                                          CHAPTER 10                                ART AND CULTURE
Hemet desires to create a city rich
with art and culture that will
enhance the quality of life and
                                          T     he purpose of the Art and Culture Element is to describe the current
                                                art and cultural resources available in the City of Hemet and the
                                                Planning Area, acknowledge issues and opportunities in the planning,
                                                presentation, and promotion of these resources, and establish goals,
economic opportunities of current         policies, and implementation measures that realize the full aesthetic
and future residents, businesses and      potential and economic benefit of the art and culture sector of the
visitors. The Art and Culture             community.
Element establishes the framework
to integrate art and culture into all     Art and Culture is an optional element permitted under California planning
aspects of City life and encourage        law. It is included in this General Plan for two reasons. First, to
partnerships with and between             demonstrate the importance the City places on achieving an exceptional
private and public organizations.         quality of life for its residents. Second, to promote the use of art and culture
                                          in the City’s economic development efforts of marketing, branding,
                                          communication, increasing the pool of educated and qualified employees,
                                          attracting the creative industries, and creating an aesthetic environment for
                                          tourists and potential businesses. The City is committed to ensuring that a
                                          diverse array of opportunities is available to stimulate the local economy
                                          and to meet the needs of all persons regardless of socioeconomic status,
                                          physical capabilities, or age.
                                          10.1 I SSUES            AND O PPORTU NITIES
                                          Several important issues and opportunities will have a direct effect on how
                                          arts and culture will integrate into the community fabric and improve
                                          overall quality of life in Hemet. The role of the City government in the arts
                                          is to help facilitate the integration of art and culture into the overall
                                          structure, use, and economy of the City, in partnership with local artists,
                                          businesses, schools, developers, non-profit organizations, and other
                                          interested groups.
                                          Changing Demographics Historically, Hemet’s population has been older
                                          than Riverside County as a whole due to earlier development trends in the
                                          retirement housing market that resulted in a higher-than-average median
                                          age. This specialized demographic created a greater need for cultural
                                          programs and facilities that supported the lifestyles of the area’s large and
                                          well-established retirement and “snow-bird” population of seasonal
                                          residents. However, with City demographics indicating a significant growth
 The Ramona Pageant,                      in younger families, facilities and activities must be cooperatively designed
 California’s Official Outdoor            to accommodate the needs of all age groups. New opportunities must be
 Play, has provided splendor,
 pageantry, and passion since             recognized, integrated, and promoted for the community to expand and
 1923 at the Ramona Bowl in               adapt the creative arts to meet the aspirations and economic needs of its
 Hemet.                                   residents and businesses.
                C   I  T Y       O    F H  E   M   E  T     G    E   N  E  R   A L     P  L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                                10-1

                                                                        ART AND CULTURE
Changing Demand for the Arts and Culture There is a growing
awareness of the importance of art and culture in improving the quality of
life for area residents and businesses. In cities nationwide, recreation, art,
and culture have been shown to serve as a catalyst to strengthen economies
and revitalize downtowns. Throughout Hemet’s history, the community has
valued local arts and culture programs. With the increased number and
diversity of the City’s population, a demand exists for additional programs,
venues, and facilities. Additionally, as companies and corporations begin to
recognize that the Hemet area offers a good quality of life for employees
and a pool of qualified workers as an increasing number of students are
graduating from Mt. San Jacinto College and other local education
institutions with professional degrees focused in manufacturing, advertising,
marketing, promotion, design, and related fields, businesses and
employment opportunities will increase, and demand for creative arts
education will continue to grow.
Community Cohesion Local artistic and cultural activities can bring
together diverse segments of the community who find value and interest in
similar types of artistic expression and performances. Museums, education
centers, performing arts centers and other venues offer classes,
performances, presentations, lectures, exhibits, and events that unite
residents and provide opportunities for dialog and a sharing of common
interests and can increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the programs.
Creating linkages between the various segments of the community will
strengthen relationships, stimulate economic cooperation and development,
and provide for a richer menu of cultural opportunities in the community.
                                                                                     Since the 1920s when the Ramona
                                                                                     Bowl was first constructed and used as
Economic Development Opportunities The overall economic downturn
                                                                                     an attraction to entice new settlers to
affecting the Inland Empire and the nation, has presented new challenges to
                                                                                     the Hemet area, the community has
Hemet’s efforts to grow its economy. The City sees this as an opportunity
                                                                                     placed a high value on local art and
to add art and culture to its economic development strategy with efforts
                                                                                     culture. As the City’s population and
designed to attract tourism and industries to Hemet. By enhancing the
                                                                                     diversity grows, demand will increase
City’s quality of life and demonstrating a commitment to the arts, the City
                                                                                     for larger and more diverse
becomes more attractive to the creative industries, the professional
                                                                                     performances, events, programs and
workforce looking to relocate, and companies dependent on the
                                                                                     venues.
professional workforce. Adopting strategies that promote the community’s
artistic, cultural and recreational assets through branding and marketing
programs, and coordination with other agencies and organizations, will
stimulate local economic and employment opportunities and communicate
a sense of empowerment and well-being to the community.
Financial Challenges Changes in the economy over the past several years
at the local, regional, and national levels have created new challenges in the
seeding, provision, operation, and maintenance of adequate arts and cultural
programs and facilities. To keep pace with the needs of residents, the City
has recognized a need to form partnerships with other public and private
sector entities to achieve its goals. In the face of challenging fiscal times, it
is important to recognize the importance of community volunteerism to
offset financial and resource challenges while simultaneously engendering a
spirit of “community pride” and “ownership” in the quality of life in our
region.
          C  I  T Y      O  F    H   E   M  E  T     G   E  N  E   R  A L      P  L A   N      2 0 3 0
                                                        10-2

                ART AND CULTURE
                                           10.2 L OCAL A RTS O R GANI ZA TI ONS
                                           The provision of art, music, and cultural activities is a concerted effort
                                           between the private and the public sectors and between individual and
                                           group interests. A network of visual and performing artists, individuals,
                                           and businesses are committed to nurturing a thriving arts community, and
                                           independent groups and organizations are each devoted to a particular
                                           segment of arts and culture. Harnessing the volunteer capacity of these
                                           organizations can help offset the financial and resources challenges of
                                           providing local arts programs while instilling a sense of pride and local
                                           ownership in the quality of life within the community. These organizations
                                           can also assist in fostering working relationships between the City, adjacent
                                           communities, local educational institutions, and the community at large.
                                           Key organizations within the community include:
                                           The Diamond Valley Arts Council The DVAC is a local non-profit
                                           organization created to actively promote the awareness, appreciation and
                                           participation in all forms of the arts, and the professions associated with the
                                           arts, to improve and enhance the quality of life in the region. Founded in
                                           2004, it serves as an umbrella organization that nurtures and assists allied
                                           organizations through collaborative partnerships with businesses and
                                           government agencies, public and private. Through this partnering
The annual First Peoples Day event         arrangement, the DVAC seeks to improve the cultural climate that will
held at the Ramona Bowl celebrates the     attract new visitors, improve on tourism, stimulate the business economy,
mix of cultures in Hemet’s history that    offer more educational opportunities and create new outlets for the
have contributed to its rich heritage,     marketing and development of the arts at large. By taking a regional
including Native Americans, Latin          approach, DVAC fosters the cohesive and coordinated effort needed to
Americans, and early pioneers, farmers,    bring the local communities together to achieve a quality of life that will
and ranchers. Visitors are encouraged      assist the city in its branding and marketing efforts.
to join in the theme and attend in dress
from the era.                              Hemet Valley Art Association The purpose of the Hemet Valley Art
                                           Association, Inc. is to encourage and develop the appreciation, study and
                                           practice of the fine arts and to further educate, inspire and enrich the lives
                                           of others through its programs, exhibits and activities. The Art Association
                                           operates a gallery located on Florida Avenue.
                                           Hemet Community Concert Association Hemet Community Concert
                                           Association is a non-profit, all-volunteer managed organization dedicated to
                                           presenting the best of the performing arts to the residents of the San
                                           Jacinto Valley. The Association has brought music to the community since
                                           1972 and believes that live concerts are an essential part of any community’s
                                           cultural landscape.
                                           Ramona Music Association Beginning in 1939, the Ramona Music
                                           Association has promoted cultural life in the community by performing a
                                           wide variety of musical programs in the famous Ramona Bowl, site of the
                                           State of California's official historical play, "Ramona." Annually, 7,500 to
                                           10,000 concert attendees avail themselves of "Concerts under the Stars"
                                           programs, which have included jazz, country, inspiration instrumental
                                           music, Celtic, oldies but goodies, large choral, Dixieland, and doo wop.
              C   I  T Y      O   F      H  E   M   E  T      G    E  N E   R A L      P   L A  N    2 0 3 0
                                                                  10-3

                                                                        ART AND CULTURE
Ramona Hillside Players The mission of the Ramona Hillside Players is
to promote quality entertainment offering creative live theatre productions;
providing a cradle for community theatre in the Hemet valley; offering
opportunities for growth to actors and directors while preserving its
dramatic and comedic heritage and providing mutually satisfying theatre
experiences for its members and audiences. Since 1941, the Players have
performed in the Santa Rosa Hills near the Ramona Bowl.
Inland Stage Company Inland Stage Company has been offering
theatrical performances and acting classes in the Inland Valley since 2002.
Its mission is to make the community a more artistically rich environment
for all who live here. The Company teaches and performs at the Esplanade
Arts Center.
Human Relations Council The Human Relations Council of the Greater
Hemet, San Jacinto, and Menifee Region is a multi-cultural citizens group
dedicated to promoting cooperation, equality, understanding, and positive
human relations in the community. Formed in 1998, the Council conducts
and participates in various community events, and organizes the annual
First Peoples Day celebration held at the Ramona Bowl.
10. 3 A RT AND C ULTURAL F ACILITIES                              AN D
          V ENUES
The Hemet area offers a variety of cultural facilities and venues that enrich
the lives of local residents and offer the potential of attracting tourists from
out of the area. These assets help to create a more livable community,
stimulate the local economy, celebrate our history, protect and appreciate
our natural environment, and engage the citizenry. The City’s goal is to help
foster an environment where art, music, culture, and education can
continue to flourish and influence the local economy and where decision
makers legitimize the arts as an essential component of civic support and
funding. The existing artistic and cultural facilities and venues within the
Planning Area are mapped on Figure 10.1.
10.3.1         MUSEUMS AND INFORMATION CENTERS
Seven museums of various sizes and interests are in the Hemet
area. Each museum provides an asset to the community by
strengthening the social fabric and contributing to a positive image
of the City.
Western Science Center In 1995, Metropolitan Water District
(MWD) began construction of the 4,500 acre Diamond Valley
Lake. Large-scale excavations for the massive project led to the
discovery of the some of the most significant Ice Age fossils and
Native American artifacts in the United States. To house the large Skeleton of a Harlan’s ground sloth at the
collection and to provide educational, research and service Western Science Center
opportunities for the general public and
         C   I  T Y      O  F    H   E  M   E  T     G   E  N   E  R  A L      P L A N    2 0 3 0
                                                        10-4

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of                                                                                                                                                 County                                                             Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Jacinto
                                                           Maze                                                                                                                   Cottonwood Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Chaum-Mix Poki,
                                                           Stone                                          Beech St                                 Warren Rd                                                          Esplanade                                                                                                                  Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Soboba Cultural Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Arts Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            River
                                                                                                                                                                                  Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                   California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                    Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                              Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hemet
                                                                                                                Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                           Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ian
                                                                                                                                                en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Public Library                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hemet Depot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Menlo Ave                                                                                                               rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                   Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                  and Museum
                                                                                                                                                                Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Girard St                                                                                                                       Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                      Myers St                                                                                                                  Florida Ave                                                                              Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave                                           Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gilbert St                                                                                    Hemet Valley
                                                                                                                                                                                        ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                            Flo                               Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                   Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Art Association
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mayberry Ave                                                                                                        Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fingerprints     Lyon Ave                                                                                                                     Gallery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kirby St
                                                                                                                                            ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Youth Museum
                                                                                                                                           ed u                      HEMET-RYAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    AILW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yale St
                                                                        Ryan School of
                                                                                                                                                                      AIRPORT                  FR                              Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                                               Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                             &S
                                                                                                                                       A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                        AT
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                      ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Stetson Ave                                                                                                                  Stetson Ave
                                                                        Aeronautics Museum
                                                                                                                                    San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                    ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tM
               Patterson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Elk St                                                                                                                                                                           me
                                                                                                                                                                      Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                           Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Crest Dr                                            eH
                                                                                                                                 ts   on                                                                                                                  Chambers St                                                                                                                                              Lak
                                                                                                                                                    Warren Rd
                                                                                                                             Ste
               House Museum                                                                                                                                      Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                               RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BOWL                    Ramona Bowl Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bautista Wash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and Amphitheatre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bautista Rd
                                                                                               California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                               go
                                                                                                                                                                ky                                                                                     ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pk
                                                                                                                                                              iP                                                                                                     y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                         on                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                  ni
                                                                                                                                                     g                                                                                                                                                                                               bel                                       PARK
                                                                                                                                              e                                                                                                                                                                                             Gib
                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Western
                                                                                                                                       Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Science Center                                                                      Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                  Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 073 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                       Museums and Cultural Sites                                                                           Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                      Cultural Sites                                                                        Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            River/Lake
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                         Museums
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Creek/Canal
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F i g u r e   1 0 . 1
                     1       0.5   0                              1            2                                                                                                                                                                                            Railroad                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL SITES
                                                                                   Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H e m e t   G e n e r a l   P l a n
                                               ART AND CULTURE
Back of Figure 10.1
        C  I T Y    O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                    10-6
            ART AND CULTURE
                                                 educational institutions, the Western Science Center was built
                                                 through the collaboration of MWD, the University of California,
                                                 Riverside (UCR), local leaders, City representatives and elected
                                                 officials, coordination with the Native Americans, and grant
                                                 funding from the State and federal government. Opened in
                                                 2006, the Center has been designed to provide world-class
                                                 facilities for the research, curation, and presentation of an
                                                 exceeding rare collection of specimens.Among the fossils
                                                 uncovered was “Max,” the largest mastodon found in the
                                                 western United States, “Little Stevie”, a young mastodon that is
 The Western Science Center’s Simulated “Dig
 Site” provides hands-on archaeology and         the most complete ever recovered in the inland region of
 paleontology experience while teaching the      Southern California, and “Xena,” a Columbian mammoth.
 tools of the trade.                             Nearly 1 million paleontological specimens and archeological
                                                 artifacts found at more than 337 prehistoric and historic sites
                                                 form the core of the collection. Discoveries range from ice age
                                     fossils to artifacts from approximately 9,000 years ago to the settlement
                                     period of approximately 200 years ago. The comprehensive scientific work
                                     done on this project allows the Hemet area to understand and interpret its
                                     prehistory and history in a way that few other communities can claim.
                                     The Center’s renowned facilities for research and advanced educational
                                     training attract interest internationally. The facility is climate-controlled, is
                                     equipped with security safeguards, and was designed as a repository for
                                     paleontological and archaeological materials. It has solar panels on the roof,
                                     a cold-water pipeline beneath the floor to reduce air conditioning needs,
                                     landscaping with low-irrigation native foliage, and extensive water
                                     reclamation. The building received the Leadership in Energy and
                                     Environmental Design (LEED®) Platinum rating from the nonprofit U.S.
                                     Green Building Council, which is the highest rating offered.
                                     Additionally, the Center offers interactive exhibits, special events, lectures,
                                     and workshops at all levels, from kindergarten to adult, throughout the year.
                                     The contribution of these collections, discoveries, programs, and leadership
                                     in sustainability to the cultural landscape of Hemet is significant, and
                                     continues to be a vibrant part of the community.
                                              Diamond Valley Lake Visitor Center Owned and operated by
                                              MWD, the visitor center tells the story of the construction of the
                                              massive reservoir in the Domenigoni and Diamond Valleys, and the
                                              role of Diamond Valley Lake in the state’s water supply system.
                                              The center also serves as a community education, interpretation,
                                              and event center for the Hemet area.
                                              Hemet Depot and Museum The first Hemet Railroad Depot was
                                              constructed at the southeast corner of Latham Avenue and Santa
                                              Fe Street in 1893 by the Santa Fe Railroad Company with the
                                              financial assistance of William F. Whittier. It burned down in 1897
Hemet Depot and Museum
                                              and a second depot, with passenger and freight facilities, was
                                              constructed on the same site in 1898. In 1914, a new passenger
                                              room was built about 100 yards southwest, at the intersection of
                                              State and Inez Streets and Florida Avenue. To save money, the
                                              freight house was built on wheels, rolled down the track, and
          C   I  T Y    O   F     H   E   M  E   T      G   E  N E   R  A L      P L  A    N     2 0 3 0
                                                           10-7

                                                                     ART AND CULTURE
attached to the new passenger room. This hybrid depot eventually fell into
disuse. The Santa Fe Railroad Company considered demolishing the facility,
but agreed in 1987 to sell the depot to an organization of private
individuals, city and county government officials, and community groups
and businesses named Save Our Station, which spent 10 years restoring the
facility.
Restoration was completed in 1998. The Hemet Museum opened in the
century old freight house. Operated entirely by volunteers, the museum
focuses on local history and features photographs and artifacts of old
Hemet and the Ramona Pageant, as well as Native American artifacts and
agricultural displays. The passenger room was leased to a coffee
house/restaurant business and includes an outdoor patio.
Ramona Bowl Museum In the early 1920s, the City initiated plans to
promote the area to visitors by creating a dramatic pageant based on the
novel, Ramona, written by activist and author Helen Hunt Jackson following
an 1883 visit to the area with Abbot Kinney, a well-known conservationist
and land developer. At the time, Jackson was traveling throughout southern
California to document the mistreatment of Indian groups following the
secularization of the mission system. During her visit, Jackson documented
the plight of a group of Soboba Indians and hired a law firm to protect
their land rights. Jackson eventually used information gathered
during her visit to write her famous novel. Audiences viewed the
first staging of the Ramona Pageant in 1923, with subsequent
performances every spring in the Ramona Bowl Amphitheater.
Today, the Ramona Pageant is known as the longest running
outdoor play in California, and is dubbed the “official California
Outdoor Play.”
The Ramona Bowl Museum is located adjacent to the Ramona Bowl
and includes artifacts, costumes, photography, and historical
documentation of the local Indians, the Ramona Pageant, and the
Ramona story. It has been operated since 1953 by the Ramona
Pageant Association, which has produced the annual Ramona
Pageant since its inception.
Ryan School of Aeronautics Museum The Ryan School of
Aeronautics Museum is located at the Hemet Ryan Airport. It is
dedicated to the role that the Ryan School played in training pilots
for active duty in World War II. In 1940 in preparation for possible Book Cover from 1943. The author, Reed
involvement in the European war, the U.S. War Department decided Kinert, was a flight instructor at the Ryan
to establish pilot training schools across the country and hired School of Aeronautics.
civilians to teach primary flight training. T. Claude Ryan, who
designed the Spirit of St. Louis airplane and opened the Ryan School of
Aeronautics in San Diego, was asked to start a training program in southern
California. He chose to establish a facility in Hemet for three reasons:
unpopulated areas, little or no fog, and many acres of open land for a main
airfield and auxiliary fields for practicing takeoffs and landings. Eventually
five hangars and 55 barrack buildings were constructed and 8,907 army
cadets were trained to fly. Pilots who graduated from the Ryan School were
sent to Randolph Field in Texas where they learned fighter techniques. The
          C I  T Y      O   F     H  E   M  E  T     G  E  N  E  R  A L     P  L A N    2 0 3 0
                                                       10-8

 ART AND CULTURE
              first class that graduated from Ryan and then Randolph were sent to the
              Philippines; all 15 pilots died defending the islands when Japan attacked.
              The Ryan School of Aeronautics ceased operations in December 1944 and
              the facility was given to Riverside County. It has since been used by aircraft
              associated with crop dusting, aerial tankers fighting fires in the mountains,
              and private recreational airplane use.
              Chaum-Mix Poki, Soboba Cultural Center Chaum-Mix Poki, which
              means the “House of Culture” in the Soboba Indian language, is a growing
              repository of Native American resources for both amateur and professional
              researchers. Located on the Soboba Reservation, the center opened in 2003
              and contains a growing collection of more than 800 books and articles,
              maps, photographs, manuscripts, and artifacts. It also offers cultural
              presentations and Soboba Indian language classes. The Soboba Reservation
              was established on June 19, 1883, by a Presidential executive order that set
              aside 3,172 acres of land for the Soboba Band of Luiseño Indians for their
              permanent occupation and use. A portion of the reservation's western
              boundary along the San Jacinto River is located within Hemet’s Planning
              Area.
              Fingerprints Youth Museum Fingerprints Youth Museum is located in
              downtown Hemet on Carmalita Street. The museum advocates a sensory
              approach to learning by providing young children with opportunities to
              touch and play with objects in a controlled environment as a means of
              enhancing learning and retention. “Teach it, Touch it, Test it.” This
              nonprofit organization is governed by United Communities Network in
              partnership with the Community Foundation of Riverside and San
              Bernardino Counties, United Way, Wal-Mart, the Bank of Hemet, Hemet
              Noon Rotary, and the Senior Corps Foster Grandparents Program.
              Patterson House Museum The Patterson House Museum is located at
              the site of the 1891 Patterson House in Winchester. It acknowledges the
              important role that the Patterson family played in the growth and
              development of the Winchester community. The Patterson House is in the
              process of being restored.
              10.3.2        CULTURAL FACILITIES
              Arts and culture play a significant role in our public and private lives.
              Nearly every manufactured thing that we touch, use, or see on a daily basis
              was imagined, created, or decorated by an artist. Much of this, coupled
              with how we live, defines our culture, and thereby, manifests itself in our
              quality of life. The following performing, fine arts, and cultural facilities in
              the Hemet area provide venues for educational, artistic, and cultural growth
              and entertainment. These resources are crucial to exposing and involving
              community youth and adults to the inspirational and creative opportunities
              available to them in the City. Notable local facilities are mapped in
              Figure 10.1.
              Esplanade Arts Center The Esplanade Arts Center (EAC) is managed by
              the Diamond Valley Arts Council to serve as a Center for the Arts in the
              region. The EAC is a facility that houses a large gallery/display area for the
              works of local artists, as well as collections by well-known and famous
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L    P   L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                   10-9

                                                                        ART AND CULTURE
artists to allow local residents an opportunity to see the kind of work that
normally requires travel to distant larger cities. The EAC also houses a
“black-box theater” where theatrical presentations and musical
performances can be conducted by individual artists, troups, small and large
groups of musicians, choirs and the like. Classroom and meeting space is
also provided for academic training, master music classes, and extension
programs for the University of California, Riverside, such as their OSHER
Lifelong Learning Program. Plans are being made to expand these
programs into a comprehensive academy setting and master class that will
allow educational opportunities at all age levels for the arts of all types that
will serve Hemet and the local regional cities and County area, including
Idyllwild.
Hemet Valley Art Association Gallery The Hemet Valley Art Association
Gallery provides a venue for the exhibition and sale of art produced by
association members. The gallery presents juried art, featured artists,
photography, sculptures, paintings, prints, and other media. Art classes are
offered on-site.
Hemet Public Library In 1906, members of the Women's Club opened a
reading room at the corner of Harvard Street and Florida Avenue to give
residents a place to gather and read. In 1910, when the room became too
small for the growing community, a resident wrote to Andrew Carnegie
seeking funds to help build a library. Carnegie
responded with a $7,500 grant to fund part of
the construction. The Carnegie library was
finished in 1913 and served the City for 52
years. The building was razed in 1969, and the
C.B. Covell Memorial Library was built at
Florida Avenue and Buena Vista Street. This
building, however, also became too small for
the City, and was replaced by a state-of-the-art
52,000 square foot facility on Latham Avenue
at Carmalita Street in June 2003.
                                                    Hemet Public Library
In 2010, the Hemet Public Library celebrated
its centennial. An invaluable asset to the City, the library offers a diverse
range of services and products, demonstrating the City’s commitment to
the education and skills development of its citizens. In addition to Additional information, goals, and
providing access to thousands of books for educational and recreational policies regarding the Hemet Public
use, the library provides internet and computer access, frequently for Library are located in Chapter 5
career assistance and job searches; research services for small businesses; Community Services and Infrastructure
reference and information services; study space for high school and Element.
college students; children’s programs and services; teen programs and
services; literacy programs; a local history repository; genealogy classes;
and a variety of meeting rooms with space for small study groups,
conferences of up to 20 persons, and events of up to 300 persons.
Ramona Bowl Amphitheatre The Ramona Bowl is a natural amphitheatre
nestled in a canyon in the Santa Rosa Mountains. This cultural venue is
known nationally and the amphitheatre is California State Historic
Landmark No. 1009. In the early 1920s, the local chamber of commerce,
          C  I  T Y     O   F    H   E M  E   T     G   E  N   E  R   A L     P  L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                      10-10

            ART AND CULTURE
                                    which became the Ramona Pageant Association, bought 160 acres in and
                                    around the canyon for the creation of the bowl. The Ramona Pageant was
                                    first staged here in 1923. The Ramona Pageant was designated as the
                                    California State Outdoor Play by Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 5, the
                                    California Assembly concurring, on March 19, 1993. The play is based on a
                                    book written by Helen Hunt Jackson in 1884 that documented the plight of
                                    local Native Americans.
                                    The pageant celebrated its 88th year of performances in 2011, and continues
                                    to be an active and enduring part of the community. Hundreds of local
                                    residents volunteer each year for coveted parts in the play and to assist in
                                    organizing and staging the multi-day event.
                                    10.3.3         ART AND CULTURE IN THE SCHOOLS
                                    Schools, as institutions of learning, are addressed in the Chapter 5,
                                    Community Services and Infrastructure Element of this General Plan. The
                                    intention of this section is to highlight opportunities to partner with local
                                    educational institutions for the facilitation and promotion of arts and
                                    cultural curriculums and activities. Numerous studies have provided
                                    evidence of enhanced learning, achievement, and self-esteem when arts are
                                    integrated into the academic environment.
                                             Hemet Unified School District The Hemet Unified School
                                             District has active programs in band, choir, theatre, art, dance, and
                                             other artistic professions. Cooperative programs and projects with
                                             the schools can help maximize and improve cultural opportunities
                                             and create links within the art community.
                                             Western Center Academy In association with MWD, the Western
                                             Science Center, and the Hemet Unified School District, a charter
                                             school opened in 2010 to serve as a national model for middle
                                             school education. The academy uses science, mathematics, and
                                             technology as the foundation for a rigorous and exciting
                                             multidisciplinary learning experience for sixth- to eighth-grade
Youth Art Award Ceremony at the Hemet        students. The Western Center Academy’s central instructional goal
Library
                                             is to integrate an approach based on “museum discovery” into the
                                             formal educational methods commonly practiced in schools. This
                                             learning approach is unique, experiential, active, and participatory;
                                    uses real specimens; and complements the connection with the Western
                                    Science Museum. Students have the opportunity to learn about science,
                                    math, and technology in specialized lab sessions that use inquiry-based
                                    learning models to explore elective subjects, including paleontology,
                                    archaeology, entomology, physics, chemistry, astronomy, field ecology,
                                    aquatic biology, and geology.
                                    Idyllwild Arts Academy Located about 20 miles east of downtown Hemet
                                    in the San Jacinto Mountains, the Idyllwild Arts Academy specializes in
                                    preprofessional training in music, theatre, dance, visual art, creative writing,
                                    moving pictures, and interdisciplinary arts for ninth through 12th grade. An
                                    associated program, the Idyllwild Arts Summer Program, annually enrolls
                                    approximately 2,000 students, ages 5 to adult, in 8-week summer workshops
                                    taught by professional artists and teachers.
           C  I  T Y     O   F    H   E  M   E   T    G   E  N  E   R  A L     P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                         10-11

                                                                       ART AND CULTURE
Mt. San Jacinto College Mt. San Jacinto College is a single
community college with two campuses: one in the City of San
Jacinto and one in the City of Menifee. Salient class offerings
include art, sculpture, music, drama, and dance as well as
opportunities to participate in the MSJC Art Gallery, Jazz
Ensemble, Golden Eagles Big Band, Inland Chorale, and MSJC
Symphony Orchestra. Additionally, MSJC provides a wide
range of cultural events. Representative programs include:
plays, musicals, musical concerts of a variety of forms, art
festivals, art gallery displays, dance concerts and other activities
that add to the intellectual and cultural life of the college
community. These events include both day and evening
programs and are open to students and the general public. Mt.
San Jacinto College professors are active in the community and
provide lectures and workshops at the Western Science
Museum and other venues in the City of Hemet.
10.3.4          ART IN PUBLIC PLACES
Public art refers to works of art in any media that have been
planned and executed with the specific intention of being
placed in the public domain, usually outside and accessible to
all. Monuments, memorials and civic statuary are the oldest and
most obvious form of public art, but increasingly other aspects
                                                                     Dedication of the Veteran’s Memorial at
of the built environment are being considered such as murals, Gibbel Park in 2006
fountains, landscaping, plazas, and sculptures.
Generally, Art in Public Places programs provide a funding source for art
projects that are accessible and visible to the entire community through
developer fees or project entitlement requirements. Examples include art in
new developments, art in public spaces through contribution to a
designated fund, art incorporated into the City’s gateways and focal points,
and spaces for the creation and presentation of art. Cities with Art in Public
Places programs create a cohesive and marketable destination by providing
opportunities for residents and visitors to enjoy the artistic and cultural
backbone of the City.
Public art is a visible demonstration of a community’s commitment to art
and culture. It is a source of civic pride that provides an opportunity for the
City to share its values, promote its identity, stimulate
economic growth, and create a marketable destination
for residents and visitors.
Current examples of public art in Hemet include:
           The Veterans Memorial at Gibbel Park
           honoring America’s armed forces.
           The mural at Hemet Fire Station No. 1
           honoring the New York City fire fighters of the
           September 11, 2001 attack on the World Trade
           Centers.
                                                              Mural at Hemet Fire Station No. 1 on Juanita Street
         C    I  T Y      O  F     H  E  M   E  T    G   E  N  E   R A L      P  L   A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                       10-12

            ART AND CULTURE
                                                   The statue at the Florida Avenue Promenade depicting a man
                                                   showing his grandchild the wonders of the night sky.
                                        10.4      ARTS , CULT URE A ND THE ECONOMY
                                        The promotion of arts and culture can assist in creating jobs, attract
                                        investments, generate tax revenues and stimulate local economies by
                                        increasing tourism and expanding consumer purchasing opportunities
                                        within the city. Art and cultural activities also enhance an area’s quality of
                                        life, infuse new energy in community development efforts, add to the value
                                        of local amenities, and retain and attract young professionals to an area.
                                        10.4.1        ART AND CULTURE IN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                                        The City’s approach to economic development includes fostering an
                                        atmosphere for economic growth and creative branding that recognizes:
                                                       Creative and new media industries are playing a more
                                                       prominent economic and social role in communities the size
                                                       of Hemet;
                                                       A company’s decision to locate or expand its business is
                                                       often influenced by the local availability of an educated
                                                       workforce and the quality of life offered its employees;
                                                       Creative industries and other professional companies can play
                                                       a major role in providing new high level job opportunities for
                                                       current residents as well as fostering an environment that
                                                       attracts new talented workers and their families to the
                                                       community;
                                                       Tourism centered on arts and culture can improve and
                                                       stimulate economic growth by providing new venues that
                                                       result in longer and more frequent tourist stays, expanding
First Star statue at the Florida Avenue
                                                       consumer purchase options, and creating new jobs and
Promenade Shopping Center                              investment opportunities that service the growing tourism
                                                       market.
                                        Hemet has an opportunity to channel the existing energies and investments
                                        already being made by local arts and culture groups, and to provide
                                        leadership in sustaining and expanding these efforts. Creating linkages, both
                                        programmatically and physically, between local arts facilities, venues, and
                                        open spaces will encourage complementary activities and growth, and
                                        reduce the need for residents to travel outside of the community to access
                                        classes, programs, entertainment, and employment opportunities.
Additional information, goals, and         10.4.2       ART AND CULTURE IN DOWNTOWN HEMET
policies regarding economic development    Art and culture are key ingredients in the revitalization of downtown
are located in Chapter 2 Land Use          Hemet. The downtown’s historic structures provide opportunities for
Element, and Chapter 3 Community           reuse or for architecturally sensitive new construction for restaurants, jazz
Design Element.                            clubs, specialty shops, art galleries, entertainment venues, and mixed-use
                                           developments that will serve as a catalyst for artistic expression and
                                           provide a unique synergy in the community. The General Plan envisions
           C   I  T Y       O   F    H    E   M  E  T     G  E   N  E   R  A L      P   L  A N    2 0 3 0
                                                            10-13

                                                                   ART AND CULTURE
downtown Hemet becoming the focal point for entertainment and              Additional information, goals, and
cultural venues such as art galleries, music houses, dining experiences,   policies regarding historic preservation
and coffee houses along with specialty retail businesses. The              and the history of Downtown Hemet
revitalization of downtown Hemet will benefit greatly from the             are located in Chapter 9 Historic
concentration of cultural venues within an attractive, safe, and walkable  Resources Element.
environment.
         C   I T Y    O   F   H    E   M E  T    G   E   N   E R  A L     P   L   A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                    10-14
 ART AND CULTURE
              G OALS AND P OLICIES
              A RT   AND C ULTURE
              GOAL         Promote art and culture as a means of improving the
                           quality of life for City residents.
              AC-1
              POLICIES
              AC-1.1      Community Identity Use public art and cultural
                          programs to enhance the image of Hemet, to help support
                          community identity, and to foster community pride.
              AC-1.2      Art in Public Places Program Encourage the
                          development of a coordinated, flexible, citywide Art in
                          Public Places program for new development or
                          community organizations to provide public art or spaces
                          for art as part of a development project.
              AC-1.3      Public Spaces and Facilities Use artistic elements in
                          coordination with the City’s transportation network and
                          pedestrian linkages, landscaping, lighting, paving, and
                          signage at the City’s gateways and other public spaces to
                          strengthen Hemet’s identity and image.
              AC-1.4      Downtown Focus Encourage the development of
                          downtown Hemet as the art and cultural center of the City.
                          Encourage the preservation, renovation and reuse of the
                          downtown area’s historic structures and cultural facilities.
              AC-1.5      Promote Art and Culture Promote artistic and cultural
                          facilities and activities that benefit the City in terms of
                          overall image, economic stimulus, and long-term goals.
              AC-1.6      Specific Plans Require an arts and culture component in
                          new specific plans that incorporates public art into its
                          design or support for arts and cultural activities into its
                          programming.
              AC-1.7      Redevelopment Explore opportunities to incorporate
                          elements of art and culture into private and public sector
                          redevelopment projects.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E    N  E  R  A L      P  L  A N      2 0 3 0
                            10-15

                                                                   ART AND CULTURE
GOAL          Encourage art and culture as a means to stimulate
              economic development in the City.
AC-2
POLICIES
AC-2.1       Economic Benefits Promote the preparation of a strategy
             that capitalizes on the economic benefits of arts in the
             community and creates a plan to incorporate the arts into
             economic development efforts that increase tourism,
             attract creative and manufacturing industries, improve
             education, advance the local workforce, and improve the
             quality of life.
AC-2.2       Tourism Include arts and culture in the City’s tourism
             strategy, particularly through efforts that promote, brand,
             and market Hemet’s unique cultural heritage and historic
             resources.
AC-2.3       Community Marketing Develop marketing and
             communication efforts that promote events, create
             relationships with potential partners, identify new potential
             venues and activities, and identify the City as a
             recognizable destination for community arts and culture.
AC-2.4       Public Outreach Encourage the use of media venues to
             provide regular coverage of the arts and culture, including
             events, facilities, programs, and educational activities.
AC-2.5       Community Events Encourage, promote, and participate
             in regional, citywide, and neighborhood arts and cultural
             events that benefit the City in terms of overall image,
             economic stimulus, and long-term goals.
AC-2.6       Partnerships Encourage corporate, business, and
             foundation support of artistic and cultural activities and
             projects through mutual programs and private-public
             partnerships.
GOAL          Support the art and cultural opportunities offered by
              the educational and non-profit organizations
AC-3
POLICIES
AC-3.1       Public Awareness Increase the awareness of the public to
             the benefits of art and culture by recognizing and
             promoting the arts, artists, performing arts, and
             educational organizations
AC-3.2       Community Facilities Promote the use of community
             facilities (e.g., Hemet Public Library, Simpson Center,
       C I T Y      O   F     H   E  M  E  T    G  E   N  E   R  A L    P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                  10-16

 ART AND CULTURE
                         parks, churches, schools) to increase opportunities for
                         visual and performing arts that are appropriate and
                         beneficial to the greater community.
              AC-3.3     Youth Participation Coordinate with education
                         institutions and other interested organizations to increase
                         the participation of area youth in the cultural and
                         recreational opportunities available in the community
              AC-3.4     Local Organizations Support the activities and programs
                         of local organizations promoting arts and culture in
                         Hemet, as appropriate.
              AC-3.5     Citizen Involvement Encourage active citizen
                         involvement in the planning, development, and provision
                         of arts and cultural programs, facilities, and services.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E   N  E  R   A L      P L  A  N       2 0 3 0
                           10-17
                                                    ART AND CULTURE
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                         10-18
                     HOUSING
                                      CHAPTER 11                                                    HOUSING
The City is committed to
ensuring an adequate supply of
                                      R      esidential growth in Hemet will be approached in a manner that
                                             respects the City’s scenic, cultural, and historic heritage, while meeting
                                             the housing, recreation, and employment needs of its residents and
                                             businesses. Pursuing balanced growth enables the City to provide
quality housing in a variety of       quality services to meet the long-term needs of the community.
types and prices to meet the
needs of its residents and            Policies and programs in this element will ensure that as the City grows,
enhance its economic vitality. A      new development will maintain or enhance the levels of public services and
mix of homes appropriate to a         facilities enjoyed by current residents. The City is committed to providing
wide-range of income levels will      safe, diverse, accessible, and well-maintained neighborhoods that instill a
facilitate both the provision of      sense of community pride and identity. In addition to maintaining a high
affordable housing through new        level of services for seniors and younger families, the City intends to create
construction and preservation,        an economically sound community, boasting a diverse economy, expanded
and the attraction and retention      employment opportunities, and a balanced, but friendly approach to
of a diverse employment base to       business and development. Opportunities for a variety of cultural and
support local economic                recreational activities will be provided for all ages.
development objectives.
                                      Achieving the Vision. Hemet is committed to a vision of a diverse and
                                      sustainable community that increases housing choice for all current and
                                      future residents. This element outlines the City’s approach to achieving this
                                      vision by:
                                          matching housing supply with current and projected needs,
                                          facilitating and promoting a fair and balanced distribution of housing
                                           choices throughout the City,
                                          assisting in the provision of affordable housing through new
                                           construction and preservation,
                                          removing or mitigating governmental and other constraints to housing
                                           investment, and
                                          promoting fair and equal housing opportunities.
                                      11.1 S COPE           AND C ONTEXT
                                      The housing market in California, particularly in Southern California, is
                                      extremely volatile. Market conditions, constraints, and opportunities change
                                      rapidly, necessitating periodic reassessment of our housing needs and
                                      strategies. Adjustments to implementing actions and objectives have been
                                      made in this element to ensure the City continues to move toward its
                   C I T Y       O F H E M E T           G E N E R A L             P L A N         2 0 3 0
                                                           11-1

                                                                                      HOUSING
housing goals. Although other elements of the General Plan require
updating less frequently, the Housing Element is required to be updated
every eight years, at minimum, to satisfy the City’s desire to track changes in
the community and to respond to requirements of State law. This element
covers planning period of October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021.
11.2 S TATE L AW R EQU IREMENTS
Pursuant to State Housing Element law (Section 65580) of the Government
Code, the Housing Element must contain local commitments to:
   provide sites with appropriate zoning and development standards and
    with services and facilities to accommodate the jurisdiction’s Regional
    Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) for each income level;
   assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of low
    and moderate income households;
   address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove
    governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and
    development of housing, including housing for all income levels and
    housing for persons with disabilities;
   conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing
    stock;
   promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race,
    religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial
    status, or disability; and
   preserve for lower income households the assisted housing
    developments.
The Housing Element must establish specific actions, objectives, and
timelines for addressing the above requirements. The 2013-2021 Housing
Element represents a revision of the City’s 2006-2014 Housing Element.
The revision was prepared to comply with Section 65583 of the
Government Code and to address revisions of other state laws that address
housing, planning, and zoning issues.
11. 3 P UBLIC I NVOLVEMENT
The City held a community and stakeholder workshop to discuss housing
policy and the update to the Housing Element on November 15, 2012 at
the Hemet Public Library from 2:30 to 4:00 pm. The meeting was
advertised through a quarter-page ad in the Press-Enterprise newspaper and
on the City’s website. Notices were also mailed to 24 organizations working
on housing issues in the community.
Workshop participants included residents, as well as representatives from
organizations and agencies working in housing programs and development.
A summary of the community input from the workshop is provided in
Appendix C.
         C I T Y         O F    H E M E T           G E N E R A L             P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                       11-2

 HOUSING
             The Housing Element includes programs to address a number of the
             concerns expressed by community members and stakeholders:
                 Program H-1a includes continued coordination with the Fair Housing
                  Council of Riverside County to provide fair housing outreach,
                  education and services.
                 In Program H-1b, the City will continue to coordinate with applicable
                  service providers such as Valley Restart to address homeless needs.
                 Program H-4e addresses deteriorating conditions in mobile home parks
                  and continues proactive surveys and inspections of mobile home parks.
                 Program H-4f continues the City’s comprehensive neighborhood
                  improvement and preservation efforts through programs like Hemet
                  ROCS (Restoring Our Community Strategy).
             11. 4 G ENERAL P LAN C ONSISTENCY
             State law requires the Housing Element to contain a statement of “the
             means by which consistency will be achieved with other General Plan
             elements and community goals” (California Government Code, Section
             65583[c] [6] [B]). There are two aspects of this analysis: 1) an identification
             of other General Plan goals, policies, and programs that could affect
             implementation of the Housing Element or that could be affected by the
             implementation of the Housing Element, and 2) an identification of actions
             to ensure consistency between the Housing Element and affected parts of
             other General Plan elements.
             The elements of the new General Plan most closely related to housing
             issues are the Land Use, Community Design, Circulation, and Community
             Services and Infrastructure elements. Several of the goals of these elements
             relate to Housing Element goals and will affect implementation of the
             Housing Element.
             Relevant Land Use Element goals and policies include:
                 Revitalization through Infill Development Goals, policies, and land
                  use designations support the City’s desire to provide additional
                  opportunities for infill development. These include providing higher
                  densities in central areas, providing for a mix of uses that will
                  encourage housing near employment and services, and locating new
                  housing in areas already served by infrastructure and public services.
                 Balancing Jobs and Housing Goals and policies support increased
                  employment uses in or near Hemet, as well as additional support for
                  existing businesses. The General Plan update includes policies to
                  support high-quality jobs that will provide higher wages and better
                  benefits to residents.
C I T Y O F H E M E T          G E N E R A L           P L A N         2 0 3 0
                                  11-3

                                                                                       HOUSING
    Encouraging Connections between Transportation Corridors and
     Housing Goals and policies encourage the location of higher density
     housing along major transportation corridors that provide transit
     services as well as neighborhood commercial uses.
Relevant Community Design Element goals and policies include:
    Creating Walkable Communities Policies and goals emphasize
     creating residential areas where pedestrians are welcomed and
     encouraged.
    Improving Community Safety Goals and policies encourage utilizing
     safescape and defensible space design principles to improve community
     image, personal safety, and the use of public gathering spaces.
Relevant Circulation Element goals and policies include:
    Maintaining the roadway network Goals and policies guide how the
     roadway network is maintained so residential development is adequately
     served. This includes policies that direct the improvement of roads
     during new development, the collection of impact fees, and creative
     solutions to finding adequate capacity.
    Transportation choices Goals and policies support non-automobile
     transportation, emphasizing pedestrian pathways, bicycle facilities, and
     enhanced transit services.
Relevant Community Services and Infrastructure Element goals and policies
include:
    Schools Goals and policies support linking the development of new
     schools with the needs of residents. The City will work with the school
     districts to enable timely planning and funding for schools.
    Seniors and the physically disabled Goals and policies provide for
     the appropriate placement of senior facilities, support affordable
     housing that is accessible for the disabled, and support other facilities
     and services for these populations. The City plans to use the Housing
     Element sites inventory to locate areas that would be appropriate for
     senior housing. Specifically, the City will seek sites that are close to
     public transportation, shopping, and services.
    Facilities and Services Goals and policies support the provision of
     services (water, sewer, and solid waste), facilities, and utilities for new
     development, adequate to serve the project sites.
    Energy Efficiency Goals and policies include energy conservation
     techniques that would use green building materials, methods, and
     operations. These, and other policies, are also referenced in the Energy
     Conservation section of the Housing Element.
         C I T Y         O F      H E M E T         G E N E R A L              P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                        11-4

 HOUSING
             The City has reviewed the Housing Element for consistency with the other
             General Plan Elements and found that the goals, policies, and
             implementation programs of the Housing Element are consistent with
             those of the other Elements. Implementation of the Housing Element will
             support the objectives of the City’s other General Plan Elements in striving
             to meet the community’s vision. Any future amendments to the Housing
             Element, or any other Element of the General Plan, will be reviewed for
             internal consistency at the time of the amendment proposal.
             11.5 C OMMUNITY P RO FILE
             The purpose of the Community Profile is to provide a comprehensive
             assessment of the characteristics and trends in Hemet’s population,
             economy, and housing. Population and demographic data is key in
             determining housing needs, but economic trends and assessments of the
             local housing stock are essential in formulating predictions of how many
             and what kind of housing units will be in high demand in upcoming years.
             With Hemet’s continuing evolution from a retirement community to a
             destination for younger families seeking affordable living, planning for
             housing must reflect the City’s changing needs. Detailed community profile
             information is included in Appendix C, which includes Housing Data
             associated with the General Plan.
             11.6 C ONSTRAINTS
             Governmental, market, infrastructure, and environmental factors may limit
             the provision of adequate and affordable housing. These constraints may
             result in housing that is not affordable to lower- and moderate-income
             households, not readily available for households with special needs, or may
             cause certain types of residential construction to be economically infeasible
             for developers.
             Private developers play a significant role in the provision of affordable
             housing. Nonprofit developers generally have access to a wider range of
             public funding to subsidize affordability than for-profit developers;
             however, the competition for such funding is usually tight. For-profit
             developers may have the financial capacity to provide affordable housing,
             but are generally not obligated to do so.
             In recent years, recognizing that affordable housing cannot be provided by
             the market, local jurisdictions have created a variety of methods to facilitate
             and encourage the development of affordable housing. Effective methods
             include provision of subsidies, flexible development standards, regulatory
             concessions, and development agreements.
             11.6.1       NONGOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
             Nongovernmental constraints are those factors outside of local government
             control that limit the availability of housing and/or the feasibility of
             building affordable housing. The assessment of these constraints provides a
             basis for possible actions by the City to offset potential effects on housing
             supply and cost. However, the City has little or no control over many of the
             nongovernmental factors that influence the cost and availability of housing.
C I T Y O F H E M E T         G E N E R A L            P L A N         2 0 3 0
                                 11-5

                                                                                      HOUSING
Nongovernmental factors such as land, construction, and financing costs
and availability are described in detail in Appendix C.
11.6.2        GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
The intent of local government regulations is to protect public health and
safety, and to ensure a decent quality of life for the community. However,
local policies and regulations affect the price and availability of housing and
in particular, the provision of affordable housing. Land use controls, site
improvement requirements, fees and exactions, permit processing
procedures, and other factors can constrain the maintenance, development,
and improvement of housing.
State and federal regulations also affect the availability of land for housing
and the cost of producing housing. Regulations related to environmental
protection, building codes, and other topics have significant, often adverse,
impacts on housing cost and availability. Perhaps one of the greatest
constraints to the production of housing affordable to lower-income
households is the chronic shortage of State and federal financial assistance
for such housing.
While constraints exist at other levels of government, the City has little or
no control over these regulations and no ability to directly mitigate their
effects on housing. The City’s efforts, therefore, emphasize policies and
regulations that can be mitigated by the City.
Governmental constraints include land use controls and their enforcement,
site improvements, fees, exactions required of developers, and local
processing and permit procedures. Land use controls may limit the amount
or density of development, thus increasing the cost of housing. Building
codes set specific building standards that may add material costs, limit the
amount of buildable area, or otherwise constrain housing production.
Governmental constraints are described in detail in Appendix C.
11.7 H OUSING R ESOURCES
This section of the Housing Element deals with those social and financial
resources that aid the City in providing for the housing needs of its
population. The following sub-sections include additional information on
financial, and policy resources that the City will rely on for this planning
period. A residential land inventory and discussion of the City’s ability to
meet its regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) are provided in
Appendix C.
11.7.1        FINANCIAL RESOURCES
This section offers a summary of funding sources which are currently used
by the City, as well as additional funding sources which are potentially
available to support various housing programs.
Federal Sources of Funds
The primary source of federal funding for housing in Hemet is the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). It
supports public housing units, including operating subsidies and
         C I T Y        O F      H E M E T          G E N E R A L             P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                       11-6

 HOUSING
             rehabilitation. HUD also provides Housing Choice Vouchers (formerly
             Section 8 certificates), a tenant-based subsidy program. Housing Choice
             Vouchers funding can also be used to support homeownership and project-
             based rental assistance.
             As an entitlement city under HUD regulations, Hemet is also eligible for
             Community Development Block Grants (CDBG), Home Investment
             Partnership (HOME) funds, Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG), and
             Housing for People with AIDS/HIV (HOPWA).
             HOME funds are used for the new construction and rehabilitation of
             affordable housing, covering both homeownership and rental properties.
             HOME funds can be used to support homeownership programs, as “gap”
             loans for multifamily rental development and rehabilitation. CDBG funds
             designated for housing primarily support rehabilitation and First Time
             Homebuyer programs.
             Mortgage Revenue Bonds (Federal)
             Tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds can be issued by the City for housing
             developments that restrict a portion of their units for very-low income and
             low income households. The basic federal requirements are that 20 percent
             of the units must be restricted to very-low income households (50 percent
             of area median income), or 40 percent of the units restricted to households
             at 60 percent of area median income. The funds raised as a result of the
             bond sales carry below market interest rates, but these favorable terms are
             often not sufficient to produce a feasible mixed income development.
             Under these conditions, developers may couple their bond applications
             with Low Income Housing Tax Credits to raise the equity needed for the
             project’s affordability and feasibility. Bond-funded developments with tax
             credits may have a longer affordability period (55 years) than the 30-year
             regulatory term on a project with bonds alone.
             Proposition 1C Funding (State)
             Proposition 1C authorized about $2.85 billion in State funding for a variety
             of housing programs. Potential uses of Proposition 1C funds include
             brownfield cleanup and infill incentives, multifamily housing programs,
             implementation of Transit Oriented Development (TOD), the State’s
             Homeowner Downpayment Assistance program, supportive housing,
             farmworker housing, emergency housing assistance, and programs for
             homeless youth.
             Mortgage Credit Certificates (Federal)
             The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program provides financial
             assistance to first time homebuyers for the purchase of new or existing
             single-family homes. The MCC provides qualified first time homebuyers
             with a federal income tax credit. Income tax credits reduce an individual's
             tax payment(s) by an amount equal to the credit. The MCC program can be
             used to increase homeownership.
             Multifamily Housing Program (State)
             The Multifamily Housing Program (MHP) is used to assist the new
             construction, rehabilitation, and preservation of permanent and transitional
C I T Y O F H E M E T         G E N E R A L             P L A N       2 0 3 0
                                 11-7

                                                                                     HOUSING
rental housing for lower income households. Special allocations have been
made for supportive housing with associated health and social services for
low income renters with disabilities, or individuals or households that are
moving from emergency shelters or transitional housing, or are at risk of
homelessness. MHP funding can be used by local governments, for-profit
and nonprofit corporations, limited equity housing cooperatives, and
individuals to construct, rehabilitate, or preserve permanent and transitional
rental housing.
Affordable Housing Innovation Program (State)
Affordable Housing Innovation Program funds the creation of pilot
programs to demonstrate innovative, cost-saving approaches to creating or
preserving affordable housing through grants and loans.
Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods (State)
Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods funding includes grants to
local public agencies to make deferred-payment second mortgage loans to
qualified buyers of new homes, including manufactured homes on
permanent foundations, in projects with affordability enhanced by local
regulatory incentives or barrier reductions. These grants are used to increase
homeownership among low- and moderate income residents.
HOME (Federal)
HOME provides formula grants to states and localities that communities
use-often in partnership with local nonprofit groups-to fund a wide range
of activities that build, buy, and/or rehabilitate affordable housing for rent
or homeownership or provide direct rental assistance to low-income
people.
CalHOME (State)
CalHOME funding includes grants to local public agencies and nonprofit
corporations to assist individual households through deferred-payment
loans, as well as direct, forgivable loans to assist development projects
involving multiple ownership units, including single-family subdivisions.
These grants are used to enable low and very-low income residents to
become or remain homeowners.
CalHOME Self-Help Housing Technical Assistance Allocation
(State)
CalHOME Self-Help funding includes grants to local public agencies and
nonprofit corporations for programs that assist low and moderate income
families to build their homes with their own labor. These grants are used to
increase homeownership and asset-building among low- and moderate
income residents.
Emergency Housing and Assistance Program (State)
Emergency Housing and Assistance Program funding includes both
operating grants and deferred loans for capital development. Grants can be
used for facility operations of emergency shelters, transitional housing
projects, and supported services for homeless individuals and families.
Loans to local public agencies and nonprofit developers may be used for
capital development activities for emergency shelters, transitional housing
         C I T Y         O F     H E M E T           G E N E R A L           P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                        11-8
 HOUSING
             and safe havens that provide shelter and supportive services for homeless
             individuals and families.
             Predevelopment Loan Program (State)
             Predevelopment Loan Program funding includes short term loans to
             provide capital to finance the start of low income housing projects. These
             loans can fund redevelopment costs of projects to construct, rehabilitate,
             convert or preserve assisted housing, including manufactured housing and
             mobile home parks.
             Workforce Housing Reward Program (State)
             This program provides financial incentives to cities and counties that issue
             building permits for new housing affordable to very-low or low income
             households. Grants can be used for construction or acquisition of capital
             assets.
             Federal Tax Credits
             Tax credits enable low-income housing developers to raise project equity
             through the sale of tax benefits to investors. Two types of federal tax
             credits are available: 9% credits and 4% credits. The program is
             administered by the California Tax Credit Allocation Committee.
             11.7.2       POLICY RESOURCES
             Energy Conservation
             State law (Government Code Section 65583[a][7]) requires housing
             elements to contain an analysis of opportunities for residential energy
             conservation. According to HCD, the energy conservation section of a
             Housing Element must inventory and analyze the opportunities to
             encourage the incorporation of energy saving features, energy saving
             materials, and energy efficient systems and design for residential
             development. Housing Element policies and programs should address the
             environmental significance and operational benefits of employing energy
             conservation in the building and retrofitting of housing.
             According to the U.S. Department of Energy, residential energy use
             accounts for about 21 percent of all energy use nationwide, although homes
             in the Pacific region, with its milder climate, use up to 35 percent less
             energy than homes in other parts of the country. Space heating and cooling
             account for about 43 percent of residential energy use, followed by water
             heating (12 percent), and lighting (11 percent). Greater energy efficiency in
             these three residential components would greatly contribute to an overall
             reduction in energy use.
             Opportunities for residential energy conservation exist at all levels: the
             individual dwelling unit, the residential project, the neighborhood, the
             community, and the region. As described in this chapter, the City of Hemet
             has adopted or will adopt strategies, policies, and programs to address
             opportunities for energy conservation, including residential energy
             conservation, at all of these levels. Opportunities for residential energy
             conservation include:
C I T Y O F H E M E T         G E N E R A L            P L A N         2 0 3 0
                                11-9
                                                                                     HOUSING
    Compliance with minimum energy conservation standards for
     residential construction and operations (heating, cooling, cooking,
     refrigeration, etc.). California requires cities and counties to enforce
     minimum energy efficiency standards through State building code
     standards (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations) and through
     energy efficiency standards for household appliances.
    Retrofitting of existing homes that are energy inefficient through
     weatherization, rehabilitation, and the replacement of older appliances.
    Energy efficient project site planning that takes maximum advantage of
     natural systems (sun, shade, wind) for lighting, heating, cooling, and
     generation of electricity.
    Neighborhood design and layout that encourage alternatives to
     automobile use through higher density, mixing of uses, greater
     connections, and street design for all types of mobility.
    Community and regional growth strategies that emphasize infill
     development; higher intensity and mixed-use development along
     transportation corridors.
    Neighborhood, community, and regional centers with a mix of
     employment, housing, retail, and services.
    The placement of housing for a variety of households and income
     levels as close as possible to job centers and services.
    Water conservation, water conserving landscaping, and stormwater
     management systems that reduce energy use.
The City’s strategies and policies related to energy conservation are shaped
by several State, regional, and local initiatives and programs. Among the
most important initiatives and programs described in this chapter are:
    State building code standards for energy efficiency (Title 24);
    The State’s climate change strategies focused on reductions in
     greenhouse gas emissions, as required by AB 32, the California Global
     Warming Solutions Act of 2006; and
    The City of Hemet General Plan.
State Energy Efficiency Requirements for New Construction
Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations contains California’s building
standards for energy efficiency. Each city and county must enforce these
standards as part of its review of building plans and issuance of building
permits. The standards, prepared by the California Energy Commission,
were established in 1978 in response to a State legislative mandate to reduce
California's energy consumption. The standards are updated periodically to
consider and incorporate new energy efficiency technologies and methods.
The Energy Commission estimates that California's building efficiency
          C I T Y        O F      H E M E T          G E N E R A L           P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                        11-10

 HOUSING
             standards (along with those for energy efficient appliances) have saved
             more than $56 billion in electricity and natural gas costs since 1978. It is
             estimated the standards will save an additional $23 billion by 2013.
             California Green Building Standards Code
             The 2010 California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen) took
             effect January 1, 2011. CALGreen is the first statewide mandatory green
             building code in the nation. It sets minimum standards for all new
             structures as part of a broad effort to significantly reduce California’s
             carbon emissions. The code has approximately 52 mandatory measures and
             an additional 130 optional provisions. The code addresses compliance
             verification by using the existing building code enforcement structure.
             Public agencies incorporate CALGreen code provisions into their building
             inspection procedures.
             Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
             The California Legislature adopted the California Global Warming
             Solutions Act in 2006 (Assembly Bill 32) and declared that “global warming
             poses a serious threat to the economic well-being, public health, natural
             resources, and the environment of California.” In adopting the act, the
             Legislature found that human activity is one of the leading contributors to
             an increase in carbon dioxide, methane, and other “greenhouse gases”
             (GHGs). The State has declared that these gases are leading to an increase
             in average global temperatures and contributing to changes in climate
             throughout the world. The purpose of AB 32 is to reduce GHG emissions
             to 1990 levels by 2020 (25 percent reduction over current levels). Executive
             Order S-03-05 requires further reduction of GHGs to 80 percent below
             1990 levels by 2050.
             AB 32 is being implemented by the California Air Resources Board and
             local air pollution control districts. The California Air Pollutions Control
             Officers Association (CAPCOA), which represents local air districts,
             recently released a report describing ways to measure and reduce GHGs at
             the local level, including steps that cities and counties can take to contribute
             to the goals of AB 32. An important local strategy recommended by
             CAPCOA is the adoption of general plan policies and implementation
             measures that encourage energy conserving community layout and design.
             Many of the recommendations are relevant for residential energy
             conservation. Among the suggestions are:
                 Promote walkability through a highly connected street system with
                  small blocks;
                 Promote mixed-use neighborhood centers and transit-oriented
                  development;
                 Reduce the amount of water used for landscaping and encourage the
                  use of recycled water for landscaping;
                 Promote the use of fuel-efficient heating and cooling equipment and
                  other appliances;
C I T Y O F H E M E T           G E N E R A L             P L A N        2 0 3 0
                                  11-11

                                                                                     HOUSING
    Encourage green building designs in both new construction and
     building renovation;
    Encourage building orientations and landscaping that enhance natural
     lighting and sun exposure;
    Encourage the expansion of neighborhood-level products and services
     and public transit opportunities throughout the area to reduce
     automobile use;
    Promote energy-efficient design features, including appropriate site
     orientation, use of light color, roofing, and building materials;
    Encourage the development of affordable housing throughout the
     community, as well as development of housing for elderly and low and
     moderate income households near public transportation services; and
    Ensure that a portion of future residential development is affordable to
     low and very-low income households.
Hemet General Plan
The City of Hemet recently updated its General Plan in 2012. The updated
General Plan includes goals and policies in several elements which support
energy conservation in order to comply with AB 32. Goals and policies
include:
    Make use of federal, State, and utility energy conservation incentive and
     education programs.
    Support conversion of asphalt to green space where possible to help
     reduce urban heat island effects.
    Coordinate the locations of new public facilities with mass transit
     services to encourage alternative transportation use.
    Encourage increased use of passive solar design and day-lighting in new
     and rehabilitated structures, as well as new developments.
    Encourage installation and use of cogeneration facilities.
    Promote mixed-use development. The General Plan Update includes
     mixed-use designations, and development standards associated with
     these zones that seek to facilitate energy-efficient development
     patterns.
    The City will review its Zoning Code to ensure that provisions
     encourage and facilitate infill development, especially development of
     infill sites that might otherwise remain undeveloped or under-used due
     to economic or physical site constraints.
          C I T Y         O F     H E M E T          G E N E R A L           P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                        11-12

 HOUSING
                 The City will encourage more energy efficient subdivision design
                  through standards for lot orientation to take advantage of natural solar
                  power during the preliminary subdivision design evaluation process.
             11.7.3        CITY ORGANIZATIONAL RESOURCES FOR HOUSING
             Successor Agency to the Hemet Redevelopment Agency
             Prior to 2012, the City of Hemet Redevelopment Agency was involved with
             a number of housing-related activities, including the purchase of land for
             new housing development, partnering with other agencies and
             organizations to provide financial assistance for new housing development,
             and providing funds for housing programs including housing rehabilitation.
             Much of the funds for housing-related activities were provided through a
             required Housing Set-Aside, an obligation of the Redevelopment Agency to
             provide a minimum of 20 percent of the tax increment on activities to
             support affordable housing.
             In January 2012, the Redevelopment Agency was dissolved, consistent with
             State legislation (ABx1 26). As part of the dissolution process, the City
             Council confirmed that the City of Hemet will serve as the Successor
             Agency to the Hemet Redevelopment Agency. All assets, properties, and
             contracts were transferred to the Successor Agency. An Oversight Board
             has been established to assist the Successor Agency in the close out and
             wind down of affairs of the dissolved Redevelopment Agency. The
             Oversight Board is generally intended to supervise the activities of the
             Successor Agency. Once obligations of the former Redevelopment Agency
             are met, the Successor Agency will be discontinued. The Successor Agency
             cannot enter into any new contracts or other obligations. The Successor
             Agency is charged with monitoring the continued affordability of projects
             previously developed using Redevelopment Agency funds based on the
             affordability requirements of each project.
             Hemet Housing Authority
             The City of Hemet Housing Authority is an independent agency, separate
             from the City of Hemet and the former Hemet Redevelopment Agency.
             The Housing Authority is able to undertake a number of housing-related
             activities including the development of new affordable housing and
             administering programs to provide housing opportunities for lower and
             moderate income households. Prior to 2012, the Housing Authority worked
             alongside the Hemet Redevelopment Agency to develop new affordable
             housing. In the future, the Hemet Housing Authority may partner with
             outside organizations and agencies to implement policies and programs
             identified in the Housing Element.
             11.8 H OUSING P LAN
             11.8.1        EVALUATION OF ACHIEVEMENTS
             Appendix C, Section C.3 includes a description of the City’s
             accomplishments in implementing the existing Housing Element. State law
             requires that the Housing Element include:
C I T Y O F H E M E T          G E N E R A L           P L A N       2 0 3 0
                                 11-13

                                                                                            HOUSING
    An evaluation of the “effectiveness of the element,” including a review
     of the actual results of the previous element’s goals, objectives, policies,
     and programs (Government Code 65588(a)(2)).
    An evaluation of “progress in implementation” of the Housing
     Element programs, including an analysis of the significant difference
     between what was projected or planned in the previous element and
     what was achieved (Government Code 65588(a)(3)).
    An evaluation of the “appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies”
     of the existing element. This includes a description of how the goals,
     objectives, policies, and programs of the updated element incorporate
     lessons learned from the results of the previous element (Government
     Code 65588(a)(1)).
Appendix C, Section C.3 briefly describes the programs contained within
the existing element. The objective of each program is identified, and the
results of each program are evaluated. Based on the results and the
requirements of State law (Government Code 65583(c)(1) through
65583(c)(6)(d)), programs were continued, modified or deleted.
11.8.2 QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
The City anticipates achieving the objectives outlined in Table 11.1 for the
RHNA planning period from January 1, 2014 through October 31, 2021.
                                      Table 11.1
                             Quantified Objectives
                January 1, 2014 through October 31, 2021
                                        New
           Objective                                  Rehabilitation Conservation
                                    Construction
    Extremely-Low Income                  67                105               --
       Very-Low Income                    67                150               --
         Low Income                       96                369             158
       Moderate income                   112                 --               --
   Above-Moderate Income                 262                 --               --
             Total                       604               6241             1582
Notes:
1 Includes 75 loans/grants per year (20% for extremely-low income, 20% for very-
low income, and 60% for low income); 5 senior ramp grants per year (all very-low
income); 20 CalHOME loans (10 for very-low income and 10 for low income);
Mobley Lane Apartment rehabilitation (44 low income units).
2 Includes 18 units at Ability First, 65 units at Oasis Senior and 75 units at Sahara
Senior.
         C I T Y         O F        H E M E T            G E N E R A L              P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                           11-14

 HOUSING
             11.9 G OALS           AND      P OLICIES
             H OUSING
             This chapter contains Hemet’s housing goals, policies, and programs. Goals
             were developed in direct response to the observed needs for Hemet
             identified in the analyses conducted during the preparation of this Housing
             Element.
             The goals of the Housing Element aim to provide: 1) equitable access to
             housing; 2) adequate provision of housing; 3) adequate housing sites; 4)
             neighborhood preservation, rehabilitation of the existing housing stock, and
             maintenance of affordable housing costs; and 5) reduced constraints to the
             provision of housing.
             The broad goals of the Housing Element provide a framework for
             compliance with California Government Code Section 65583, which
             requires that the Housing Element contain a “statement of the community’s
             goals, quantified objectives, and policies relative to the maintenance,
             improvement, and development of housing.”
              GOAL              Provide for the attainment of quality housing within
                                a satisfying living environment for households of all
              H-1               socio-economic, age, and ethnic types in Hemet.
             POLICIES
             H-1.1:            Promote fair housing practices throughout the City.
             H-1.2:            Promote a variety of housing types to meet the special
                               needs of persons with disabilities, elderly households, and
                               others who may need assisted living, group home,
                               institutional care, and other alternative residential
                               environments.
             H-1.3:            Ensure that families with children have equal access to
                               housing through enforcement of anti-discrimination
                               policies and by facilitating the construction of housing to
                               meet the needs of such families.
             IMPLEMENTATION
              Program             Implement Fair Housing Laws
              H-1a:
              Program             The City of Hemet actively furthers fair housing in the
              Description:        community. Specifically, the City will continue to
                                  contract with an appropriate agency to promote fair
                                  housing. The City will continue to refer complaints
                                  regarding fair housing and discrimination issues to the
                                  appropriate agency. At present, the City contracts with
                                  the Fair Housing Council of Riverside County for these
                                  services. The City will also advertise fair housing and
C I T Y O F H E M E T         G E N E R A L              P L A N       2 0 3 0
                                 11-15

                                                                                    HOUSING
                 housing discrimination services in City and public
                 buildings.
Objective:       Continue to support the Fair Housing Council of
                 Riverside County and provide referral services.
Responsible      Community Investment Department; City of Hemet
Agency:          Housing Authority
Timeframe:       Current and ongoing
Funding:         CDBG funds
Program         Emergency Shelters and Homeless Facilities
H-1b:
Program         The City will continue to coordinate with the County of
Description:    Riverside, Valley Restart and other applicable service
                providers to address the needs of homeless individuals
                and families. Activities may include, but are not limited
                to, monitoring the capacity of existing shelters within the
                City and coordinating outreach services with applicable
                providers and agencies.
Objective:      Provide for the housing needs of homeless persons
Responsible     Community Investment Department; City of Hemet
Agency:         Housing Authority
Timeframe:      Ongoing
Funding:        General Fund; CDBG; Riverside City and County
                Continuum of Care
Program          Accessibility for Persons with Disabilities
H-1c:
Program          The City will continue to enforce State requirements to
Description:     include accessibility in housing and public facilities for
                 persons with disabilities. The City will undertake the
                 following actions:
                     Encourage housing developers to include
                      accessibility for individuals with disabilities in their
                      project designs and ensure compliance with the
                      accessibility requirements in the California Building
                      Standards Code (Title 24).
                     Periodically evaluate City regulations and
                      procedures to ensure that they do not exclude
                      participation by persons with disabilities.
        C I T Y     O F       H E M E T          G E N E R A L              P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                    11-16

 HOUSING
                                Include accessibility considerations in the
                                 preparation of the City’s capital improvement plan
                                 and the allocation of funding for capital
                                 improvements to housing and residential
                                 neighborhoods.
                                Continue to administer and fund the Handicapped
                                 Ramp Program and the Senior and Disabled Home
                                 Repair Program as resources are available.
                                Continue to monitor and support the Ability First
                                 Apartments – an 18-unit apartment complex for the
                                 developmentally and physically disabled.
                                Continue to provide exceptions to regulatory
                                 provisions for housing for persons with disabilities
                                 through the adopted reasonable accommodation
                                 procedures.
             Objective:     Increase accessibility in housing for persons with
                            disabilities.
             Responsible    Community Development Department, Building
             Agency:        Division; Community Investment Department; City of
                            Hemet Housing Authority
             Timeframe:     Current and ongoing implementation              of  State
                            requirements and housing programs
             Funding:       General Fund; CDBG funds
             Program        Special Housing Needs
             H-1d:
             Program        In implementing affordable housing programs, the City
             Description:   will work with housing providers to provide a range of
                            low-cost housing options for special needs groups,
                            including seniors, large families, female-headed
                            households, single-parent households with children,
                            persons with disabilities, persons with developmental
                            disabilities, and homeless individuals and families. The
                            City will support development of housing for special
                            needs groups through a combination of regulatory
                            incentives, zoning standards, housing rehabilitation, and
                            supportive services programs described in other
                            implementation programs. In addition, the City will seek
                            funding under State and federal programs designated
                            specifically for special needs groups such as seniors,
                            persons with disabilities, persons with developmental
                            disabilities, and persons at-risk of homelessness.
C I T Y O F H E M E T     G E N E R A L            P L A N         2 0 3 0
                           11-17

                                                                                 HOUSING
Objective:      Increase the availability of housing for special needs
                groups while meeting the City’s overall goals for the
                production of housing affordable to extremely-low, low,
                very-low, and moderate income households.
Responsible     Community Investment Department, Housing Division;
Agency:         Community Development Department, Planning
                Division; City of Hemet Housing Authority
Timeframe:      Current and ongoing.
Funding:        General Fund, HOME funds, County tax allocation
                bonds
Program          Zoning Code Revision to Comply with State Law
H-1e:            Regarding Emergency Shelters and Transitional
                 and Supportive Housing
Program          The City will review and revise, as necessary, definitions,
Description:     standards, and other provisions for emergency shelters
                 and transitional and supportive housing in the Zoning
                 Code to comply with State law.
                 To accommodate transitional and supportive housing,
                 the City will amend its zoning code in accordance with
                 Government Code Section 65583(a)(5) to consider
                 transitional housing and supportive housing as a
                 residential use of property, subject only to those
                 development standards that apply to other residential
                 dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
                 In addition, definitions for “target population”,
                 “transitional housing” and “supportive housing” will be
                 revised consistent with Government Code Section
                 65582.
                 The City will amend standards and provisions in
                 Chapter 90 Article X Division 4 of the Municipal Code
                 to comply with all statutory requirements related to
                 emergency shelters pursuant to State law, including use
                 separation requirements.
Objective:       Accommodate the development of emergency shelters
                 and transitional and supportive housing in compliance
                 with State law
Responsible      Community       Development      Department,     Planning
Agency:          Division
        C I T Y     O F      H E M E T         G E N E R A L             P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                  11-18

 HOUSING
             Timeframe:       Within one year of adoption of the Housing Element
             Funding:         General Fund
             GOAL         Facilitate the provision and improvement of
                          affordable housing to meet the needs of the
             H-2          community.
             POLICIES
             H-2.1:       Encourage the participation and financial commitment of
                          private entities (both non-profit and for-profit) in attaining
                          housing goals.
             H-2.2:       Encourage the provision and continued availability of a
                          range of housing types throughout the community,
                          including mobile homes and rental housing, for all
                          economic segments of the community.
             H-2.3:       Continue to plan and facilitate the rehabilitation of lower
                          and moderate income housing through all relevant federal,
                          State, and county housing assistance programs, as well as
                          local development standards.
             H-2.4:       Encourage supportive services for special needs
                          populations through implementation of the City’s
                          Consolidated Plan.
             IMPLEMENTATION
             Program        Facilitate Development of Affordable Ownership
             H-2a:          and Rental Housing through Regulatory Incentives
             Program        Development of affordable housing requires substantial
             Description:   leverage of public funds, and multiple layers of funding
                            are often required to address the subsidies required. The
                            City will continue to partner with public and private
                            entities to pursue available local, State, and federal
                            funding resources.
                            Currently, the City offers a number of housing programs,
                            including HOME funds. The City will advertise the
                            availability of these programs on the City website and at
                            public counters through brochures.
                            As applicable, the City will continue to refer interested
                            individuals to the County of Riverside for first-time
                            homebuyer assistance through low-interest loans and/or
                            mortgage credit certificates financed through Riverside
                            County mortgage revenue bonds.
                            The City will continue to work with Riverside County in
C I T Y O F H E M E T     G E N E R A L             P L A N       2 0 3 0
                            11-19

                                                                                  HOUSING
                issuing mortgage revenue bonds, tax credit, and mortgage
                credit certificates to finance housing construction and
                home purchase for low and moderate income
                households. Specific actions by the City will include:
                    Annual meetings (or more frequent, if needed) with
                     the County to determine the financial feasibility of
                     City participation in new mortgage bond, tax credit,
                     or mortgage credit certificate allocations;
                    Contribution to the cost of applying for an allocation
                     and administering the program based on the City’s
                     share or participation in the program; and
                    Distribution of information on the program to
                     developers, lenders, the real estate industry, and
                     homebuyers via the City’s website and at public
                     counters.
Objective:      Continue to work with housing developers and the
                County of Riverside to pursue various funding
                mechanisms.
Responsible     Community Investment Department; City of Hemet
Agency:         Housing Authority
Timeframe:      Current and ongoing
Funding:        HOME funds, CDBG funds, and other State and federal
                opportunities as available.
Program         Participate in Regional Solutions to Housing Issues
H-2b:
Program         Continue to coordinate with the California League of
Description:    Cities, Western Regional Council of Governments
                (WRCOG) and other applicable organizations to monitor
                legislation, work directly with local legislators, and
                propose and/or promote State and federal legislation that
                supports the goals and objectives of the City’s Housing
                Element and the needs of the community.
Objective:      Support legislative activities that promote the goals and
                objectives of the City’s Housing Element.
Responsible     City Council, City of Hemet Housing Authority; City
Agency:         Manager; City Staff
Timeframe:      Current and ongoing
        C I T Y      O F      H E M E T          G E N E R A L            P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                    11-20

 HOUSING
             Funding:      General Fund
             Program       Provide Dedicated Staff for Coordination of the
             H-2c:         City’s Housing Programs
             Program       Maintain staff positions as funding sources allow to
             Description:  oversee the development and administration of housing
                           programs and to serve as a liaison with other agencies
                           offering housing programs in Hemet.
             Objective:    Maintain program oversight and smooth coordination
                           with other City departments and agencies providing
                           housing programs.
             Responsible   Community Investment Department; City of Hemet
             Agency:       Housing Authority
             Timeframe:    Current and ongoing
             Funding:      CDBG funds; General Fund
             Program       Development Permit System Review
             H-2d:
             Program       To ensure that the City can accommodate its RHNA
             Description:  regional share of new housing construction need and its
                           quantified objectives for the construction, conservation,
                           and rehabilitation of housing, the City will continue to
                           implement a permit process that:
                              Includes concurrent review of multiple permit
                               applications.
                              Provides one-stop permit processing with a case
                               manager for each permit application.
                              Expedites residential development review consistent
                               with the complexity of the project and
                               planning/environmental issues to be resolved.
                           The City will annually review its development permit
                           system to ensure effective implementation.
             Objective:    Continue expediting the permit process.
             Responsible   Community Development Department, Planning and
             Agency:       Building Divisions; Engineering Department; Fire
                           Department
C I T Y O F H E M E T     G E N E R A L          P L A N        2 0 3 0
                           11-21

                                                                               HOUSING
Timeframe       Current and ongoing
Funding:        General Fund; Development permit fees
Program         Address Flooding Issues
H-2e:
Program         Hemet will continue efforts to resolve flooding problems
Description:    by collecting development impact fees and requiring
                implementation of planned flood control improvements
                in all affected residential projects. As part of these
                efforts, the City will develop and implement a master
                drainage plan for west Hemet, including the Salt Creek
                area.
Objective:      Ensure that new residential developments are protected
                from flooding, and improve flood protection for existing
                homes.
Responsible     Engineering Department
Agency:
Timeframe:      Develop Master Drainage Plan for West Hemet by 2015;
                Ongoing improvements
Funding:        General Fund and Development Impact Fees for
                Drainage
Program         Coordination for Entitlement Funding
H-2f:
Program          The City’s departments will coordinate internally on an
Description:     annual basis for the use and distribution of federal
                 entitlement programs to better integrate Housing
                 Element policies, programs and reporting requirements
                 with the City’s Consolidated Plan.
Objective:      Interdepartmental coordination for Consolidated Plan
                process.
Responsible     Community Investment Department, City of Hemet
Agency:         Housing Authority
Timeframe:      Annually
Funding:        General Fund; CDBG; HOME
        C I T Y      O F     H E M E T          G E N E R A L          P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                  11-22

 HOUSING
              GOAL         Provide adequate sites for housing.
              H-3
             POLICIES
             H-3.1:       Locate appropriate residential uses with convenient access
                          to employment centers and services.
             H-3.2:       Plan for residential land uses that accommodate
                          anticipated growth of new employment opportunities.
             H-3.3:       Plan for residential land uses to support development of
                          housing affordable to all income levels.
             H-3.4:       Continue to allow the installation of manufactured housing
                          on permanent foundations in accordance with State law
                          requirements for factory built housing and mobile homes.
             H-3.5:       Continue to permit second units in single-family residential
                          areas by right in accordance with State law.
             H-3.6:       Promote the inclusion of a percentage of affordable units
                          in market-rate development projects.
             IMPLEMENTATION
             Program        Compliance        with     Regional     Housing      Needs
             H-3a:         Allocation
             Program       The City has a sufficient inventory of available sites to
             Description:  ensure capacity to accommodate the City’s 2014-2021
                           RHNA allocation. This includes existing zoning for sites
                           which are adequate to accommodate the City’s allocation
                           of 67 units affordable to extremely low income
                           households, 67 units affordable to very-low income
                           households, 96 units affordable to low income
                           households, 112 units affordable to moderate income
                           households, and 262 units affordable to above-moderate
                           income households. The City’s existing capacity for
                           housing, including projects in the approval process, will
                           allow the City to meet or exceed the RHNA need. In
                           order to implement the City’s 2006-2014 Housing
                           Element and provide adequate sites for the City’s Cycle 4
                           RHNA allocation, the City rezoned a number of parcels.
                           The City’s Cycle 5 (2014-2021) RHNA allocation is lower
                           than the previous RHNA allocation, resulting in a surplus
                           of available sites for residential development at all income
                           levels. The City will continue to monitor development of
                           current projects to meet its RHNA allocation.
C I T Y O F H E M E T     G E N E R A L             P L A N         2 0 3 0
                            11-23

                                                                                  HOUSING
Objective:    Meet the 2014-2021 RHNA
Responsible   Community Development Department, Planning
Agency:       Division; Community Investment Department; City of
              Hemet Housing Authority
Timeframe:     2021
Funding:      General Fund
Program       Maintain Inventory of Housing Sites, Including Infill
H-3b:         Sites
Program       Maintain an inventory of sites suitable for future
Description:  residential development, including infill sites, that provide
              housing opportunities to all income levels.
              The City has prepared an inventory of infill sites with
              residential development potential. The City will make this
              information available to interested nonprofit or for-profit
              developers.
Objective:    Provide inventory of residential sites to housing
              developers.
Responsible   Community Development Department
Agency:
Timeframe:    Ongoing maintenance of sites inventory
Funding:      General Fund
Program       Coordinate      with  Annual       Capital    Improvement
H-3c:         Program
Program       The City will annually coordinate the Capital
Description:  Improvement Program (CIP) with the Housing Element
              objectives to ensure that facilities and infrastructure are
              available to accommodate housing needs.
Objective:    Ensure infrastructure availability to accommodate housing
              needs.
Responsible   Public Works Department; Engineering Department
Agency:
Timeframe:    Current and ongoing
        C I T Y     O F      H E M E T          G E N E R A L             P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                   11-24
 HOUSING
             Funding:      General Fund, Development Impact Fees, State and
                           federal infrastructure grants
             Program       Encourage the Use of Density Bonuses
             H-3d:
             Program       To provide greater affordability in new housing
             Description:  development, the City shall encourage the use of density
                           bonuses in accordance with the State Density Bonus Law
                           and the City’s density bonus ordinance, Chapter 90,
                           Article 6 of the Hemet Municipal Code.
                           The City will disseminate information to the development
                           community about the density bonus provisions.
             Objective:    Encourage use of density bonuses for affordable housing
             Responsible   Community Development Department
             Agency:
             Timeframe:    Current and ongoing
             Funding:      General Fund
             Program       Monitoring Potential Constraints
             H-3e:
             Program       The City will periodically review City regulations,
             Description:  procedures and fees to identify any potential constraints to
                           the reasonable development and maintenance of housing.
                           The City will outreach to the development community to
                           assist in this review. If the City finds that regulations or
                           procedures are a constraint to the provision of adquate
                           housing, the City will examine revisions to identified
                           requirements or policies as reasonable and necessary.
             Objective:    Ensure that City regulations, procedures and fees do not
                           unreasonably constrain production and maintenance of
                           housing
             Responsible   Community Development Department, Planning Division
             Agency:
             Timeframe:    Ongoing
             Funding:      General Fund
C I T Y O F H E M E T     G E N E R A L             P L A N       2 0 3 0
                            11-25

                                                                                 HOUSING
 GOAL          Preserve existing neighborhoods and rehabilitate the
               existing housing stock.
 H-4
POLICIES
H-4.1:        Encourage the maintenance and repair of existing housing
              to prevent deterioration within the City.
H-4.2:        Strive to abate substandard housing conditions.
H-4.3:        Provide and maintain an adequate level of community
              facilities and municipal services in all community areas.
H-4.4:        Improve and upgrade community facilities and municipal
              services where necessary and feasible.
IMPLEMENTATION
Program        Provide Rehabilitation Loans and Senior Repair
H-4a:          Grants
Program        The City will continue to provide grants and loans to assist
Description:   in housing rehabilitation and home repairs. The City will
               implement these programs according to guidelines that are
               reviewed and amended periodically to assure effective
               implementation. Forms of assistance may include:
                   Loans to low-income homeowners for housing
                    rehabilitation.
                   Home repair grants for very-low income elderly
                    and/or disabled homeowners (including mobile home
                    owners).
                   Mobile home repair loans.
Objective:     Support the rehabilitation of approximately 75 single
               family dwellings per year through loans/grants, 5 senior
               homes per year through handicap ramp grants, 20
               CalHOME loans for owner-occupied units, and the 44
               units at the Mobley Lane Apartments.
Responsible    Community Investment Department; City of Hemet
Agency:        Housing Authority
Timeframe:     Annually
Funding:       CDBG funds, HOME funds, CalHOME funds, other
               State and federal funds as appropriate.
        C I T Y      O F      H E M E T          G E N E R A L           P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                    11-26

 HOUSING
             Program       Maintain Cooperative Relationships with Other
             H-4b:         Public and Private Nonprofit Organizations
             Program       The City of Hemet will continue to seek cooperative
             Description:  relationships with other public or private organizations to
                           more effectively leverage financial resources and staff
                           capabilities in delivering home repair and housing
                           rehabilitation programs. Continue existing agreements
                           with the Riverside County Housing Authority, and identify
                           one or more agencies or organizations with organizational
                           and financial capacity to operate home repair and/or
                           housing rehabilitation programs in Hemet.
             Objective:    Deliver home repair and rehabilitation programs through
                           cooperation with other public and private nonprofit
                           organizations.
             Responsible   City of Hemet Community Investment Department
             Agency:
             Timeframe:    Current and ongoing
             Funding:      General Fund, CDBG
             Program       Rental Registration and Inspection Program
             H-4c:
             Program       The City will evaluate the feasibility and appropriateness
             Description:  of developing a rental registration and inspection program.
                           This program would provide for periodic survey and
                           inspection of rental units within the City to proactively
                           identify and address substandard housing conditions.
             Objective:    Evaluate developing a rental registration and inspection
                           program.
             Responsible   Community Development Department
             Agency:
             Timeframe:    Evaluate program development by 2014
             Funding:      General Fund
C I T Y O F H E M E T     G E N E R A L            P L A N        2 0 3 0
                            11-27
                                                                               HOUSING
Program       Use Tax Exemptions to Encourage Maintenance of
H-4d:         Rental Housing
Program       The City will work with the Franchise Tax Board to
Description:  enforce the provisions of the California Revenue and Tax
              Code prohibiting owners of substandard rental housing
              from claiming depreciation, amortization, mortgage
              interest, and property tax deductions on State income tax.
              The City will develop procedures to guide enforcement of
              these provisions.
Objective:    Improve condition of rental housing by preventing owners
              of rental housing from claiming tax benefits from
              substandard units.
Responsible   Community         Development       Department,       Code
Agency:       Enforcement and Building Divisions
Timeframe:    Develop guidelines by 2015
Funding:      General Fund
Program       Health and Safety Inspections of Mobile Home Parks
H-4e:
Program       The City will continue to be proactive in surveying and
Description:  inspecting mobile home parks to identify issues affecting
              habitability. Based on the surveys, the City will conduct
              building and code enforcement inspections, and require
              specific improvements in park conditions based on
              inspection results. The purpose of the study will be to
              target mobile home parks with the most serious problems
              while preventing the deterioration of parks currently in
              sound condition, in accordance with Title 25.
Objective:    Conduct approximately 6 mobile home park inspections
              per year based on the survey and inspection schedule.
              Require specific improvements to address deficiencies
              identified in inspections to improve park conditions.
Responsible   Community         Development       Department,       Code
Agency:       Enforcement and Building Divisions; Fire Department
Timeframe:    Annually
Funding:      General Fund, CDBG, other State funding programs
        C I T Y    O F       H E M E T         G E N E R A L           P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                 11-28
 HOUSING
             Program       Neighborhood Preservation
             H-4f:
             Program       The City will continue comprehensive neighborhood
             Description:  improvement and preservation efforts that combine
                           community policing, social and supportive services,
                           infrastructure and other public improvements, and code
                           enforcement activities in targeting neighborhoods with
                           high concentrations of substandard property conditions,
                           crime, and other problems. The City is currently
                           coordinating these efforts through the Hemet Restoring
                           Our Community Strategy (ROCS).
             Objective:    Neighborhood preservation and improvement
             Responsible   Community          Development       Department,       Code
             Agency:       Enforcement       Division; Police Department; Fire
                           Department
             Timeframe:    Current and ongoing
             Funding:      General Fund, CDBG and other State and federal funding
                           sources as available
             GOAL         Preserve affordable housing opportunities.
             H-5
             POLICIES
             H-5.1:       Preserve the affordability of existing assisted housing units
                          through rehabilitation and/or acquisition and management
                          by entities dedicated to maintaining the affordability of
                          these units.
             H-5.2:       Enforce energy efficiency standards in new construction
                          and increase energy efficiency in older neighborhoods.
             H-5.3:       Promote compact, mixed-use development patterns that
                          use land efficiently, reduce pollution and increase energy
                          and resource efficiency.
             IMPLEMENTATION
             Program        Improve Residential Energy Efficiency
             H-5a:
             Program        Through the General Plan, the City has adopted goals and
             Description:   policies to reduce Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions in
                            accordance with AB 32. Many of these GHG emission
                            reduction measures will increase energy efficiency.
                            Specific actions include:
C I T Y O F H E M E T     G E N E R A L             P L A N        2 0 3 0
                             11-29
                                                                                HOUSING
                  Enforcement of State energy conservation standards
                   (Title 24) in new residential construction;
                  Inclusion of energy efficient home improvements and
                   modifications in the City’s home repair and housing
                   rehabilitation programs;
                  Coordination with Southern California Edison (SCE)
                   to encourage participation in the Customer Assistance
                   Program for low-income, senior citizens, permanently
                   handicapped, and non-English speaking customers to
                   control their energy use;
                  Distribution of public information on methods of
                   achieving energy conservation in residential design,
                   construction, and rehabilitation via the City’s website
                   and brochures at the public counter, and;
                  Implementation of General Plan policies and zoning
                   standards for energy conservation in project design,
                   including:
                   ♦    Promote mixed-use development in its updated
                        General Plan. Development standards associated
                        with these mixed-use areas seek to facilitate
                        energy-efficient development patterns.
                   ♦    Encourage more energy efficient subdivision
                        design through standards for lot orientation to
                        take advantage of natural solar power, light, and
                        heating and cooling during the preliminary
                        subdivision design evaluation process.
                   ♦    Support conversion of asphalt to green space to
                        help reduce urban heat island effects.
                   ♦    Coordinate the locations of new public facilities,
                        higher density housing, and employment centers
                        with public transit services to encourage
                        alternative transportation use.
                   ♦    Advertise federal, State, and utility energy
                        conservation incentive and education programs
                        via the City’s website and public counter
                        brochures.
Objective:     Increase energy efficiency of new and existing housing
Responsible    Community Development Department, Planning and
Agency:        Building Divisions; Engineering Department; Public
               Works Department
        C I T Y     O F      H E M E T           G E N E R A L          P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                   11-30

 HOUSING
             Timeframe:    Continue ongoing implementation of existing programs
             Funding:      General Fund, State and federal grant programs
             Program       Preserve Existing Assisted Units
             H-5b:
             Program       The City of Hemet will continue to monitor and
             Description:  coordinate with the owners and management of Oasis
                           Senior Villa, Oasis Senior and Ability First (housing for
                           low-income persons with disabilities) to ensure
                           preservation of the rental housing units as affordable
                           housing for low-income households.
             Objective:    Preserve 158 units of housing affordable to lower income
                           households.
             Responsible   Successor Agency; Community Investment Department,
             Agency:       Housing Division
             Timeframe:    Ongoing
             Funding:      Successor Agency Administration Budget
             Program       Riverside County Housing Choice Vouchers
             H-5c:
             Program       The Riverside County Housing Authority administers the
             Description:  Housing Choice Voucher Program for the City of Hemet.
                           The program extends rental subsidies to very-low income
                           households that cannot afford the cost of rental housing
                           without assuming a cost burden. Vouchers pay the
                           difference between the current fair-market rent
                           established by HUD and what a tenant can afford to pay.
             Objective:    Continue to report potential fraudulent use vouchers,
                           substandard housing conditions, and other concerns to
                           the Riverside County Housing Authority.
             Responsible   Riverside County Housing Authority
             Agency:
             Timeframe:    As needed
             Funding:      County of Riverside; HUD
             Program       Evaluate Development Impact Fees
             H-5d:
             Program       Pursuant to the requirements of AB 1600, the City will
             Description:  annually evaluate development impact fees to ensure that
                           such fees are the minimum necessary to cover actual
                           costs; update and implement the General Plan; and to
C I T Y O F H E M E T     G E N E R A L           P L A N        2 0 3 0
                            11-31
                                                                                 HOUSING
               ensure protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
Objective:     Ensure that development impact fees are no higher than
               they must be to cover costs.
Responsible    Community Development Department,               Engineering
Agency:        Department, Finance Department
Timeframe:     As needed
Funding:       General Fund
Program        Mobile Home Rent Review Commission
H-5e:
Program        The City shall continue to meet the provisions of Hemet
Description:   Municipal Code Chapter 2 (Administration), Article IV
               (Boards, Commissions, and Committees), Division 3
               (Mobile Home Rent Review Commission) regarding rent
               increases at mobile home parks.
Objective:     Maintain a process to conduct hearings on mobile rent
               issues.
Responsible    City Manager; Community Investment Department
Agency:
Timeframe:     Current and ongoing
Funding:       Application fees; General Fund
        C I T Y     O F      H E M E T         G E N E R A L             P L A N  2 0 3 0
                                                 11-32
                                         CHAPTER 2                                                LAND USE
As the City faces a future of certain
growth, the goals and policies in
this element enhance the quality of
                                         H       emet has grown from an agricultural town in the early 1900s, to a
                                                 widely recognized retirement community in the 1960s, and has been
                                                 one of the fastest growing cities in southern California. The area's
                                                 affordability, mild climate, and scenic location in the San Jacinto
life for residents, accommodate          Valley have always made Hemet an attractive destination for seniors and
residential growth to meet the           families. These factors combined with proximity to regional employment
housing needs of a diverse               centers such as Riverside and San Diego have also made Hemet a
community, improve blighted or           destination for residents. The Land Use Element reflects and supports the
under-performing commercial and          community’s desire to establish a clear path to the future, concentrating on
industrial       areas,         direct   the creation of a substantial job base for the City’s residents, and the
infrastructure improvements that         retention of the features that are considered unique and special to Hemet: a
keep pace with growth, and ensure        scenic setting, historic downtown, recreational and cultural amenities, and
the City’s long-term economic            diverse and attractive residential neighborhoods.
stability with an appropriate
balance of land uses.                    As the City continues to grow, Hemet will be developed in an orderly and
                                         fiscally responsible manner while continuing to rely on the values that are
                                         the foundation of our community: a sense of independence, a responsibility
                                         to future generations of residents, and strong ties to our community’s
                                         beauty and heritage.
                                         2.1 S CO PE       AND C ONTEXT
                                         The Land Use Element meets State general plan requirements for a land use
                                         element and incorporates the optional general plan topic of economic
                                         development. It directs and defines development patterns by designating
                                         allowable uses, requirements, and locations for both existing and future
                                         development. This element has the widest ranging scope in the General
                                         Plan and affects all of the other elements. This vision of long-term land use
                                         will influence short-term plans such as subdivisions, specific plans, and
                                         public works projects.
                                         State planning law requires that the Land Use Element designate "the
                                         proposed general distribution and general location and extent of the uses of
                                         the land" for a variety of purposes (Government Code Section 65302[a]).
                                         Through maps and text, the Land Use Element defines the distribution and
              C   I   T Y        O   F H  E   M   E  T    G    E   N E  R   A L    P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                               2-1

                                                                                    LAND USE
intensity of development of residential neighborhoods, commercial and
industrial districts, parks and other open spaces, and public uses of property
in Hemet. In particular, this element contains the Land Use Map, which
presents a pictorial representation of land use policy. To ensure appropriate
implementation of the element’s goals, the text describes the relationship
between General Plan land use policy and zoning.
The Land Use Element presents land use planning and economic
development strategies that apply to the Planning Area as a whole. These
are supplemented by specific land use, mobility, economic development,
and design policies applicable to specific districts and areas throughout the
community to guide the City toward achieving its land use goals. The
element also provides strategies for downtown Hemet, Diamond Valley
Lake, and West Hemet districts that support the creation of distinct
communities that complement rather than compete with one another.
Finally, the Land Use Element provides a discussion and overview of six
mixed-use areas within the Planning Area and the development
considerations associated with those mixed-use areas.
2.1.1          RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS IN THE
               GENERAL PLAN
The contents of all the General Plan elements are complementary and must
be integrated to provide comprehensive and consistent guidelines. The
Land Use Element describes long-range goals for the physical development
of the community, both in terms of land use type and intensity, as well as
character and form. The element also provides the framework for various
topics addressed in other General Plan elements, because the manner in
which land is used in Hemet affects all the elements.
Community Design The Land Use Map provides a two-dimensional
description of land use policy by indicating the location and type of
permitted uses. Equally important is the third dimension of character and
community form. The Community Design Element describes how new
development fits within the established City framework. The Community
Design Element also describes how creative site design, architectural
treatments, and landscaping can be used to enhance the visual image Hemet
conveys to residents and visitors, and the form of development that will
best assist the City in accomplishing multiple housing, circulation, land use,
and recreation objectives.
Circulation Different land uses generate different trip demands, which in
turn influence the capacity and service levels of Hemet’s transportation
systems. The Circulation Element lays out future transportation services
and routes designed to meet the demands of both existing and future
development. Road capacity goals and policies addressed in the Circulation
Element also affect the type and mix of uses identified in the Land Use
Element. Changes in land use policies that promote economic development
goals may result in congestion and reduce quality of life for residents, if not
serviced with adequate road capacity.
         C   I  T Y      O   F    H  E  M  E  T     G   E   N E  R  A L      P  L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                        2-2

 LAND USE
              Community Services and Infrastructure The goals and policies of the
              Community Services and Infrastructure Element ensure adequate
              infrastructure capacity to mitigate any undesired effects of growth by
              monitoring and phasing development, so it is concurrent with the provision
              of infrastructure. Since many of the goals and policies expressed in the
              Community Services and Infrastructure Element are implemented through
              tax revenues received by the City, the content of the Land Use Element
              correlates directly to the funding of public services.
              Public Safety Safety and noise abatement issues also relate to land uses. To
              comply with noise level requirements, land use designations are determined
              in tandem with noise contour maps in the Public Safety Element. To
              mitigate or avoid damage and injury from natural and human-made hazards,
              hazards maps in the Public Safety Element must also be consistent with the
              Land Use Element.
              Open Space, Recreation, and Conservation The Land Use Element
              designates areas to be used as open spaces, parks, trails, recreation facilities,
              and areas for the conservation and preservation of natural resources. Goals
              and policies regarding the use, preservation and maintenance of these areas
              are addressed in the Open Space and Conservation Element and the
              Recreation and Trails Element.
              Art, History, and Culture The Land Use Element designates districts
              intended for historic recognition and preservation as well as for economic
              development and cultural enhancement. The goals and policies in the
              Historic Resources Element and the Art and Culture Element must be
              consistent with the district designations and with the Land Use Element’s
              efforts to create a unique identity and sense of community in Hemet.
              Housing The ability to attract new employers and to further develop
              existing ones is aided by the provision of housing options that can
              accommodate a range of users. The Housing Element provides an
              assessment of suitable locations for residential in-fill development, identifies
              barriers to the development of affordable housing, and establishes policies
              and programs that direct infrastructure investments to support residential
              growth.
              2.2       I SSUES      AND O PPORTU NITIES
              The City of Hemet is one of the oldest cities in Riverside County
              (established in 1910) and has recently been one of the fastest growing cities,
              partly because of the large amounts of vacant land in the western and
              southern edges of the city suitable for development. The juxtaposition of
              old versus new presents both opportunities and issues for the City of
              Hemet. Several of the key land use and development issues currently
              affecting Hemet are discussed below.
              2.2.1         MAINTAINING AND ENHANCING THE CITY’S ROLE
                            IN THE REGION
              The City of Hemet has historically been the San Jacinto Valley’s primary
              source of retail, medical, and cultural activity. As the surrounding area
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T    G    E   N  E R  A L      P  L  A   N      2 0 3 0
                                    2-3

                                                                                   LAND USE
grows, however, the City will need to both maintain and encourage
additional activities to help retain our regional role. To this end, the Land
Use Element envisions:
     expanded medical facilities at the existing hospital and elsewhere in the
     City, Sanderson Avenue, and key interchanges with the realigned
     Highway 79,
     regional shopping opportunities on west Florida Avenue, Sanderson
     Avenue, and key interchanges with realigned Highway 79,
     art and culture focusing in the downtown area, Ramona Bowl, and the
     Diamond Valley Lake museum complex,
     expansion of the civic and governmental facilities downtown and along
     State Street including the potential for a new Superior Court complex,
     continued development of regional recreational opportunities at
     Simpson Park and Diamond Valley Lake,
     establishment of clean technology industries around the Hemet-Ryan
     Airport, at the future business park located at future the SR 79 and
     Stetson Avenue, and along the Domenigoni Corridor, and
     coordinating the establishment of mixed land use districts with the
     extension of regional, transportation services such as the Metrolink
     Commuter rail line, realigned Highway 79, and other transit centers.
2.2.2          INCREASING EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
While the retail and residential sectors of the City have been fairly active,
the business and industrial sectors need to be enhanced and expanded.
Opportunities exist in the health care, manufacturing, “newer
technologies”, and recreation industries. Hemet intends to strategically seek
key businesses and industries and promote the city as an ideal area for
emerging industries to locate. This will provide the city with a balanced land
use base and create a stronger, more diversified economy, ensuring long-
term fiscal stability.
2.2.3          INTEGRATING LAND USE WITH REGIONAL
               TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES
The General Plan links future land uses to the mobility components listed
below both to ensure that sufficient capacity exists to serve the new
development but also, and perhaps more importantly, to promote Hemet’s
role in the region as a key destination for facilities such as business parks,
shopping centers, recreational and cultural activities, and governmental
offices all within the service range of primary transportation nodes. Over
the next several years, significant regional transportation improvements are
planned and Hemet will need to continue to actively promote the
prioritization and funding of these critical transportation facilities:
          C  I  T Y     O   F    H   E  M   E   T   G    E   N E    R   A L  P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                         2-4

 LAND USE
                   realignment of SR 79 through the City and its tie to the Mid-County
                   Parkway and Interstate 10 (I-10),
                   development of Metrolink and transit stations in the downtown area
                   and the west end of Hemet,
                   improvements to the Hemet-Ryan Airport, and
                   improvements to the regional circulation system such as the widening
                   of Florida Avenue from the City’s western boundary-line to Interstate
                   215 (I-215).
              2.2.4         RETAINING A SENSE OF COMMUNITY
              Throughout the General Plan process, a recurring theme voiced by almost
              all participants at meetings and workshops was a strong desire to maintain
              and enhance a strong sense of community. Concurrent with this sentiment
              was the acknowledgement that the City is growing. A desire exists to
              develop a new sense of place and identity for the City. This issue is
              addressed by developing districts that recognize and respect each area’s
              sense of place and style, while creating new districts that will promote the
              City’s role within the region and expand the job base.
              2.2.5         CREATING A UNIQUE IDENTITY FOR THE CITY
              Until recently, Hemet was nationally known as a “retirement community”
              because the bulk of the population was retirees (in 1990, the average age in
              Hemet was over 60). That perception, however, is contrary to what is
              currently happening within the community. With an influx of families to the
              newer master planned communities, the median age in Hemet is now closer
              to the national average. The City is experiencing a transition from quiet
              small town to dynamic suburban city. Consequently, the City is in the
              process of determining its unique identity. Many in the community have
              expressed a desire to return to “Hemet as it used to be”, others insist a new
              identity is key to Hemet’s future. The Land Use Element and other parts of
              the General Plan explore the following opportunities:
                   Hemet can optimize the recreational and natural amenities that exist
                   locally for residents and visitors. Hemet can be a major provider of
                   healthy living activities such as hiking and biking, especially in the
                   surrounding open spaces and in conjunction with the Diamond Valley
                   Lake area. The General Plan’s vision for an extensive trail network
                   would also complement this opportunity.
                   Hemet can take advantage of its existing role in providing health care
                   services for the valley and further enhance those services, providing
                   state-of-the-art clinical, research, and educational health facilities.
                   Hemet can offer a walkable downtown unique in Riverside County in
                   conjunction with new and rehabilitated development and cultural
                   amenities that are models of sustainability.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E   N  E    R  A L     P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    2-5

                                                                                  LAND USE
     Hemet can be a regional or national center for clean, alternative
     technology, research, and industry.
2.2.6          ENHANCING AND REVITALIZING EXISTING
               LAND USES
Older areas of the City need to be revitalized or enhanced. Although newer
retail development favors locating in shopping centers rather than stand
alone pads along Florida Avenue, existing development along the
thoroughfare can be revitalized over time, providing office, residential, and
specialty retail shops not typically found in shopping centers. Larger, “Big-
box” retail buildings and sites need to be carefully analyzed to retain major
retail establishments to the extent practicable. Anticipating and
accommodating a transition through creative zoning and redevelopment
strategies will create a challenge for the City, but provides tremendous
opportunities for future residents and business owners.
Older neighborhoods and housing stock within the central portion of the
City has been particularly impacted by the recession and wave of
foreclosures. Many of these areas were once stable, well-kept
neighborhoods but have deteriorated over time and have increasingly
become rental properties owned by absentee landlords. The City is
embarking on a comprehensive program to help restore these
neighborhoods through a variety of methods involving multiple City
departments. A cornerstone of the program is to require landowners to
assume greater responsibility for their properties and the screening and
compliance of their tenants through education and a series of implementing
ordinances.
2.2.7          ENSURING THAT NEW DEVELOPMENT IS
               COMPATIBLE WITH OLDER DEVELOPMENT
One of the major concerns raised during the development of the General
Plan was how new development would affect existing development,
especially the historic downtown area. To address this issue, the Land Use
Element, the Community Design Element, and the Historic Resources
Element contain policies and programs designed to ensure that new
development will complement, not compete with, existing land uses. Both
the old and the new have a distinct and important role in Hemet’s future.
2.2.8          PROVIDING FOR A BALANCE OF HOUSING
               OPPORTUNITIES
The City of Hemet is historically known as a retirement community. While
senior communities will continue to play a vital role in Hemet’s future, the
City is undergoing tremendous demographic changes as a result of young
families attracted by reasonable housing prices. A need exists however, in
the area of move-up and higher-end housing. To attract high-quality jobs to
the area, the City must attract and keep the move-up residential market
within the City. This will require the City to focus on providing a safe
community with quality of life amenities such as excellent schools,
recreational activities, and cultural opportunities in addition to providing
master planned neighborhoods and estate-style residential development.
         C   I  T Y      O F     H   E  M  E  T    G   E   N E  R   A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                       2-6

 LAND USE
              2.2.9         CHANGING DEMOGRAPHICS FOR MOBILE HOME
                            AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
              The effects of existing development are also emerging as important issues.
              Many of the City’s mobile home and recreational vehicle parks were
              originally designed for senior residents or vacationing “snow birds”. As
              demand for affordable housing increased, larger numbers of family
              households are occupying mobile home and recreational vehicle parks
              throughout the City that were originally designed for seniors. Senior
              residential developments create less traffic and school facility impacts than
              traditional households; therefore, many traffic and school improvements
              were not completed at the time the mobile home parks were first approved.
              As families and other non-senior households continue to occupy these
              parks, impacts on the City’s infrastructure, public services, and quality of
              life for all residents must be addressed. Additionally, the City recognizes
              that several residential neighborhoods and mobile home parks require
              improvements. Improvements can be accomplished through incentives
              contained within the Land Use Element (such as increased density for older
              mobile home parks along Florida encouraging a shift to condominiums)
              and through programs such as property maintenance strategies and housing
              improvement programs.
              2.2.10        STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT OF WESTERN HEMET
              The most significant amount of undeveloped land within the City and the
              Planning Area is located at the western edge of the City. Although this
              presents outstanding opportunities for future growth, particularly in terms
              of job creation, there are a number of challenges related to the provision of
              infrastructure, environmental constraints, and economic opportunities.
              While the General Plan provides the framework for future development of
              the area, a comprehensive community plan or specific plan will be needed
              to address the detailed land use, infrastructure, environmental, and
              community design components. Strategies and considerations for the
              successful development of the western Hemet area are presented in Section
              2.9.4 of the Land Use Element.
              2.3      R ELAT ED P R OGRAM S , P LANS ,                AND
                       R EGULATI ONS
              There are a number of related programs and plans that are considered in
              the formulation, adoption, and implementation of local land use policy.
              Related programs and plan are both local and regional in nature. Regional
              planning agencies such as the Southern California Association of
              Governments (SCAG) and the Western Riverside Council of Governments
              (WRCOG) recognize that planning issues extend beyond the boundaries of
              individual cities. Efforts to address regional planning issues such as air
              quality, transportation, affordable housing, and habitat conservation have
              resulted in the adoption of regional plans. Relevant local and regional plans
              related to the Land Use Element are discussed briefly in the following
              sections.
C I T Y O F H   E  M  E   T     G  E   N  E  R A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   2-7

                                                                                LAND USE
Hemet Municipal Code and Zoning The Hemet Municipal Code
establishes detailed zoning districts and regulations based on the General
Plan. The municipal code includes all of the City’s zoning ordinance
provisions and has been supplemented over time to include other related
procedures such as subdivision regulations, environmental review
procedures, and a sign code. Municipal code regulations and maps must be
consistent with the land uses, policies, and implementation programs of the
General Plan. The municipal code will be updated to reflect the land use
and development policies contained in this element.
Hemet Redevelopment Plans Redevelopment is a process created to
assist local governments in eliminating blight and revitalizing designated
“project areas”. A portion of redevelopment funds (20 percent) must also
be used to promote affordable housing opportunities within the
community. Hemet has five redevelopment project areas:
     Downtown
     Combined Commercial
     Farmer’s Fair
     Hemet
     Weston Park
Generally, the redevelopment project areas focus on the central built areas
of the City including the historic downtown area and along Florida Avenue.
When established, the project areas encompassed sections of the
community with conditions such as abandoned buildings, substandard
housing, empty parcels, and vandalism that may impede the City's
development. The Hemet Redevelopment Agency has prepared an
implementation plan for the redevelopment areas which is updated every 5
years. Redevelopment plans are one of the tools the City uses to implement
Land Use Element policies.
Hemet-Ryan Airport Land Use Plan and Airport Master Plan—State
law requires that General Plans be consistent with land use compatibility
plans approved by Airport Land Use Commissions (ALUC). The Riverside
ALUC approved the Hemet-Ryan Airport Comprehensive Airport Land
Use Plan (ALUP) in 1992 and a minor amendment in 2009. Detailed
information on how land uses are integrated with airport planning is
provided later in this element under Section 2.10, “Hemet-Ryan Airport.”
Riverside County owns and operates the Hemet-Ryan Airport, and the
Economic Development Agency has recently prepared an updated master
plan that evaluates the potential for future expansion at the airport, but
does not propose a specific runway extension at this time. The updated
Master Plan is anticipated to be adopted by the County of Riverside in
2012.
State Global Warming/Greenhouse Gas Legislation: AB 32 and SB
375 Assembly Bill (AB) 32—The Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006
establishes greenhouse gas reduction goals to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions equal to 1990 levels. This requires cutting approximately 30
         C  I  T Y     O   F     H  E  M   E  T    G  E   N E  R  A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                      2-8

 LAND USE
              percent from business-as-usual emissions levels projected for 2020, or
              about 15 percent from today’s levels. On a per-capita basis, that means
              reducing annual emissions of 14 tons of carbon dioxide per person down to
              about 10 tons per person by 2020. The primary agency responsible for
              implementing AB 32 is the California Air Resources Board, which is
              establishing a greenhouse gas scoping plan and statewide standards. The
              intent of AB 32 was to establish a general goal toward reducing greenhouse
              gas emissions on a statewide basis. Specifics on how that is to be achieved
              are outlined in companion SB 375.
              Senate Bill (SB) 375—SB 375 focuses on greenhouse gas reductions through
              both mobile and stationary sources, with mobile source reductions being
              addressed through changes to land use planning strategies such as mixed
              use, densification of housing, and adherence to smart planning principals.
              These land use planning strategies are to be embodied in Sustainable
              Community Strategy (SCS) plans to be developed by council of
              governments such as SCAG. While SCAG has yet to develop the region’s
              SCS plan, the City of Hemet has strived to integrate as many of the SB 375
              components in the development of this General Plan as possible. For
              example, the City has identified over six mixed-use locations within the City
              and Planning Area, in addition to embodying pedestrian and alternative
              transportation strategies throughout the General Plan.
              California Environmental Quality Act The California Environmental
              Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the State legislature in response to a
              public mandate for more thorough environmental analysis of projects that
              might affect the environment. Provisions of the law and environmental
              review procedures are described in the CEQA Statutes and State CEQA
              Guidelines. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the decision
              making stage of development, City officials and the general public will be
              able to assess the environmental impacts associated with private and public
              development projects.
              Riverside County Local Agency Formation Commission Provisions of
              the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government Reorganization Act of
              2000 will be applied by the Riverside County Local Agency Formation
              Commission (LAFCO) in making decisions regarding future City
              annexations of land within the Hemet sphere of influence (SOI) and to any
              reorganization of other service districts for the Hemet Planning Area.
              LAFCO’s efforts are directed to seeing that services are provided efficiently
              and economically while agricultural and open space lands are protected.
              Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation
              Plan Hemet has adopted an ordinance implementing the Western Riverside
              County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP). The
              MSHCP addresses habitat protection issues throughout the County and
              City and establishes “criteria areas,” which require high levels of habitat
              protection. All development projects within criteria areas are first required
              to undergo an extensive habitat assessment and if necessary, undergo an
              acquisition process from the Western Riverside County Regional
              Conservation Authority (RCA). Properties outside of the criteria areas are
C I T Y O F H  E  M   E    T    G  E  N   E R  A L      P  L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                  2-9

                                                                                 LAND USE
also subject to provisions of the MSHCP, especially the need to assess and
protect endemic plant species unique to the Hemet area.
Habitat Conservation Plan for the Stephens’ Kangaroo Rat in
Western Riverside County The HCP for the Stephens’ Kangaroo Rat
(SKR) is implemented by the Riverside County Habitat Conservation
Agency (RCHCA). The SKR HCP mitigates impacts on the SKR caused by
development by establishing a network of preserves and a system for
managing and monitoring them. Through implementation of the SKR
HCP, more than $45 million has been dedicated to establishing and
managing the preserves, resulting in conserving approximately 50 percent of
the SKR-occupied habitat remaining in the HCP area. A small portion of
the Planning Area is located within the 533,954-acre SKR HCP area. Any
proposed project located within the SKR HCP area will be required to
comply with applicable provisions of the plan.
2.4           L AND U SE C ONCEPT S
2.4.1         SMART GROWTH PRINCIPLES
Smart growth is best described in the Edge Development Study prepared for
the City of Hemet by the Urban Land Institute (ULI) in 2010. In that study,
ULI described smart growth as a process of, “making conscious choices
about how land, water, and transportation infrastructure are deployed, so
that future growth enforces existing communities in positive ways and
improves our regional patterns rather than destroys them…”
The City of Hemet has embraced smart growth concepts and has integrated
them as underlying principles throughout the General Plan, especially the
Land Use Element. The Smart Growth Network, a coalition of nonprofit
and government organizations including the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), has defined 10 principles of smart growth as follows:*
                     SMART GROWTH PRINCIPLES
         Mix land uses to promote a more varied land use pattern.
         Take advantage of compact building design.
         Create a range of housing opportunities and choices.
         Create walkable communities.
         Foster distinctive, attractive communities with a strong sense of
         place.
         Preserve open space, farmland, natural beauty and critical
         environmental areas.
         Strengthen and direct development toward existing communities.
         Provide a variety of transportation sources.
         Make development decisions predictable, fair and cost effective.
         Encourage community and stakeholder collaboration in
         development decisions.
         C  I  T Y      O  F      H   E  M E  T    G   E  N   E  R  A L    P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                      2-10

 LAND USE
              2.4.2         BALANCING GROWTH AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              Hemet is a desirable place to live and will continue to grow. It is imperative
              that the City manages the growth to encourage new housing and job
              opportunities without overwhelming the infrastructure and transportation
              systems. Balanced growth values both the historic community character and
              the rights of individual owners to use, develop, and redevelop their
              properties.
              One of the most noticeable effects of new development is increased
              demand on the City’s infrastructure. To ameliorate the impact, the City has
              enacted several fees to ensure that new development projects cover the fair
              share cost of accommodating the growth. City impact fees aim to reduce
              the effects of new development on capital facilities, the circulation system,
              and local schools. The City has also enacted a fee to offset the cost of
              implementing the goals and objectives of the Western Riverside MSHCP.
              The circulation system has a significant role in maintaining balance in
              Hemet by supporting the types and intensities of land uses proposed in the
              Land Use Map. The proposed distribution of land uses must also respond
              to both existing infrastructure and proposed improvements. The City
              recognizes these factors and will promote development strategies that
              reduce traffic generated by future projects.
              To ensure that traffic effects from new developments are addressed and
              adequate infrastructure and services are provided, General Plan residential
              land use designations offer incentives to new development to provide
              features the City wishes to promote, such as trip reduction. Designing new
              projects in a manner that minimizes automobile trips can offset perceived
              negative effects of increased density and contribute to improved
              neighborhood character. Trip-reducing design features include locating
              schools and appropriate commercial amenities close to homes.
              Maximum densities identified for each land use designation can only be
              achieved for residential projects that provide enhanced amenities and trip
              reduction benefits. This concept will be most important in portions of
              Hemet’s Planning Area that are currently undeveloped and require a
              significant level of capital improvements to support development. In these
              developing areas, a more rapid pace of future growth is expected and with
              it, more significant infrastructure provision is expected. In these largely
              undeveloped areas, lower residential densities are expected from new
              development to accommodate the need to reserve land for new roads.
              Coordination throughout the development process and flexibility in the
              application of land use designations will provide the City the tools needed
              to balance future growth in developing areas.
              2.4.3         JOBS AND HOUSING BALANCE
              Achieving balance requires looking at the overall jobs-housing composition
              of Hemet. While the demand for new residential development will guide
              development in the Planning Area over the life of this General Plan, a
              commensurate increase in employment opportunities will be required to
              achieve a balance of jobs and housing. A geographic balance between
C I T Y O F H   E  M  E   T     G   E  N   E R  A L     P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   2-11

                                                                                          LAND USE
housing and jobs has many benefits, including reduced
traffic and congestion, fewer air emissions, lower costs                        COMPASS BLUEPRINT
to businesses and commuters, lower public expenditures                   GROWTH VISIONING PRINCIPLES
on facilities and services, greater family stability, and       Principle 1: Improve mobility for all residents
higher quality of life.                                                  Encourage transportation investments and
                                                                         land use decisions that are mutually
The goal of a jobs and housing balance in Hemet is to                    supportive
both create jobs that can be filled by current residents,                Locate new housing near existing jobs and
as well as to attract job seekers throughout the region to               new jobs new existing housing
Hemet’s employment and residential opportunities. This                   Encourage transit-oriented development
concept is supported by SCAG, which promotes higher                      Promote a variety of travel choices
paying jobs in the Inland Empire to enable Inland               Principle 2: Foster livability in all communities
Empire residents to find comparable work to residents                    Promote infill development and
in the rest of southern California and to shorten their                  redevelopment to revitalize existing
commutes. Unlike many other cities in the region,                        communities
Hemet’s inventory of developable land puts it in a                       Promote developments that provide a mix of
unique position to create new planned communities that                   uses
                                                                         Promote “people-scaled”, pedestrian-
can offer varied employment and housing options. The
                                                                         friendly communities
General Plan provides sufficient nonresidential land to
                                                                         Support the preservation of stable, single-
ensure that space for employment opportunities in the                    family neighborhoods
Planning Area will be available for the Hemet
workforce, and that an improved balance of jobs to              Principle 3: Enable prosperity for all people
housing can be accomplished.                                             Provide, in each community, a variety of
                                                                         housing types to meet the housing needs of
                                                                         all income levels
2.4.4          COMPASS BLUEPRINT GROWTH                                  Support educational opportunities that
               VISIONING PRINCIPLES                                      promote balanced growth
In 2002, SCAG initiated a regional growth visioning                      Ensure environmental justice regardless of
                                                                         race, ethnicity, or income class
process termed the Compass Blueprint Growth
                                                                         Support local and state fiscal policies that
Visioning Principles. The principles and associated                      encourage balanced growth
strategies are intended to promote and maximize                          Encourage civic engagement
regional mobility, livability, prosperity, and sustainability.
Local decisions regarding growth, transportation, land Principle 4: Promote sustainability for future
use, and economic development should be guided by                 generations
                                                                         Preserve rural, agricultural, recreational, and
these principles. The principles and strategies identified
                                                                         environmentally sensitive areas
below are also embodied in the collaborative Regional                    Focus development in urban centers and
Transportation       Plan      (RTP)     and     Sustainable             existing cities
Communities Strategy (SCS) prepared by SCAG for the                      Develop strategies to accommodate growth
region. As part of the Compass Blueprint planning                        that use resources efficiently, eliminate
process, SCAG identified “strategic growth opportunity                   pollution, and significantly reduce waste
areas” throughout the region where well-planned                          Utilize “green” development techniques
development could provide demonstrated benefits in
balancing jobs, housing, and services. Downtown Hemet
was included as on opportunity area due to the potential for a Metrolink
station and transit-oriented development adjacent to the railway in the State
Street/Menlo Avenue/Oakland Avenue area. Hemet applied for and
received a transit-oriented development demonstration plan (graphic
rendering) illustrating what could be developed in the future surrounding
the Metrolink station.
         C   I  T Y      O  F     H  E   M   E  T     G  E    N E   R A L       P   L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                        2-12

 LAND USE
              2.4.5           ACHIEVING A HEALTHY COMMUNITY
              Recognizing that chronic health conditions and disease reduce the
              productivity and quality of life for residents, the County of Riverside
              adopted a Healthy Communities Element in its general plan in 2011. Many
              of the diseases prevalent in our society are linked to lifestyle and individual
              behaviors, particularly the lack of physical activity and unhealthy eating
              habits. Exposure to environmental toxins in the air, water, and soil are also
              a factor. Riverside County has encouraged cities to adopt the Healthy
              Communities Element or similar policies as part of their respective general
              plans. The City of Hemet General Plan integrates these policies throughout
              the various elements of the general plan with the goal of fostering the
              overall health and well-being of the City’s residents. Of particular concern
              are those individuals that are considered most vulnerable to health risks
              including children, the elderly, and the disabled.
              The topics addressed by Hemet’s healthy community policies fall into seven
              general categories as summarized below. A compendium of all the General
              Plan Healthy Community policies, and their respective elements, is
              provided in Appendix F. General Plan “Healthy Community” Policy Areas
              are identified below:
                   Land Use and Urban Design A healthy community improves
                   physical and mental health through its land use and urban design by
                   creating a range of housing opportunities and choices, supporting
                   mixed-use development, promoting complete and well-structured
                   neighborhoods, encouraging appropriate while prohibiting deleterious
                   land uses, and advocating development designs that maximize the
                   preservation of permanent open space.
                   Recreation and Open Space A healthy community promotes physical
                   activity, social cohesion, and contact with natural areas by providing
                   and facilitating access to an abundance of parks, trails, recreational
                   facilities, and community activities.
                   Public Transit and Active Transportation Alternatives A healthy
                   community promotes walking, biking, and public transit by requiring
                   transit-oriented design features in new developments, designing streets
                   to accommodate and encourage a variety of transportation means,
                   pursuing opportunities for local and regional transit services, and
                   promoting alternative transportation systems through technology,
                   employer incentives, or innovative practices.
                   Economic Opportunity A healthy community promotes an equitable
                   and strong economy by encouraging the development, expansion, and
                   retention of business and industry, and the economic advancement of
                   the local workforce through education, training, and service provision.
                   Preventive Care through Healthy Foods and Medical Access A
                   healthy community promotes preventive care and healthy living by
                   ensuring that its residents are well-served with accessible full-service
                   grocery stores, farmers markets or community gardens, and health care
                   facilities.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T     G   E  N E  R  A L      P  L  A N      2 0 3 0
                                    2-13

                                                                                    LAND USE
     Safe Neighborhoods and Public Spaces A healthy community
     promotes safety, social interaction, neighborhood cohesion, and sense
     of place through the design of the built environment, art and cultural
     activities that build community and create a comfortable environment,
     and the provision of responsive public safety and emergency services.
     Environmental Quality A healthy community is protected from
     environmental hazards such air pollutants, contaminated water and soil,
     hazardous waste and other toxins, and noise through planning, design,
     technology, education, and monitoring.
2.5       L AND U SE M AP           AND D E S IGNA TI O N S
The Land Use Map (Figure 2.1) graphically represents the planned
distribution and intensity of land use citywide. The colors shown on the
map correspond to land use designations that describe the types of uses
existing and planned in Hemet.
The residential land use pattern in Hemet today reflects the City’s history as
a small agricultural community. The densest residential and commercial
areas are centered on downtown Hemet, with lower residential
development at the edges of the City. Based on the current character of the
community, and the amount of underdeveloped and underutilized area
within the Planning Area, substantial growth is expected to occur
throughout the life of this plan.
2.5.1           DENSITY AND INTENSITY
Areas of Hemet are differentiated from one another by their principal use:
homes; shops and restaurants; offices; manufacturing businesses; parks; or
schools. To describe the intensity of use—how much development exists
on a property or could be built—land use planners have developed
quantitative measures called density and intensity. Density and intensity are
commonly used in general plans to establish limits on development and
provide quantifiable standards of building intensity for each land use
designation. State General Plan guidelines require that these standards
define the most intensive use that will be allowed under each designation.
Density The term density typically applies to residential uses and refers to
the population and development capacity of residential land. Density is
described in terms of the number of dwelling units that can be
accommodated within one acre of land (dwelling units per acre [du/ac]) and
population that can be accommodated within one acre of land (population
per acre [pop/ac]) Examples of density and residential development are
provided in the illustrations in Diagram 2.1.
Intensity The term intensity typically applies to commercial, industrial, and
other nonresidential uses and describes the degree to which a property is, or
can be, developed. Intensity is measured by floor-area ratio (FAR), which
describes the arithmetic relationship between the total square footage of a
development to the square footage of the land area on which it is located. It
is determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the
land area of that lot. FAR and factors such as building square footage,
         C    I  T Y     O  F    H  E  M   E   T   G    E  N  E  R   A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                       2-14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                                                                                           County                                                                                       Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
Note: The ultimate design and
alignment of the proposed Highway
79 has not yet been adopted and                                                                                             Beech St.
                                                                                                                                                            Warren Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                          7th St.
will be determined upon approval
of the project by Caltrans and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Jacinto Av.
                                                                                        HILLSIDE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Santa Fe Av.
                                                                                       RESIDENTIAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                            Odell Av.
Riverside County Transportation                                                        10.0 ac. min.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    River
Commission. The adopted design                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Esplanade Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MM
alternative may result in changes                                                                                 RURAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                oouu
                                                                                                                                                                                                 N. Cawston Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Commonwealth Av.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nntt
to the circulation network shown
                                                                                                                   RESID.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              aaii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ü
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -                                                                                                                            nn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Buena Vista St.
                                                                                                                5.0 ac. min.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AA
on this Figure, including existing                                                                                                                                                                                                               Eaton Av.                                                                                                                                       Washington Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vv..                                                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       State St.                                                                   Hewitt St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr ee
and proposed roadway connections                                                               RURAL                                      RURAL
                                                                                                                                          RESID.                                                                                                           Fruitvale Av.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cedar Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PPaa
in the vicinity of the proposed
                                                                                                RESID.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rrkk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ind
                                                                                                                                         5 ac. min.
                                                                                             5.0 ac. min.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AAvv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kirby St.
Hwy 79, and may or may not                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Menlo Av.                                                                                                                                                                               ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hemet St.                                               Chicago Av.
include the Tres Cerritos Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Jacinto St.
offramp.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      É
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Oakland Av.                                                                                        PPaa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rrkk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Charlton Av.                                                     Olive Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                N. Cawston Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AAvv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lincoln Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Devonshire Av.                                                                                                                                               ..                                                                                Lincoln Av.                               Palm Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Hemet Ryan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v.
                                                                                                                        California Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Latham Av.    See inset                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tA
                                                                                                                                                                                          Airport                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Meridian St.
                                                                                                                                                                            Myers St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Gr
                                                                                                                                             Florida Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Av.        Palm Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Downtown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hemet Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Soboba St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Florida Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Santa Fe St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Acacia Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               State
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     High
                                         Pinacate Rd.
                                                                          -ü
                                                                          ø-                                                                         duc t                                                          Whittier Av.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mayberry Av.                                                                                                                                                                      w ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cornell St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dartmouth St.
                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Whittier Av.
                                                                                                                                                     Warren Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Columbia St.                                                                                                     Pleasant St.
                                                                                                          f SR                                                                                                        er R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gilbert St.
                                                                                                               -7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lake St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ut
                                                                                                      #
                                                                               Calvert Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stanford St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                mm                                                                                                                                  Johnston Av.
                                                                                                                                                  Aqu
                                                                                                                          #                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                             C o
                                                                                                                                                                                                 u re
        Riverside
                                                                                             1du/     ent                                   San                                             F ut
                                                         Winchester Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Yale St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Av.
                                                                                                          o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Stetson Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Girard St.
                                                                                             2.5 ac                1du/                         Die g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                                                      o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ca
         County
                                                                                                                   2.5 ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Thornton Av.                                                                          a in
                                                                                             Pro po
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thornton Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 S. Cawston Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         et M
                                                                                                                                                                                   Fisher St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    em
                                                                                                   sed A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Av.
                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Crest Dr.                                                                                   eH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hemet St.
                                                                                                                    #
                                                                          Stowe Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fairview Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Chambers St.
                                                                                                                                                           Av.
                                                                                                        lign
                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                  t so                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VViiss
                                                                          RURAL                                                             Ste                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ttaa D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dee
                                                                                                            m
                                                                           RESID.                                                                                        Mustang Wy.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ll VVaa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BOWL                                                                               llllee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside
                                                                        2.5 ac. min.
                Grand Av.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bautis ta Rd.                    Bautista Wash
                                                                                                          M
                                                                                                          É
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Doo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nniigg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lin g
                                  Simpson Rd.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  oonn i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i PPk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R aw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       kwwyy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ..
                                                        Patterson Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gibbel Rd.                                                                                                                                                         PARK
                                   Winchester Rd.
                       Olive Av.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Avery C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             an yon R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Inset Downtown Hemet Map (¤n
                       Rice Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ista
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EAST
                                               Newport Rd.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E. Newport Rd.
                                                                                                                                                           Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DEVONSHIRE AV.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Batz Rd.
                                                    DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                         WEST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BUENA VISTA ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LATHAM AV.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        De Portola Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FLORIDA AV.                                                        FLORIDA AV.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cactus Valley Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STATE ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KIMBALL AV.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ALESSANDRO ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GILBERT ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sag e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       INEZ ST.               HARVARD ST.   CARMALITA ST   JUANITA S T.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ACACIA AV.
               ZNORTH
0       0.5        1                                 2 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sources: Esri, USGS, NOAA
LEGEND                                                                    Land Use Designations
              Hemet City Boundary                                            RR                   Rural Residential (0.0 - 2.0 du/ac)                                                                                                             NC                Neighborhood Commercial (FAR 0.35)                                                                                                                                          ARPT                              Airport                                                                                          QP/C         Quasi-Public/Cultural
                                                                             HR                   Hillside Residential (0.0 - 0.5 du/ac)                                                                                                          CC                Community Commercial (FAR 0.40)                                                                                                                                                 OP                            Office Professional (FAR 2.0)                                                                         PF      Public Facilities                                                                                                                                                                                           Last updated:
              Planning Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4/11/2017
                                                                            LDR                   Low Density Residential (2.1 - 5.0 du/ac)                                                                                                       RC                Regional Commercial (FAR 0.50)                                                                                                                                                  BP                            Business Park (FAR 0.60)                                                                          SCH         School                                                                                                                                                                                                      GPA 16-001
              Sphere of Influence
                                                                          LMDR Low Medium Density Residential (5.1 - 8.0 du/ac)                                                                                                                   MU                Mixed Use (Varies)                                                                                                                                                                    I                       Industrial (FAR 0.45)                                                                              P          Park/Recreation
              River/Lake
                                                                           MDR                    Medium Density Residential (8.1 - 18.0 du/ac)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OS       Open Space
              Creek/Canal                                                  HDR                    High Density Residential (18.1 - 30.0 du/ac)                                                                                              Environmental Management Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A    Agriculture                                                                                                             F i g u r e                                                                            2 . 1
              Railroad
    M
    É         Metrolink
              (General Location)
                                                                          VHDR Very High Density Residential (30.1 - 45.0 du/ac)                                                                                                                                    Areas subject to MSHCP criteria                                                                                                                                                                           Interim Airport Overlay Zone                                                                                                                                                                LAND USE PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H e m e t        G e n e r a l                                                                                                                      P l a n

                                                       LAND USE
Back of Figure 2.1
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                   2-16
      LAND USE
                               building height, and the percent of lot coverage are all interrelated. For
                               example, a 20,000 square-foot building on a 40,000 square-foot lot yields an
                               FAR of 0.5:1. The 0.5:1 FAR can accommodate a single-story building that
                               covers half the lot or a two-story building on a quarter of the lot.
                               Commonly only the developed footprint portion of the FAR is expressed
                               (e.g., 0.5:1 is expressed as 0.5 FAR) Examples of intensity and FAR on a
                               given property are provided in the illustrations in Diagram 2.2.
  R8 Medium Low           R18 Medium High
  Density 5-8 dwelling    Density 12.1-18 dwelling
  units/acre              units/acre
R30 High Density            R45 Very High
18.1-30 dwelling            Density
units/acre                  30.1-45 dwelling
                            units/acre
Diagram 2.1 Examples of Density Ranges                         Diagram 2.2 Examples of Floor Area Ratio
                                                               Calculations
     C   I T Y       O F   H    E   M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L       P L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                    2-17
                                                                                   LAND USE
Table 2.1 lists the General Plan designations used on the Land Use Map,
indicating the nature and intensity of development that is permitted in the
Planning Area. A total of 21 land use designations are divided among
residential, commercial, industrial and public/open space categories. The
maximum allowable development on any individual parcel is governed by
the maximum measure of density or intensity for each land use designation,
with the anticipated yield influenced by the physical characteristics of a
parcel, by access and infrastructure issues, and by compatibility
considerations. Land use designations are described in terms of general land
uses and maximum densities or intensities permitted. Corresponding zone
districts specify the permitted uses for each category as well as the
applicable development standards. The density or intensity maximums
outlined for each designation serve as development caps. Actual
development intensities are expected to be lower than the caps, based on
market factors and past development trends.
Given the varying levels of development in the City and Planning Area,
maximum allowed development capacity is not an accurate gauge of actual
future development. In well-established residential areas, existing units have
been built close to the allowed maximum densities. Many of these areas also
contain new subdivisions that are not expected to change within the life of
this plan. Conversely, in areas that are sparsely populated, factors such as
the lack of utility infrastructure and roads may inhibit the development
potential of these areas and lower densities are expected as a result. To
balance these scenarios and to estimate future build-out of the City and
resulting impacts on the circulation system, typical levels of density and
intensity have also been assumed, as described within the preceding land
use designation descriptions. The City anticipates most development will
occur at or below these typical levels, although on any single property,
development up to the cap is allowed.
2.5.2          ZONING AND LAND USE
The Hemet Zoning Code (Chapter 90 of the Hemet Municipal Code)
serves as the primary implementation tool for the General Plan. Whereas
the General Plan is a policy document that sets forth direction for
development decisions, the zoning code is a regulatory document that
establishes specific standards for the use and development of all properties
in the City. The code regulates development intensity using a variety of
methods, such as setting limits on building setbacks, yard landscaping
standards, and building heights. The code also indicates which land uses are
permitted in the various zones.
General Law cities are required by California Government Code Section
65860 to administer zoning codes that are consistent with their adopted
general plan. Table 2.2 identifies the relationship between Hemet’s zone
districts and the General Plan land use designations.
          C  I  T Y     O   F   H   E  M   E T     G   E  N  E   R  A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                      2-18

 LAND USE
                                                              Table 2.1
                                           Land Use Density and Intensity
                                                                       Intensity Range                    Target
                                  Land Use
                                                                       (min. and max.)                  Intensity1
              RESIDENTIAL
              RR—Rural Residential                                         0-2.0 du/ac                  1.0 du/ac
              RR 2.5                                                      2.5 acre min.              1.0 du/2.5 acre
              RR 5                                                        5.0 acre min.              1.0 du/5.0 acre
              HR—Hillside Residential                                      0-0.5 du/ac                  0.5 du/ac
              HR-10                                                       1du/10 acres                1 du/10 acres
              LDR—Low Density Residential                                 2.1-5.0 du/ac                 3.5 du/ac
              LMDR—Low Med. Density Residential                           5.1-8.0 du/ac                 6.5 du/ac
              MDR—Medium Density Residential                              8.1-18 du/ac                   14 du/ac
              HDR—High Density Residential                               18.1-30 du/ac                   22 du/ac
              VHDR-Very High Density Residential                         30.1-45 du/ac                 35.0 du/ac
              COMMERCIAL
              NC—Neighborhood Commercial                                    FAR 0.35                    FAR 0.25
              CC—Community Commercial                                       FAR 0.40                    FAR 0.30
              RC—Regional Commercial                                        FAR 0.50                    FAR 0.40
              OP-Office Professional/Medical                                 FAR 1.0                    FAR 0.50
              MU—Mixed Use                                                     Varies
              INDUSTRIAL
              ARPT—Airport/Support Uses                                        Varies
              BP—Business Park                                              FAR 0.60                    FAR 0.35
              I —Industrial                                                 FAR 0.45                     FAR 0.4
              PUBLIC AND OPEN SPACE
              PF—Public Facility                                               Varies
              P—Park/Outdoor Recreation                                         NA
              OS—Open Space/Natural Resource                                    NA
              A—Agricultural                                                    NA
              SCH—School                                                        NA
              QP-Quasi Public                                                  Varies                     Varies
              OVERLAY DESIGNATIONS
              SP—Specific Plan                                                 Varies
              EM—Environmental Management                                       NA
              Notes: du/ac = dwelling units per acre; FAR = floor area ratio; NA = not applicable
              1Target Intensity is range used in the traffic model prepared for the General Plan’s environmental impact
              report and represents a “reasonable worst case” analysis.
C I T Y O F H   E  M     E   T        G    E   N    E    R   A L        P    L   A   N      2 0 3 0
                                          2-19

                                                                                            LAND USE
R ESIDENTIAL C ATEGO RIES
Residential uses are located throughout Hemet at varying development densities. The highest residential
densities are located near downtown Hemet. The lowest residential densities tend to be located in the
hillside areas to the west and south of the City.
Seven land use categories allow for a range of housing types and densities. The City also permits accessory
units and nonresidential uses such as schools, parks, child day care, and religious and charitable
organizations in these areas, consistent with state law and City zoning requirements. Within several of the
residential designations, sub-designations of varying density are established for purposes of determining
likely development capacity.
RR—Rural Residential                             The RR—Rural Residential designation is intended to reserve areas
                                                 for the pursuit and protection of rural and equestrian lifestyles and
                                                 the character of existing rural communities. Representative form of
                                                 development is single-family homes on lots from one-half acre to
                                                 10 acres and larger.
                                                 Subcategories
                                                 RR 2.5………………2.5 acre minimum lot size
                                                 RR 5…….………..…5.0 acre minimum lot size
HR—Hillside Residential                          The HR—Hillside Residential designation is used in rural portions
                                                 of the Planning Area that are characterized by hilly topography.
                                                 Clustering of units and use of other hillside protection techniques
                                                 are encouraged in these areas, to the extent that such techniques are
                                                 compatible with the overall rural character desired for the area.
                                                 Subcategories
                                                 HR-10…………….…10 acre minimum lot size
LDR—Low Density Residential                      The LDR—Low Density Residential designation provides for
                                                 traditional     residential    subdivisions,     planned       residential
                                                 developments, mobile home subdivisions and parks, and low-
                                                 density senior housing. Typical lot size is 7,200 square feet (sq. ft.)
                                                 with a range of lot sizes from 6,000 sq. ft. to 20,000 sq. ft.
LMDR—Low Med. Density Residential                The LMDR—Low Medium Density Residential designation
                                                 provides for traditional residential subdivisions, planned residential
                                                 developments, mobile home subdivisions, and parks, and low-
                                                 density senior housing. Common open spaces may be required.
                                                 Typical lot size is in the 5,000—6,000 sq. ft. range.
MDR—Medium Density Residential                   The MDR—Medium Density Residential designation provides for
                                                 patio homes and attached single-family and multiple-family units.
                                                 MDR areas are typically located at the edges of single-family
                                                 neighborhoods, and are often planned as a transition between
                                                 higher intensity uses and single-family neighborhoods.
         C   I  T Y     O   F    H  E   M   E  T      G   E   N   E    R  A L      P  L   A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                         2-20

          LAND USE
HDR—High Density Residential                The HDR—High Density Residential designation provides for
                                            attached multiple-family units. HDR areas are typically located near
                                            commercial nodes, school sites, parks and other activity centers.
                                            Typical housing types include townhomes at the low end of the
                                            density range and stacked units at the high end of the density range.
VHDR—Very High Density Residential          The VHDR—Very High Density Residential designation provides for
                                            multiple-family units with surface parking, although podium designs
                                            or parking structures may be constructed as a means of providing a
                                            greater amount of open space than would otherwise be possible.
                                            VHDR areas are typically located along major streets and near major
                                            activity centers or transit districts.
C OMMERCIAL C ATEG ORIES
Commercial uses in Hemet influence the physical and economic environment of the City. Important
distinctions exist between commercial areas that serve the local community and commercial areas that serve
the region. Neighborhood commercial areas are located primarily near residential neighborhoods and consist
of low-scale stand-alone commercial business and commercial centers. Commercial centers and businesses
with a wider customer base are primarily located along the City’s main commercial corridors, such as Florida
Avenue and Sanderson Avenue.
Four commercial land use designations are designed to support business activity and provide tools to
improve areas that function below their economic potential. Additionally, a mixed-use designation will
provide opportunities for developments that integrate retail, office, and residential uses.
NC—Neighborhood Commercial                  The NC—Neighborhood Commercial designation provides for
                                            general retail, markets, commercial services, and restaurants designed
                                            to serve primarily the needs of surrounding residential areas.
CC—Community Commercial                     The CC—Community Commercial designation provides for general
                                            retail, markets, commercial services, restaurants, lodging, commercial
                                            recreation, professional offices and financial institutions. CC areas are
                                            typically located near residential, office or industrial activity centers
                                            and major arterial corridors, and are designed to serve the needs of the
                                            community at-large.
        C  I  T Y      O  F    H  E  M   E  T      G   E  N   E   R  A L         P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                      2-21

                                                                                             LAND USE
RC—Regional Commercial                        The RC—Regional Commercial designation provides for intensive
                                              and broadly mixed retail concentrations. The representative form is a
                                              retail center, anchored by one or more major tenants other than a
                                              supermarket, and which draws from a regional rather than local
                                              market.
OP-Office Professional/Medical                The OP—Office Professional/Medical designation provides for
                                              business, professional, government, and medical offices, and
                                              educational institutions. Ancillary and limited support commercial uses
                                              are also permitted uses.
MU—Mixed Use                                  The MU—Mixed Use designation provides for a mix of residential
                                              and compatible office and retail/service uses integrated as a cohesive
                                              development, or such uses developed side-by-side in a manner that
                                              encourages interaction between uses. Density and intensity ranges vary
                                              based on location. There are six mixed-use areas identified for this
                                              General Plan and which are discussed in more detail later in the Land
                                              Use Element.
I NDUSTRIAL C AT EGORIES
Three categories provide areas for industrial development: one that corresponds to the uses at Hemet-Ryan
Airport, a second intended to encourage business park development, and a third to support light industrial
uses related to manufacturing, clean technology and logistics. Expanded opportunities for industrial land
uses will assist the City in meeting its employment and revenue generating objectives. Maintenance and
design standards will encourage attractive and clean industrial developments.
ARPT—Airport/Support Uses                     The ARPT—Airport/Support Uses designation allows for airport
                                              operations and support facilities, as well as associated industrial and
                                              commercial uses, consistent with the Hemet-Ryan Airport Master
                                              Plan.
BP—Business Park                              The BP—Business Park designation provides for single and multi-
                                              tenant light industrial, flex office, and office uses. Suitable uses include
                                              corporate and general business offices, medical uses, research and
                                              development, e-commerce, and light manufacturing. Ancillary support
                                              commercial uses, restaurants, and hospitality uses intended to serve
                                              the business community may also be permitted. The BP designation
                                              provides for well designed, business and employment centers offering
                                              attractive architectural and landscape design. Areas designated as BP
                                              are intended to provide an employment base for the City of Hemet,
                                              and are to be developed as “clean” industries that do not create
                                              nuisances due to levels of noise, odor, air emissions, vibrations, waste,
                                              or substantial heavy truck traffic. Potential opportunities exist for rail
                                              connections where adjacent to the rail corridor.
         C   I  T Y      O   F    H   E   M E  T      G   E   N  E   R    A L       P  L   A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                         2-22

          LAND USE
I—Industrial                                    The I—Industrial designation accommodates a range of
                                                manufacturing, business office, assembly, fabrication, construction,
                                                transportation, logistics, and auto repair uses. The I designation is
                                                primarily allocated to areas of the city adjacent to the rail line, the
                                                airport, or major transportation corridors. Potential opportunities exist
                                                for rail connections along the railway corridor.
P UB LIC     AND       O P EN S PA CE C AT EGOR IES
Six public and open space land use designations provide for regulation and protection of publicly owned
properties or facilities that provide services and are used by the community. The open space designation
provides areas for parks, recreation, and resource conservation and production uses.
PF—Public Facility                              The PF—Public designation provides for offices, facilities, and areas
                                                supporting the conduct of public and institutional activities including,
                                                but not limited, to the following:
                                                     public and private utilities;
                                                     police and fire station facilities, including drainage facilities;
                                                     public safety facilities;
                                                     facilities owned by public agencies and jurisdictions; and
                                                     other public and institutional uses.
P—Park/Outdoor Recreation                       The P—Park/Outdoor Recreation designation provides open space
                                                for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to, areas of
                                                outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited
                                                for park and recreation purposes, including access to lakeshores, rivers
                                                and streams; and areas that serve as links between major recreation
                                                and open space reservations, including utility easements, banks of
                                                rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors.
OS—Open Space/Natural Resource                  The OS—Open Space/Natural Resource designation provides for
                                                open space areas to be managed in as near a natural state as possible in
                                                order to provide for wildlife habitat, passive recreational activities such
                                                as hiking and nature viewing, and biological resource protection.
                                                Typically, the OS designation is reserved for public or quasi public
                                                lands.
A—Agricultural                                  The A—Agricultural designation provides open space for the
                                                managed production of resources, including but not limited to,
                                                rangeland, agricultural lands, and areas required for recharge of
                                                groundwater basins.
         C  I   T Y       O   F    H   E  M   E  T      G    E   N E   R    A L       P    L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                            2-23

                                                                                             LAND USE
SCH—School                                   The SCH—School designation provides for lands already occupied for
                                             public or private school facilities such as elementary, middle, and high
                                             schools.
QP – Quasi Public                            The QP-Quasi Public category provides for uses such as museums,
                                             outdoor cultural venues such as the Ramona Bowl, education and
                                             institutional uses, churches, and other activities on properties owned
                                             and leased by public and quasi-public agencies. This category is
                                             distinct from the PF (Public Facility) category in that it includes uses
                                             associated with activities open or available to the public but which are
                                             privately owned or operated by a public agency. The Quasi Public
                                             district also allows uses and facilities related to the operations of the
                                             public agency or utility, including research and design.
O VERLAY D ESI GNATIONS
Overlay designations can best be described as a land use “layer” that provides special guidance or
considerations for the underlying land uses. For example, the Environmental Management (EM) overlay
does not change an underlying designation of residential. Residential is still the primary use. However, the
EM overlay “signals” that environmental factors such as streambeds or the presence of endangered species
could influence development differently than the same designation without the overlay.
SP—Specific Plan                             The SP—Specific Plan designation is for master planned communities
                                             (either residential, commercial, mixed use, or business park), which
                                             provides for consistent architectural and landscape themes and
                                             standards. The existing and proposed Specific Plan districts are shown
                                             in Figure 2.2.
EM—Environmental Management                  The EM—Environmental Management designation is an overlay
                                             designation indicating that the area is within the Multi-Species Habitat
                                             Conservation Plan (MSHCP) criteria cells.
          C  I T Y      O  F     H   E  M  E   T      G   E   N   E  R   A L       P   L   A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                         2-24

        LAND USE
                                                                      Table 2.2
                           Relationship Between Hemet’s Zone Districts and the General Plan Land Use Designations
                                                                           General Plan Land Use Designations
        Zoning Codes                                Residential                         Commercial             Industrial      Public and Open Space
                                      RR   HR LDR  LMDR MDR       HDR  VHDR NC CC RC OP MU ARPT BP                        I PF  P OS A SCH           QP
A     Agriculture                      X                                                                      X             X   X    X    X     X    X
A-1-C Light Agriculture                X                                                                      X             X   X    X    X     X    X
A-2-C Heavy Agriculture                X                                                                      X           X X   X    X    X     X    X
R-A   Residential Agriculture          X                                                                                        X    X    X     X
R-1-D Single Family Downtown                   X     X                                                  X                                       X
R-1-H Single Family Hillside           X    X                                                                                   X    X    X     X
R-1-6 Single Family Lot 6,000 sf+              X     X                                                  X                                       X
R-1-  Single Family – Lot 7,200 sf+            X                                                                                                X
7.2
R-1-  Single Family – Lot 10,000 sf+        X  X                                                                                                X
10
R-1-  Single Family – Lot 20,000 sf+   X    X  X                                                                                          X     X
20
R-1-  Single Family – Lot 40,000 sf+   X    X                                                                                             X     X
40
R-2   Two Family                                     X        X                                         X                                       X
R-3   Multiple Family                                X        X     X    X                              X                                       X
SLR   Small Lot Residential                    X              X                                         X                                       X
PCD   Planned Community                X    X  X     X        X     X    X      X      X    X     X     X            X    X X   X    X          X    X
      Development
MHP   Mobile Home Park                               X        X     X
TR-20 Independent Mobile Home                        X        X     X
      Subdivision
R-P   Residential Professional                 X     X        X                 X                 X     X                                       X
OP    Office Professional                                                              X    X     X     X            X      X                        X
C-1   Neighborhood Commercial                                                   X                 X     X                                       X
C-2   General Commercial                                                               X    X     X     X            X      X
C-M   Heavy Commercial/Limited                                                         X    X           X            X    X X
      Industrial
D-1   Downtown 1                                                                                  X     X
D-2   Downtown 2                                                                                  X     X                   X
M-1   Light Manufacturing                                                                                     X      X    X X                        X
M-2   General Manufacturing                                                                                   X      X    X X
OS    Open Space                       X    X  X     X        X     X    X      X      X    X     X     X     X      X    X X   X    X    X     X    X
I     Institutional                                                                    X    X     X     X            X    X X                   X    X
SP    Specific Plan                    X    X  X     X        X     X    X      X      X    X     X     X     X      X    X X   X    X    X     X    X
S-1   Church                                   X     X        X     X    X      X      X    X     X     X                   X                        X
                                    C I  T Y  O  F   H   E   M  E T   G  E  N  E   R   A L     P   L  A   N   2 0 3 0
                                                                        2-25

                                                                                                                                     LAND USE
                                                                           Table 2.3
                                                                   Development Capacity
                                                 Acres                     Dwelling Units       Non-Residential Square Feet (1,000s)          Population
       General Plan      General Plan
       Designation       Designation              Planning                Planning                        Planning                              Planning
                                         City               Total   City                 Total   City                       Total       City             Total
                                                     Area                   Area                            Area                                  Area
Residential                              8,211      18,680  26,891 44,814  21,627       66,441     --         --              --      106,884    51,538 158,422
Rural Residential            RR           547        1,306  1,853    595    1,306         1,901    --         --              --       1,413      3,101   4,515
Rural Residential          RR-2.5          72         737     809    215     411           626     --         --              --         511       975    1,486
Rural Residential          RR-5ac          --        1,388  1,388     --     278           278     --         --              --          --       659     659
Hillside Residential         HR           194        8,069  8,264    39     1,780         1,819    --         --              --          92      4,227   4,320
Hillside Residential       HR-10           88        2,076  2,165     9      208           216     --         --              --          21       493     514
Low Density Residential     LDR          5,666       4,536  10,202 20,593  15,815       36,408     --         --              --       48,878    37,445  86,323
Low Medium Density
Residential                LMDR           810         429   1,239   6,498    124          6,622    --         --              --       15,407      294   15,701
Medium Density
Residential                 MDR           429         138     567   6,138   1,706         7,845    --         --              --       14,293     4,343  18,636
High Density Residential    HDR           263          --     263   5,775     --          5,775    --         --              --       14,166       --   14,166
Very High Density
Residential                VHDR           141          --     141   4,952     --          4,952    --         --              --       12,102       --   12,102
Commercial/Office                        1,145        335    1,480    --      --            --  12,940      3,649          16,589         --        --      --
Neighborhood
Commercial                   NC           134          21     155     --      --            --   1,459       231            1,689         --        --      --
Community Commercial         CC           794         314   1,108     --      --            --   8,650      3,419          12,068         --        --      --
Regional Commercial          RC            65          --      65     --      --            --    851         --             851          --        --      --
Office
Professional/Medical         OP           152          --     152     --      --            --   1,981        --            1,981         --        --      --
Mixed Use                                 725         641    1,366  2,184   1,639        3,823  5,586       6,380           11,966      5,186     3,893  9,080
Mixed Use 1 - Florida       MU-1          430         130     561   1,089    156          1,245  2,480       790            3,400      2,257       371    2,629
Mixed Use 2 – West
Hemet                       MU-2           --         241     241     --     578           578     --       3,270           3,270         --      1,372   1,372
Mixed Use 3 – Hemet
Gateway                     MU-3           --         121     121     --     326           326     --       1,500           1,500         --       773     773
Mixed Use 4 – Page
Ranch                       MU-4           --         149     149     --     579           579     --        820             820          --      1,376   1,376
Mixed Use 5 – Diamond
Valley Lake                 MU-5          108          --     108    172      --           172    980         --             980         410        --     410
Mixed Use Downtown         MU-D           187          --     187   1,495     --          1,495  1,996        --            1,996      3,551        --    3,551
Industrial                               1,122        824    1,945    --      --            --  14,558     10,925          25,484         --        --      --
Airport                    ARPT           297          --     297     --      --            --   1,942        --            1,942         --        --      --
Business Park                BP           402         786   1,188     --      --            --   5,250     10,277          15,527         --        --      --
Industrial                    I           423          37     460     --      --            --   7,366       648            8,014         --        --      --
Public Facilities and
Open Space                               4,214      10,666  14,881    --     146           146    787       4,843           5,631         --       348     348
Public Facilities            PF            22         230     252     --      --            --    363       4,505           4,868         --        --      --
Parks                         P          1,123        129   1,252     --      --            --    258        338             597          --        --      --
Open Space                   OS          1,899       6,508  8,407     --      --            --     --         --              --          --        --      --
Agricultural                  A            --        2,927  2,927     --     146           146     --         --              --          --       348     348
                                 C I T Y       O F        H E M E T        G E N E R A L         P L A N          2 0 3 0
                                                                                2-26

         LAND USE
                                                                                         Table 2.3
                                                                                Development Capacity
                                                          Acres                           Dwelling Units               Non-Residential Square Feet (1,000s)         Population
      General Plan         General Plan
       Designation         Designation                       Planning                   Planning                                   Planning                           Planning
                                                  City                  Total     City                  Total           City                        Total     City             Total
                                                               Area                        Area                                       Area                              Area
School                         SCH                252           148       400      --        --          --             166             --           166       --        --      --
Quasi Public                    QP                919           725      1,643     --        --          --               --            --            --       --        --      --
Right-of-Way/Lake                                2,699        13,095    15,791     --        --          --               --            --            --       --        --      --
Diamond Valley Lake            DVL                557          4,610     5,167     --        --          --               --            --            --       --        --      --
Right-of-Way                   ROW               2,139         8,485    10,624     --        --          --               --            --            --       --        --      --
2030 Estimated Totals                            18,113       44,241    62,354   47,571   37,928       70,983          33,741        25,798        59,539   113,083    55,779 168,863
Existing (2006) Totals                                                           32,682   15,113       47,795          10,179         1,602        11,781   65,223     30,161  95,384
Change, 2006-2030                                                                14,316    8,299       22,615          23,692        24,196        47,888   46,487     25,618  72,466
    Notes:
    1.   The numbers shown in Table 2.3 are approximate and represent the maximum development capacity for buildout of the General Plan. It is anticipated that these estimates will
         fluctuate over time as actual projects are approved.
    2.   Allocations for mixed use areas are based on anticipated future development. Future modifications to the table will occur when warranted after appropriate environmental
         analysis to determine if infrastructure capacity is available to serve the proposed changes as explained in Section 2.6.3 of the General Plan.
                                    C I T Y            O F         H E M E T             G E N E R A L                  P L A N             2 0 3 0
                                                                                               2-27
                                                                                    LAND USE
2.5.3         GENERAL PLAN DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY
Table 2.3 identifies the development capacity associated with the planned
distribution of land uses. Over time, as properties transition from one use
to another or property owners rebuild, land uses and intensities will
gradually shift to align with the intent of this Land Use Element. Table 2.3
summarizes the land use distribution, and the resultant residential and
nonresidential levels of development within the established City and the
remainder of Hemet’s Planning Area that can be expected from
implementation of land use policies established by this General Plan.
2.6      M IXED -U SE A REAS
2.6.1         MIXED USE DESIGNATION
The Mixed Use designation facilitates the creation of mixed-use higher
intensity environments that offer opportunities for people to live, work, and
shop within a compact area. Mixed-use development integrates residential,
commercial, and/or office uses into one building or project area. Mixed use
in one building is typically referred to as vertical mixed use. For example, a
mixed-use building of several floors could have a lower floor dedicated to
retail space and upper floor space reserved for offices, apartments, and/or
condominiums. Horizontal mixed use refers to a project where retail and
                                                                               Mixed-use projects should
residential uses are located in different buildings connected by pedestrian    incorporate upper-floor balconies,
passageways and common design elements. The Land Use Element                   bays, and windows that overlook
contains general guidelines for development for each of the six mixed-use      the street and enliven the street
areas, and allows for flexibility over time. However, it is anticipated that   elevation. Windows and balconies
                                                                               also communicate the residential
each district will have a corresponding Specific Plan, Community Plan or
                                                                               function of upper levels.
Design Guidelines to establish a cohesive identity and land use distribution.
2.6.2         MIXED USE ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Mixed-use development is a relatively new concept in non-urban
environments. Proponents of mixed use cite reduced vehicular emissions, a
more pedestrian friendly environment, and a more varied urban atmosphere
as reasons to support mixed use. For the City of Hemet, mixed-use
development will represent a departure from standard single-use land
planning, but if designed correctly and in appropriate locations will be an
overall benefit.
To maximize the opportunities associated with mixed use, the City has
selected locations that are primarily in emerging activity or transportation
corridors or areas which can be readily assimilated into the overall
development pattern. The only exception is the downtown area which
proposes mixed use as a redevelopment tool to encourage new
development as well as to reintroduce people and businesses back to the
downtown.
2.6.3         IMPLEMENTATION OF MIXED-USE AREAS
In developing the six mixed-use areas described below, the City of Hemet
worked with property owners and other stakeholders in providing a land
use mix that will evolve over time. Consequently, mixed-use development
should not be seen as a static fixed concept but rather a fluid process that
will change over time in response to internal and external conditions. To
         C  I  T Y      O  F     H   E  M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L     P L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                        2-28

 LAND USE
              this end, implementation of mixed-use concepts will necessarily need to be
              flexible while respecting the overall vision for the areas. Implementation
              techniques developed for mixed-use projects are as follows:
                   1.  Flexibility on percentages of land uses anticipated Land use
                       percentages were developed at a fixed point in time (2010) based
                       on best available knowledge of how mixed-use projects might be
                       designed. The City recognizes that changes will occur over time
                       and will permit up to a 10 percent adjustment in land use
                       percentages without a General Plan amendment if the proposed
                       change meets the following conditions:
                            Traffic generation does not increase. Morning, afternoon,
                            and average daily trips (ADT) are equal to or less than the
                            baseline land use assumptions; or
                            Traffic slightly increases but can be mitigated. It can be
                            demonstrated that both on- and off- site capacity exists to
                            absorb slight increases in traffic, or alternative transportation
                            strategies are employed; or
                            Balance of land uses is maintained. Proposed changes in
                            land uses do not dramatically alter the adopted land use mix or
                            .environmental conditions.
                   2. Individual project proposals Ideally, each designated mixed-used
                       area would be developed under the auspices of a specific or area-
                       wide plan. The City recognizes however, that funding may not be
                       available to prepare such a plan before development of individual
                       properties within a mixed-use area. To ensure long-term viability
                       and to provide for equitable distribution of costs, the City will
                       consider individual projects as long as the following actions take
                       place:
                            Integration with surrounding properties One of the
                            primary functions of mixed use is to permit ease of access
                            between uses and between properties to help reduce vehicular
                            trips. All mixed-use projects need to demonstrate how the
                            project is internally integrated as well as externally integrated
                            through a detailed mobility system and design characteristics.
                            Other factors, including infrastructure components, need to be
                            developed, which shows how a project is served by
                            infrastructure and how a project helps to facilitate the
                            continuation of infrastructure to adjoining properties.
                            Public design components are developed in concept
                            Public design components such as streetscapes, entryway
                            monumentation, signage, and architectural theme and scale
                            should be developed at least in concept so that the project can
                            integrate with future developments and approved plans to the
                            maximum extent possible.
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E  T      G   E  N   E R   A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   2-29
                                                                                 LAND USE
2.6.4         FLORIDA AVENUE MIXED-USE AREA #1
Overview
Mixed-Use Area #1 (MU-1) will serve as the
region’s primary retail destination taking
advantage of the SR 74/79 interchange.
Services provided will include specialty retail,
restaurants, department stores, and general
retail uses. Additionally, the area will provide a
vibrant office environment as well as medium
to high density residential units. All of the uses
will be integrated through a comprehensive
pedestrian system as well as the more traditional
road system.
Anticipated Land Use Summary
1. Retail, commercial, office and institutional: 35 percent of land area
2. Residential: 10-15 percent of land area
3. Open Space and Rights-of-Way: 45-55 percent of land area
     a.  Vernal pool conservation area: 40-50 percent of land area unless a
         criteria refinement is adopted for MSHCP cell blocks. With a
         criteria refinement, the land use distribution would be increased in
         the same development percentages. Portions of the MSHCP cell
         groups are currently under public agency ownership and should
         serve as the core of the conservation area.
     b. Public open space such as a public plaza, paseos, landscaped
         setbacks, and trails, but excluding private open space: minimum of
         5 percent of land area.
     Development Considerations
      Design To achieve a harmonious blend of land uses and
         development patterns, special care shall be given to a
         comprehensive circulation system consisting of vehicular and
         pedestrian access and linkages as well as a consistent and thematic
         design treatment for streetscapes and architectural elements.
        Specific Plan Requirement Any mixed-use project within MU-1
         shall be submitted through a specific plan or Planned Community
         Development. The 200 acre property on the northeast corner of
         Florida Avenue and Warren Road) shall be considered through a
         specific plan.
        Single Use Project Proposals Single use projects may be
         submitted through standard zoning ordinance procedures but shall
         demonstrate consistency with the intent of the MU-1 concept and
         how the project will integrate with adjoining properties.
         C I T Y        O F      H E M E T          G E N E R A L           P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       2-30

 LAND USE
                        percent of that area must be conserved for permanent open space
                        purposes unless a criteria refinement is approved. Any
                        development within a criteria area will first have to comply with the
                        habitat acquisition negotiation process (HANS) prior to any
                        development submittal to the City.
                        Drainage and Infrastructure Development in MU-1 is
                        constrained by drainage issues and the future realignment of
                        Highway 79. Special consideration will need to be given not only to
                        protecting development from seasonal flooding, but also to
                        ensuring that the hydraulic connectivity to the vernal pool complex
                        is maintained. Additionally, development within MU-1 must
                        address off-site infrastructure as well as on-site infrastructure needs
                        and how the development will be served by with an overall
                        infrastructure plan.
              2.6.5          WEST HEMET MIXED-USE AREA #2
              Overview
              Mixed-Use Area #2 (MU-2) will serve as the region’s primary destination
              for Research and Development, low intensity industrial, retail and office
              uses. Of equal importance, the mixed-use area will serve as the support hub
              for the surrounding business park area. Residential, while permitted, plays a
              minor role in the overall land use strategy for this area.
                               It is anticipated that the area will develop over time and will
                               probably follow business park development in the
                               surrounding area. To maintain viability over time, a strong
                               emphasis on architectural controls and a well-planned public
                               infrastructure system will be implemented in the early stages
                               of development. Additionally, MU-2 is the most fluid of the
                               six mixed-use areas in that there is no clear-cut
                               geographically defined boundary. The intent is to promote
                               mixed use in within the business park area but permit
                               flexibility as to where it may occur. In fact, mixed use could
                               occur on two or more sites throughout the business park
                               area as long as overall land uses are consistent with the
                               considerations discussed below. In addition, the mixed use
              area should be designed in concert with a future Metrolink Station or transit
              village serving the west end.
              Anticipated Land Use Summary
              1. Retail/commercial: 30 percent of the land area.
              2. Commercial Office: 45 percent of land area.
              3. Residential: 20 percent of land area.
              4. Open Space: 5 percent of land area, which includes public plazas, trails,
                   and paseos, but excludes private open space.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G    E   N  E   R A L      P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                    2-31

                                                                                  LAND USE
Development Considerations:
   Specific Plan Requirement Any mixed-use proposal shall be
   submitted through a specific plan or Planned Community
   Development.
   Drainage and Infrastructure Parts of MU-2 are located in the 100-
   year and 500-year flood plain. Development within MU-2 must address
   off-site infrastructure as well as on-site infrastructure needs and how
   the development will interface with an overall infrastructure plan.
   Proximity to Hemet-Ryan Airport The MU-2 area as conceptually
   shown on the Land Use Plan is currently within the Airport Influence
   Area for the Hemet-Ryan Airport (see Figure 2.6a). The existing
   Airport land Use Plan (ALUP) adopted in 1992 for Hemet-Ryan is
   proposed to be updated once a new Airport Master Plan is adopted by
   the County of Riverside. Until the new Airport Land Use Plan is
   adopted by the Airport Land Use Commission, an Interim Airport
   Overlay has been established for the MU-2 area as well as other similar
   undeveloped properties in Areas I and II of the Airport Land Use Plan
   (per Figure 2.6a) that may be incompatible with the 1992 ALUP. For
   example, at present, the 1992 ALUP restricts residential development in
   this area to one du/2.5 acres. Land Use Element Policy LU-10-4
   addresses uses allowed in the Interim Airport Overlay. At such time as
   the new Airport Land Use Plan is adopted, the City will update the
   General Plan for consistency and remove the Interim Airport Overlay.
   Area-wide Planning Required Ideally, MU-2 and the adjoining
   business park area would be analyzed and developed under an area-
   wide plan or community plan. However, the City recognizes that
   developing the plan may be cost prohibitive in the short term. Until
   such a plan is developed any project proposal will need to address how
   the project can provide and integrate with future infrastructure needs
   and address streetscape design and overall design framework for the
   area.
   Transit Village A future Metrolink station is proposed within MU-2,
   which will provide for regional mobility both to and from the West
   Hemet business park area. The City anticipates that a transit village will
   be developed adjacent to the future station and will work with property
   owners in the development of transit-oriented design concepts and an
   appropriate mix of retail/office/residential uses within one-quarter to
   one-half mile of the Metrolink or transit stop.
       C   I  T Y      O  F    H   E  M  E   T     G   E  N  E  R A L      P  L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                      2-32
 LAND USE
              2.6.6         HEMET GATEWAY MIXED-USE AREA #3
                         Overview
                         Mixed-Use Area #3 (MU-3) serves as the “Gateway” to the City
                         along Domenigoni Parkway as well as a major regional center. It
                         is anticipated that the site will be owned in total by the Soboba
                         Band of Luiseño Indians and will develop into a retail, office, and
                         residential project.
                         Anticipated Land Use Summary
                         1.         Retail/commercial/office: 80 percent of the land area.
                         2.         Residential: 15 percent of land area.
                         3.         Open Space: 5 percent of land area, which includes
                         public plazas, trails, and paseos, but excludes private open space.
              Development Considerations:
                  Specific Plan Requirement MU-3 will be under single ownership (at
                  least initially); therefore, the entire area shall be developed under one
                  specific plan.
                  Aesthetics As a gateway project, it will be critical to establish a
                  cohesive and architecturally integrated theme. The City of Hemet will
                  work with the property owner on developing this theme and promote a
                  gateway land use concept will be beneficial both to the property owner
                  and the City of Hemet.
              2.6.7         WARREN AVENUE MIXED-USE AREA #4
              Overview
              Mixed-Use Area #4 (MU-4) is a mixed-use area intended to serve Hemet
              and surrounding county residents and create a retail/business park node at
              Warren Avenue and the Domenigoni Corridor. The area will focus on
              providing retail and commercial services such as grocery stores, specialty
              shops, medical and dental offices. The area would also be suitable for clean
              technology and light industrial uses as a component of the overall plan,
              particularly the Metropolitan Water District owned parcels adjacent to Salt
              Creek and Domenigoni Parkway. Residential development is also
              contemplated as an integral part of MU-4.
                        Anticipated Land Use Summary
                        1. Retail/commercial: 25 percent of the land area.
                        2 Commercial office/medical/light industrial: 40 percent of land
                        area
                        3. Residential: 30 percent of land area.
                        4. Open Space: 5 percent of land area, which includes public
                        plazas, trails, and paseos, but excludes private open space.
C I T Y O F H  E  M   E   T     G    E  N  E   R  A L     P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    2-33

                                                                                   LAND USE
DEVELOPMENT CONSIDERATIONS:
     Specific Plan Requirement The Mixed Use Area #4 is fortunate to
     only have a couple of land owners for a relatively large area. This makes
     it ideal for implementation through a Specific Plan or Planned
     Community Development process.
     Residential Development Generally, a higher residential density is
     proposed for MU-4 as opposed to surrounding development. However,
     residential development shall be varied in design and density and shall
     avoid a preponderance of any one product type. All residential
     development shall be integrated through an internal pedestrian system
     and shall show a strong connectivity to adjoining uses both on and
     off site.
     Proximity to Hemet-Ryan Airport Portions of the MU-4 area are
     within the Airport Influence Area for the Hemet-Ryan Airport (see
     Figure 2.6a). The existing Airport land Use Plan (ALUP) adopted in
     1992 for Hemet-Ryan is proposed to be updated once a new Airport
     Master Plan is adopted by the County of Riverside. Until the new
     Airport Land Use Plan is adopted by the Airport Land Use
     Commission, an Interim Airport Overlay has been established for
     portions of the MU-4 area as well as other similar undeveloped
     properties in Areas I and II of the Airport Land Use Plan (per Figure
     2.6a) that may be incompatible with the 1992 ALUP. For example, at
     present, the 1992 ALUP restricts much of the residential development
     located north of Simpson Road to one du/2.5 acres. Land Use Element
     Policy LU-10-4 addresses uses allowed in the Interim Airport Overlay.
     At such time as the new Airport Land Use Plan is adopted, the City will
     update the General Plan for consistency and remove the Interim
     Airport Overlay.
2.6.8           DIAMOND VALLEY LAKE MIXED-USE
                AREA #5
Overview
Mixed Use Area #5 is intended to provide a synergistic blend of
retail, restaurant, office, educational and related uses as part of the
larger Diamond Valley Lake East planning area to the south and
includes a portion of the McSweeny Ranch specific plan area to the
north. It is anticipated that that area will serve as a complement to the
existing museums, Diamond Valley Lake Visitor Center and the
Western Science Center, which curates Metropolitan Water Districts
(MWD) paleontological and archeological artifacts from the
construction of Diamond Valley Lake, Valley Wide Recreation &
Park District’s regional aquatic center and ball fields, the Western
Center Academy – a charter middle school, and finally the Diamond
Valley Lake marina, allowing public access to Diamond Valley Lake
for boating, fishing, hiking, and biking.
It is envisioned that this area will become the City’s Southern
Gateway as well as the regional hub for recreation, education, and
renewable energy research and development technologies set in a
          C   I  T Y     O   F    H   E  M    E  T     G   E  N E R  A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                          2-34

 LAND USE
              sustainable campus environment and would include providing services such
              as specialty retail, restaurants, and hotels. It is also envisioned that
              alternative energy facilities and technologies may be included in this area to
              exemplify the commitment to sustainability and renewable energy.
              Anticipated Land Use Summary
              1. Retail/commercial: 30 percent of the land area.
              2. Commercial office/sustainable campus business park/research and
                   development/educational facilities: 50 percent of land area
              3. Open Space: 20 percent of land area, which includes public plazas,
                   trails, paseos, drainage channel parkland etc. but excludes private open
                   space.
              Development Considerations:
                   Specific Plan Requirement A specific plan or specific plan
                   amendment will be required for the mixed use area. Though the
                   development of the sustainable campus is only conceptual at this time,
                   a solar energy facility is currently in the preliminary planning stages for
                   the northern 195 acres of the McSweeny Ranch Specific Plan. The
                   specific plan for Mixed Use Area #5 may be integrated into the specific
                   plan for McSweeny Ranch.
                   Mix of uses The primary impetus for a mixed-use node at this location
                   was the proximity of the museums, cultural, educational and
                   recreational resources immediately to the south. It is the City’s intent to
                   provide a land use pattern that complements the museums, educational
                   and recreation complex in Diamond Valley Lake with uses such as
                   commercial, renewable energy resources, retail, education, and
                   hospitality.
                   Linkages MU-5 can serve as a “hub” for non-motorized linkages
                   between the Diamond Valley Lake Planning Area and the residential
                   communities north of McSweeny Ranch as well as the rest of the City.
                   Special care should be given to integration with the Salt Creek non-
                   motorized trail and tying into the future trail system proposed in and
                   around Diamond Valley Lake.
              2.6.9          DOWNTOWN MIXED-USE AREA #6
              OVERVIEW:
              Mixed-Use Area #6 (MU-6) represents the City’s efforts to revitalize its
              historic downtown and North State Street corridor. government, retail,
              multi-modal, entertainment, and cultural hub as well as providing a variety
              of higher density residential opportunities. For more information, see the
              “Downtown District” discussion in Section 2.9.1.
              ANTICIPATED LAND USE SUMMARY
              1. Commercial: 25 percent of land area
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G    E  N  E   R  A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    2-35

                                                                                    LAND USE
2. Business Park: 20 percent of land area
3. Office and Government: 15 percent of land area
4. Residential: 35 percent of land area
5. Open Space: 5 percent of public open space such as parks,
    plazas and paseos, but does not include private open space
    requirements associated with residential development.
DEVELOPMENT CONSIDERATIONS:
    Specific Plans Encouraged/Required Generally, due to the
    small parcels involved in downtown, requiring a specific plan
    would be cost prohibitive. However, for larger projects (over
    25 acres) specific plans will be required.
    Compatibility Integration with existing uses and enhancing
    the historic context in the downtown is a key consideration in
    this area.
    Transit Oriented Design A future Metrolink station and
    transit center is proposed in MU-6, which will provide for
    regional mobility both to and from the downtown area. The
    City anticipates that a transit village will be developed adjacent
    to the future station and will work with property owners in the
    development of transit-oriented design concepts and an appropriate
    mix of retail/office/residential uses within one-quarter to one-half mile
    of the Metrolink or transit stop.
    Gateways and streetscapes: Developing entry gateways, community
    signage and consistent landscaped streetscapes for North State Street
    and the Downtown area is an important element to establishing an
    identity for this area.
2.7      S PECIF IC P LAN A REAS
Many areas within the City and Planning Area are subject to the plans,
policies and implementation measures of currently adopted or anticipated
future specific plans. These areas are shown in Figure 2.2. The purpose of
specific plans is to provide comprehensive planning of large areas
consistent with the General Plan. Specific plans must be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of Section 65451 of the California
Government Code and the City’s Development Code, which contains some
additional requirements tailored to meet local needs and conditions.
Designated areas will require detailed plans indicating land uses, circulation,
major infrastructure and facilities, open space and parks, and appropriate
implementation measures. All specific plans will be evaluated for
consistency with the goals, policies, plans and programs of the General
Plan. Additionally, Specific Plans must be consistent with the adopted
Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan and reviewed by the Airport Land Use
Commission, unless approved by the City through an overrule process.
         C  I  T Y       O  F    H   E   M  E   T    G   E  N  E  R  A L     P  L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                        2-36

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sanderson Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City of                                                                                                                                                 County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Jacinto
                                                                                                         Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              River
                                                                                                                                                                                  Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SP84-01
                                                                                 California Ave
                                                                                                                                                               SP01-003
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                    Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ee
                                                                                                               Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                          Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ian
                                                                                                                                               en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                          Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                    SP90-009
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SP 85-01                                           Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                  Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ve
                                                                         SP88-01                                                                              Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Girard St                                                                                                                         Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                          Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                               SP 88-13                                              Myers St                                                                                                                     Florida Ave                                                                              Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ave                                          Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                                          r id
             Florida Ave                                                   Florida Ave                                                                                              Flo                                 Acacia Ave                                                                                                                          Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                              SP87-28 SP06-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              SP05-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                    SP07-004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Meridian St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kirby St
                                                                                                                                           ct
                                                                                                                                                                    HEMET-RYAN                            AY
                                                                                 SP88-19
                                                                                                                                         ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                      AILW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                     AIRPORT                    R                                                           Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                    Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                             SF
                                                                                                                                         A qu
                                                         Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                        AT &
                                                                                                                                                 SP00-001                                                                           PCD79-91 Stetson Ave
                           Riverside
                                                                                                                                    ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                   San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ca
                            County
                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                    ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     et M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                     Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                em
                                                                                                                               ts   on
                                                                                                                                         Ave                                     PCD79-93                               PCD80-002                           Chambers St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Crest Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           eH
                                                                                                                                                 Warren Rd
                                                                                                                           Ste
                                                                                                                                                               Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                   RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SP88-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m                                    State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            County
             Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                         y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ig o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ni                                                                   SP96-001
                                                                                                                                                             Pk                                                                                                  Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y
                                                                                                                                                          ni                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                      o                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                 ig                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                       PARK
                                                                                                                                            en                                                                                                                                                                                                Gib
                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                     Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SP02-001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SP01-002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ista
              Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                               Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside
                                         Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 058 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                           LEGEND
                                                                                                                                           Specific Plan Areas                                                                                                                                                           Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                    Adopted Specific Plan Area                                                                                                                           Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                    Mixed Use Specific Plan Opportunity Area                                                                                                             Street
                    Sources:
                    Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                     Future Specific Plan Area                                                                                                                            Railroad
                    ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F i g u r e     2 . 2
                    1       0.5   0                       1                2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                  SPECIFIC PLANS
                                                                               Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                       LAND USE
back of Figure 2.2
        C  I  T Y  O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                   2-38
         LAND USE
                               APPROVED SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
                               As shown in Table 2.4 and Figure 2.2, a total of 19 specific plans have been
                               approved within the Planning Area as of January 2011. Specific plan
                               documents for each of these areas are available for reference at the City of
                               Hemet Planning Department. Approved land uses for each specific plan are
                               shown on the Land Use Map.
                                                 Table 2.4
                      Specific Plans Approved in the Hemet Planning Area
     Number                     Name                                       Description
PCD 79-91       Terra Linda                             Residential single family community
PCD 79-93       Page Ranch Community Plan               Residential single family community with limited
                                                        multi-family units. More than 6,000 homes are
                                                        approved for this project
PCD 80-002      Seven Hills                             Senior community surrounding an 18-hole golf
                                                        course
SP 84-001       Sunwest Village
SP 85-001       Arthofer                                Residential single family community
SP 87-28        Hemet Auto Mall                         Commercial site specializing in auto sales and
                                                        other automobile related uses
SP 88-01        Heartland Village (Now called Four      Senior community surrounding an 18-hole golf
                Seasons)                                course and 300 non-age-restricted units adjacent
                                                        to the senior community
SP 88-13        City Sponsored                          Single family residential and large lot residential
SP 88-19        McSweeny Ranch                          Single family residential served by a
                                                        neighborhood shopping center
SP 89-19        Hemet Marketplace                       Community commercial, office and industrial
                                                        uses
SP 90-009       Hemet Valley Country Club Estates       Single family residential development
SP 96-001       Diamond Valley Gateway                  Commercial and office uses
SP 00-001       Page Plaza                              Community commercial retail site
SP 01-002       Mc Sweeny Farms                         Single family residential community served by
                                                        neighborhood commercial
SP 01-003       Peppertree                              Senior residential community comprised of
                                                        single family and multi-family units
SP 02-001       Diamond Valley Lake Park                Cultural and regional recreation uses
SP 05-003       Sanderson Square                        Commercial and business park uses
SP 06-004       Florida Promenade                       Commercial uses
SP 07-004       Stetson Crossing                        Commercial uses
                               FUTURE SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
                               The Zoning Code contains requirements for the content and processing
                               procedure for specific plans. The Planned Community Development
                               Overlay process, detailed in the Zoning Code, may also be used to satisfy
                               specific plan requirements for development within these areas. Future
       C  I T Y   O   F     H   E  M   E  T    G    E  N   E   R  A L       P   L   A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                   2-39
                                                                                   LAND USE
specific plans will be required for all properties shown as “future specific
plan” on the specific plan map. Specific plans will also be required when
any of the following conditions are met:
     Developments greater than 100 acres Any project (excluding rural
     and agricultural) greater than 100 acres will be required to be reviewed
     through the specific plan process.
     Mixed-use projects Most of the mixed-use projects will require
     submittal of a specific plan. Refer to the individual descriptions under
     the mixed-use section.
     Where development flexibility is desired Large master planned
     communities are usually successful due to consistent design and
     architectural features, a varied land use pattern and a well designed and
     integrated infrastructure and mobility network. The City encourages the
     master plan concept through the specific plan process and understands
     that flexibility in standards are necessary to achieve the quality of
     development that a master planned community offers.
2.8       L AND U SE D ISTRI CTS
Dividing the City into districts has been a way to create neighborhood
identity and foster a “small town” feeling desired in the 1992 General Plan
and reiterated as part of this General Plan Update process. These districts
are shown in Figure 2.3. Generally, a district is an area that shares similar
characteristics such as massing, scale, and age of structures, most of which
developed during a similar time period. For example, the Greater
Downtown District developed primarily from the late 1890s into the early
1930s. Storefronts are located adjacent to the sidewalk and parking is to the
rear. The district is recognized by a defined street grid system and homes in
the area are generally one story or 12–15 feet tall. Other districts focus on
housing areas developed in the 1960s to serve retirees as well as the
emerging family areas being located to the south and west of the City. Each
area is unique and serves as a neighborhood focal point for residents,
employers and employees who live and work in the district.
The district discussion provides a brief overview of the City’s primary
districts in regard to existing land use patterns, major opportunities and
constraints, as well as future land use concepts. The Greater Downtown
District, the West Hemet District, and the Diamond Valley Lake District
are discussed in more detail in the Focused District Plans in Section 2.8
immediately following this overview.
2.8.1          DISTRICT ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Maintaining Established Character While the districts reflect a unique
sense of place and time, the City’s Zoning Ordinance (by law) requires that
all uses within the same zone be treated equally. Therefore, a house built in
the 1890s is subject to the same regulations as a new tract home built in
2010 if within the same zone classification or is considered “legally non-
conforming”. This General Plan begins to address this issue through
         C   I  T Y      O  F     H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                        2-40

                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Jacinto
                                                                                                          Beech St                                 Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   River
                                                                             Northwest
                                                                                                                                                                                  Esplanade Ave
                                                                               Hemet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                   California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                    Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                              Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                                     Tres Cerritos Menlo AveHemet
                                                                                                                                           Warr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Greater
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ian
                                                                                                                                                en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downtown                                                                                                                     Park Hill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Valle Vista
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oakland Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                      Myers St
                                                                                                                                                                                                  West Florida Corridor                                                                                                                                         East     Florida Corridor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Av     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                        ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                            Flo                Acacia Ave                                                                                                                                                Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                  Airport Business                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lyon Ave                                                                                                       Southeast Hemet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kirby St
                                                                                                                                             ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                     HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                          ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                      AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SF
                                                                                                                                          A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hemet South
                                                                                                                                                                                        AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                      ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bautista Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                     San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                      Fisher St
                                                                                                                                          Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Crest Dr                                              e   He
                                                                                                                                ts   on                                                                                                                        Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                                    Warren Rd
                                                                                                                            Ste
                                                                        West Hemet                                                                        Page   Ranch
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                          RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                               California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    go
                                                                                                                                                                ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                              iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                         on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                  ni
                                                                                                                                                     g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                              e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                       Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Girard St                           Santa Rosa Hills
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                  Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                    Diamond Valley Lake
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cactus Valley Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cactus Valley
X06268298.11 081 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                     LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                       Airport Business                                                                Hemet South                                                                                  Southeast Hemet                                                 Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                       Bautista Canyon                                                                 North Hemet                                                                                  Tres Cerritos                                                   Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                          Cactus Valley                                                                   Northwest Hemet                                                                              Valle Vista                                                     Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                         Diamond Valley Lake                                                             Page Ranch                                                                                   West Florida Corridor                                           Railroad                                                                                                                     F i g u r e     2 . 3
                                                                                                                                                                       East Florida Corridor                                                           Park Hill                                                                                    West Hemet                                                      Creek/Canal
                     1       0.5   0                              1            2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAND USE DISTRICTS
                                                                                                                                                                       Greater Downtown                                                                Santa Rosa Hills                                                                                                                                             River/Lake
                                                                                   Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H e m e t    G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                       LAND USE
Back of Figure 2.3
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                   2-42
 LAND USE
              varying the land use designations for the various districts as well as
              identifying special areas that require additional attention in terms of policies
              and procedures.
              Variety Versus Consistency While districts may share common
              characteristics such as age of buildings or similar massing and scale of
              structures, they also demonstrate variety. Single family neighborhoods can
              be adjacent to multi-family projects all which are served by local
              neighborhood stores. In fact, variety typically strengthens the attractiveness
              of a district as daily needs for living are met, such as the ability to have
              schools and parks nearby. This General Plan attempts to promote the
              positive aspects of variety through land use while respecting the character
              and scale of neighborhoods and districts through the Community Design
              Element. Utilization of both elements is critical for the successful
              development and protection of districts.
              Accommodating Infill Development Several of the neighborhoods
              within the districts have pockets of vacant land suitable for infill
              development. The concept for these areas is to allow infill development that
              is in keeping with the general land use character of the surrounding area,
              but enhances the neighborhood through appropriate design, intensity and
              provision of needed infrastructure.
              2.8.2         HEMET’S DISTRICTS
              Northwest Hemet District
              This large rural area is comprised of large-lot equestrian residential uses,
              vacant land, hillside and the Heartland/Four Season golf community.
              Reinhardt Canyon lies between two steep hillside areas: the Lakeview and
              Gunn Mountains. The Maze Stone County Park, which is located in the
              canyon, contains Indian petroglyphs for public viewing. Primary constraints
              for the district include factors such as a high fire danger, distance from
              public services such as police and fire, limited access, and lack of existing
              and planned sewer lines. Portions of the District are also within Area III of
              the 1992 Hemet-Ryan Airport Influence Area (see Section 2.10 for
              additional information regarding land use constraints related to the
              Airport).
              Future development in the area allowed by the General Plan will preserve
              the existing rural life style by limiting development to single family
              residential on large 5-acre and 10-acre lots in the hillside areas. South of
              Devonshire Avenue, the land use concept changes to promote mixed use
              adjacent to SR 79 and north of Florida Avenue. Devonshire Avenue is a
              critical edge road serving to buffer the more rural areas to the north with
              the higher intensity uses to the south. Construction of the future SR 79 on
              the eastern boundary of the district will require adequate buffering of
              adjacent sensitive receptor uses.
              Tres Cerritos District
              This unique area of the City contains the Tres Cerritos Hills, a significant
              land form. The area also includes the important Warren Road/Esplanade
              Avenue gateway which will be adjacent to the future SR 79 alignment. The
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T    G   E  N   E   R A L      P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                  2-43

                                                                                     LAND USE
area has several large scale residential developments along with Cawston
Elementary, Rancho Viejo Middle School, and Tahquitz High School
facilities. City services to the area, along with planned water and sewer lines,
will be available to serve future residents. The primary issues that will affect
future development will be the fact that the undeveloped portions of the
district are outside of the City’s existing master storm drain plan and which
future development will have to address. Additionally, the westernmost
portions of the district contain some vernal pools and endemic plant
species that are protected under the MSHCP. Portions of this District are
subject to the Hemet –Ryan Airport Influence Area (see Section 2.10 for
additional information regarding constraints related to the Airport).
Anticipated future development includes residential infill in large master
planned communities, a large 20-acre park serving as a community focal
point, and the Garrett Ranch and Florida Promenade properties which the
City anticipates will develop as a regional mixed-use project providing retail,
residential, and employment opportunities.
East Florida Corridor District
Running from San Jacinto Street east to Bautista Creek is the East Florida
Corridor. While this corridor is similar to the West Florida Corridor in
terms of a commercial orientation, the commercial is of a smaller scale and
interspersed with residential development both along Florida and along the
rear property lines. The primary land use focus for this area is to promote
commercial and office uses that serve the east Hemet area and which is
compatible with the adjacent residential uses. These commercial uses can
either be new uses on infill properties or adoptive reuse of existing
buildings.
Airport Business District
The environs immediately surrounding the Hemet-Ryan Airport form an
industrial center. North of the airport toward Florida Avenue, the uses
begin to transition to commercial and limited residential. The primary
influence on this district is the Airport Land Use Plan which promotes light
industrial and support commercial land uses, as well as the existence of the
MSHCP criteria cells. Refer to Section 2.10 regarding land use restrictions
under the Airport Land Use Plan for properties within this District.
Page Ranch District
Page Ranch is a large specific plan area developed north of Salt Creek and
Domenigoni Parkway and generally west of Sanderson Avenue and south
of Stetson Avenue. The area is largely flat with single family residential
communities built from the late 1980s to present with the development of
the Del Webb Active Adult community and also includes a future mixed-
use node. The area is the location of West Hemet High School and the 60-
acre Brubaker Park facility. Portions of the Page Ranch District are located
in Area II, III, and the Transition Area of the 1992 Hemet-Ryan Airport
Land Use Plan. Although most of these areas within the City are already
developed, the westerly portion of the District is currently undeveloped,
and has been included within the Interim Airport Overlay while the 1992
ALUP is being updated by the Airport Land Use Commission. Refer to
          C   I  T Y      O   F    H   E   M  E  T    G   E  N  E R   A L     P  L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                         2-44

 LAND USE
              Section 2.10 and Land Use Policy LU-10-4 for additional information
              regarding land use constraints related to the Airport.
                   South Warrren Road Area MWD owns approximately 175 acres of
                   property north of Domenigoni Parkway on both sides of Warren Road
                   for facilities related to Salt Creek Channel and Domenigoni Parkway,
                   which was required as partial mitigation for construction of Diamond
                   Valley Lake. However, not all land was required for mitigation purposes
                   enabling use of the property for other purposes. The City of Hemet has
                   identified the South Warren Road area for mixed use (see Mixed Use
                   Area #4). An alternative land use plan would allow for a sustainable
                   campus complex with clean technology businesses and research and
                   design uses.
              North Hemet District
              This district is located immediately northwest of the downtown area. The
              area is comprised of agriculturally zoned (low density) lots with some
              conventionally zoned residential and mobile home development in the
              southern area of the neighborhood. The agriculturally zoned areas have
              large ranch style homes with horsekeeping in many of the areas. Portions of
              the District are located within Area III of the Hemet-Ryan Airport
              Influence Area, but are generally developed already. Future development
              will be infill development with concerns of compatibility with existing
              surrounding neighborhoods. Esplanade Avenue forms the northern
              boundary of the City with the City of San Jacinto. A major City gateway will
              be developed at the intersection of Sanderson Avenue and Esplanade
              Avenue. Two issues confronting the area are as follows:
                   Conversion of Senior Facilities to Family There are several age
                   restricted communities within the district. Over the past several years
                   however, there has been increased pressure to convert some of these
                   communities to nonage restricted. The City’s response to this issue is
                   require property owners seeking conversion to apply for a conversion
                   permit from the Planning Commission. If conversion cannot be
                   prevented, the process insures that impacts associated with conversion
                   (e.g. impacts to traffic and schools due to an increase in school aged
                   children) are addressed.
                   Pockets of blight While a majority of the district is well maintained,
                   blight has become a problem in certain areas or pockets, especially the
                   southeastern edge of the district. The City encourages that these areas
                   undergo improvements such as the introduction of new facilities such
                   as the Sahara and Oasis Senior Villas, a joint project between the City
                   of Hemet, the State of California, and Housing and Urban
                   Development (HUD).
              Hemet South District
              This vibrant senior-oriented area of the City is anchored by the Seven Hills
              Golf Course community on the south and the large Sierra Dawn South
              Mobile Home and Terra Linda communities in the central portion. The area
              is largely built out with the exception of a large vacant portion south of
              Stetson Avenue. The neighborhood has a few scattered multi-family
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T     G   E  N  E  R   A L    P  L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    2-45

                                                                                     LAND USE
complexes located near the Stetson and State Street intersection. Future
concerns of the area will be neighborhood preservation, in particular with
respect to senior neighborhoods. New development will focus along
Stetson Avenue between State Street and Lyon Avenue and will provide
retail and multi-family residential housing opportunities. Portions of the
Hemet South District are located in Area II, III, and the Transition Area of
the 1992 Hemet-Ryan Airport Land Use Plan. Although most of these areas
are already developed, the portion of the District along Stetson Avenue has
opportunities for infill development. Refer to Section 2.10 and the Land
Use Policies for additional information regarding land use constraints
related to the Airport.
Park Hill District
This northeast neighborhood area of the City encompasses a variety of
residential land use densities from multi-family, duplex and single family
and large estate lots as the district transitions west to east. The area is
framed by Park Hill which provides a back drop for the area and boundary
with the City of San Jacinto. A majority of Park Hill is outside of the
corporate boundary of Hemet. The viewshed of the hill is to be preserved
as much as possible through ridgeline preservation and large lot
development.
Southeast Hemet District
This established residential area is characterized by low density single family
and rural development that transitions from the East Florida Avenue
corridor to the Santa Rosa hills. Most of the area is presently in the County
of Riverside with a roadway network that has retained its rural character of
curbless streets. Presently there is a County government center, library and
other governmental services within this district. The area is envisioned to
maintain its existing single family residential character.
Santa Rosa Hills District
This district frames the City on the south and includes the Santa Rosa hills,
the Ramona Bowl, Simpson Park, large homes with valley views, and
pristine mountain habitat. The westernmost edge of the district is State
Street, which serves as a major north south corridor into the downtown
area of the City. The area is envisioned to be preserved as a major viewshed
through restrictions of density and development. Immediately adjacent and
east of State Street is a relatively flat plain intended for future and existing
residential development with limited neighborhood commercial.
Cactus Valley District
This southernmost district area is characterized by rural and equestrian uses
along with active agricultural activities. The Diamond Valley Golf Course
provides the district’s dominant recreational activity and will serve as a focal
point for future upscale homes on large lots. Future development in this
district should respect the existing land use patterns and focus on large
estate type homes, equestrian uses, and a more relaxed rural lifestyle.
Valle Vista District
This northeasternmost neighborhood area is largely single family residential
outside of the City limits in the County of Riverside. The area is framed by
         C   I  T Y     O   F     H   E   M   E  T    G   E  N  E  R  A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                         2-46

 LAND USE
              the San Jacinto River and the San Jacinto hillside. Future development will
              be infill single family development. Multifamily development will be limited
              to buffer areas between commercial areas along East Florida Avenue and
              the single family areas to the north.
              Bautista Canyon District
              This large County area is predominately agricultural with citrus groves. The
              area serves as part of the eastern gateway to the City for motorists entering
              from Idyllwild and other SR 74 destinations. Development in this area
              should continue to reflect the agricultural and rural lifestyles already well
              established.
              Hemet’s Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions
              While not technically a district in the sense of having a distinct geographical
              boundary, Hemet’s mobile home parks and subdivisions warrant special
              attention due to the fact that mobile homes constitute almost 1/3 of the
              entire housing stock for the City and are concentrated in just under 50
              parks. These parks and subdivisions range in size from the Sierra Dawn
              Estates with well over 1400 mobile homes to several smaller parks with 30
              or fewer units and provide affordable housing for many of the City’s senior
              population, as well as some family-oriented parks. The City expects to see
              the continued viability of the larger mobile home parks such as Sierra
              Dawn, Hemet West, Colonial Country Club Estates and others but would
              encourage the transition of the smaller, more distressed parks lacking
              sufficient infrastructure and resident amenities (mostly within the Acacia-
              Florida-Devonshire Corridor) to higher density residential projects,
              commercial or alternative uses over time.
              2.9       F OCUSE D D ISTRICT P LANS
              While the above districts are presented as an overview, there are four
              districts that the City has identified for receiving additional attention in this
              Land Use Element:
                   Greater Downtown District,
                   West Florida Corridor District,
                   Diamond Valley Lake District, and
                   West Hemet District.
              2.9.1          GREATER DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
              Like many older cities, Hemet has a distinct greater downtown area
              characterized by a traditional street grid system, older homes and buildings,
              and a varied land use pattern. Smaller neighborhoods and areas within the
              Greater Downtown District are grouped by similar uses with consistent
              character. These areas are represented graphically in Figure 2.4 and are
              discussed in detail as follows:
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G   E  N   E  R  A L      P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   2-47

Esplanade Ave
                                          Palm Ave
Eaton Ave
                                                                                              Future Commuter Rail
Fruitvale Ave
Menlo Ave
                                                                                                                                                                  Oakland Ave
       LEGEND
                Parks
                Hemet City Boundary
                Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                              Devonshire Ave
                Street
              Railroad
             Potential Metrolink/Transit Station
       Greater Downtown Districts
                Historic Downtown Core                                                                                                                                       Florida Ave
                Old Florida Corridor
                State Street Mixed Use District
                Hemet Stock Farm
                                                                                                                      Buena Vista St                        San Jacinto St
                State Street Business Park
                      Acacia Ave                                            Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                         Santa Fe St
                Downtown Residential Neighborhoods
                                                               Gilbert St          State St                                                                                          Girard St
                Hemet Medical Centre Complex
X06268298.11 080 01/24/2012
                         Sources:
                         Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                   F i g u r e               2 . 4
                         ESRI 2010
                                                                                                                                       GREATER DOWNTOWN
                         750 375   0      750        1,500                                                                                   DISTRICT PLAN
                                                        Feet
                                                                                                                     H e m e t            G e n e r a l                       P l a n
           LAND USE
                                   Issues and Opportunities
                                   Throughout the General Plan process, a constant focus of attention was on
                                   Hemet’s downtown area. A vast majority of people interviewed saw the
                                   downtown area as a social and economic focal point for the City. Many
                                   people also pointed to the downtown area as a reminder of Hemet’s past
                                   and symbolic of Hemet’s small town atmosphere. Conversely however,
                                   most people did not visit downtown on a regular basis as they felt the area
                                   did not provide the retail services they desired or was it perceived as a safe
                                   environment to shop and dine. Essentially, people yearned for what
                                   downtown used to be, not what it is today. From this, two main themes
                                                               begin to emerge which are:
                                                                   Downtown has an historic framework that
                                                                   should be preserved. In the words of one of
                                                                   the General Plan consultants working on
                                                                   downtown, the downtown area, “has good
                                                                   bones.” … meaning that the buildings are in
                                                                   generally structurally sound, the street system is
                                                                   well designed, and major infrastructure
                                                                   components are in place. This General Plan
                                                                   focuses on improving what is in place with
                                                                   concepts such as adoptive reuse and
                                                                   intensification of the area over time versus,
                                                                   measures such as wholesale demolition and
Harvard Street, circa 1907.                                        restructuring. A major emphasis for the future
Hemet’s downtown is one of the most historic places in             will have to be improving the look of downtown,
Riverside County.                                                  encouraging new shopping and entertainment
                                                                   options, creating a safe environment for people
                                                                   by improving lighting and providing a strong
                                                                   public safety presence, and creating attractive
                                                                   public spaces such as plazas and gathering places.
                                        Downtown must develop a unique mix of uses. The downtown
                                        area will not be the primary retail source for the City and residents. Too
                                        much competition is occurring both within the City (new shopping
                                        centers on the City’s edges) as well as competition from Temecula, San
                                        Jacinto and Menifee. Competition for downtown, however, will mean
                                        providing uses and activities that other areas do not offer. By taking
                                        advantage of the area’s small town atmosphere, a unique dining
                                        experience could be created along with the provision of specialty retail
                                        and services not typically found in traditional shopping centers. State
                                        Street could evolve over time to provide a unique mixed-use experience
                                        that serves both as a destination and origin for the future Metrolink,
                                        and a strong potential exists for the provision of art and cultural
                                        activities at sites such as the historic stock farm. Simply stated, Hemet’s
                                        downtown can compete with other areas by promoting and enhancing
                                        what is unique about Hemet versus, trying to replicate what the
                                        competition has already built. General revitalization strategies for the
                                        Downtown and North State Street area is also discussed in Section
                                        2.11.3 of this element.
         C  I   T Y       O F   H    E  M    E  T      G   E  N  E   R   A L      P L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                                                          2-49

                                                                                  LAND USE
Downtown Planning Principles
Classic architecture and street orientation make Historic Downtown Hemet
a valuable area for pedestrian-friendly shopping and recreation.
Surrounding and interior development must be compatible with the overall
environment of the Downtown planning area. In order to ensure the
orderly development of quality communities and conservation of valuable
resources, the following planning principles are proposed. These principles
should set the groundwork for the development area in and around the
Downtown community. Downtown Hemet, also known as the “Hub of the
Valley”, was founded in 1887, at a time when all of Hemet was contained
within Devonshire Avenue on the north, Gilbert Street on the west, Acacia
Avenue on the south, and Buena Vista Street on the east. The historic
downtown core focused plan area extends further than downtown’s original
boundaries, roughly from Inez Street to the west, to Acacia Avenue to the
south, and from Buena Vista Street to the east, to Devonshire Avenue to
the north. Goals and policies applicable to the downtown core are a result
of community workshops addressing downtown revitalization efforts.
Historic Downtown Core
Since Hemet’s incorporation in 1910, many changes have been made to the
original character of the City. However, Hemet’s historic downtown has
remained a staple in the community. Downtown Hemet, also known as the
“Hub of the Valley”, was founded in the late nineteenth century, at a time
when all of Hemet was contained within Devonshire Avenue on the north,
Gilbert Street on the west, Acacia Avenue on the south, and Buena Vista
Street on the east. The historic downtown core focused plan area extends
further than downtown’s original boundaries, roughly from Inez Street to
the west, to Acacia Avenue to the south, and from Buena Vista Street to the
east, to Devonshire Avenue to the north. Goals and policies applicable to
the downtown core are a result of community workshops addressing
downtown revitalization efforts.
The downtown core consists of historic commercial districts and single-
family neighborhoods that show signs of their age. The California bungalow
style of architecture was heavily favored in the early 1900s, and a range of
housing sizes and styles were constructed, from small four- and five-room
cottages to large three-story mansions. This General Plan intends to protect
the downtown core by encouraging new investment in deteriorating areas.
Infill redevelopment will be utilized as much as possible, with new, higher
intensity development on the outer edges to complement the existing
character of the area.
A large part of Hemet’s quaint character is defined by the scale and
configuration of its downtown parcels, block dimensions, and regular street
grid. The land use and design concept for the downtown core builds on          Additional information, goals,
downtown’s existing assets, encourages the continuation of uses that the       and policies regarding historic
City favors in downtown, incorporates mixed-use development, provides          resources are located in Chapter
for economic incentives, and preserves both current uses and historic          9 Historic Resources.
structures.
         C  I  T Y      O  F     H  E   M  E T    G    E  N  E  R  A L     P L A   N      2 0 3 0
                                                      2-50

          LAND USE
                                    DOWNTOWN PLANNING AND DESIGN PRINCIPLES
1.  Create a unique sense of place that maintains the character of Hemet and differentiates the Downtown from other downtowns in
    southern California. Land uses and architectural design should convey civic pride and identity.
2.  Build upon the City’s character-defining elements for revitalization. Great downtowns are made up of buildings and spaces that
    have evolved over time. Future buildings should contribute to Downtown’s character by employing one of Hemet’s historic
    commercial styles.
3.  Preserve the historic integrity of Downtown. Encourage preservation of significant historic buildings and resources in the
    Downtown and discourage use of generic architecture style used by corporate and franchise businesses that may undermine
    Downtown’s character.
4.  Save the best land uses for Downtown. Keep inappropriate uses such as warehouses, liquor stores, and drive-through restaurants
    out of Downtown and promote uses that encourage significant pedestrian activity. Encourage uses, such as book stores, coffee
    houses, outdoor restaurants and entertainment venues.
5.  Encourage government and cultural uses in Downtown. Government and cultural uses give the Downtown a civic pulse that
    should be preserved. Cultural uses, including a performing arts center, movie theatres, and art galleries, and civic uses, such as
    City Hall and other government facilities should be concentrated in Downtown.
6.  Use urban design to identify Downtown’s entries, edges and districts. Improvements that call attention to these parts of
    Downtown may include landscaping, entry features, signage, street furniture, and public art and other design features.
7.  Protect the character of lot sizes and the street grid. A large part of Hemet’s quaint character is defined by the scale and
    configuration of its Downtown parcels, block dimensions, and regular street grid.
8.  Convert vacant lots into attractive and viable infill uses. It is important to maintain a continuous street façade. Empty/vacant
    lots are eyesores that take away from the quality of the overall streetscape.
9.  Define the future Metrolink Station as Downtown’s hub. If Hemet is to develop into a vibrant and rich Downtown environment,
    the Metrolink station must become a multi-modal hub surrounded by high density residential and mixed-use projects located
    within a quarter mile of the station. To encourage connectivity to the Downtown, the Metrolink Station should be located within
    a 10 minute walking distance.
10. Make Florida Avenue pedestrian-friendly. Currently, Florida Avenue acts as a barrier to safe pedestrian movement causing “one-
    stop” shopping trips and a dependence on automobile use. Incorporating street trees and shade canopies, and pursue the
    construction of a landscaped median in the downtown portion of Florida Avenue.
11. Make signs more appropriate for a pedestrian scale. Downtown signs are currently too big, too plastic, and poorly designed.
    Develop sign regulations more appropriate for a pedestrian scale.
12. Increase shade within pedestrian environment. Select merchant-friendly trees with semi-transparent canopies and minimal leaf
    litter that add shaded pedestrian areas in the Downtown. Replace old-brow storefront canopies with newer, thinner, and stronger
    canopies that allow some light to shine through.
13. Maintain high quality residential design and property maintenance standards that encourage resident satisfaction and
    community pride, inspiring ongoing concern and care for the community. Design standards should encourage diversity in
    residential designs to avoid monotonous-looking developments.
14. Create connections between land uses that make alternatives to the automobile safe and attractive. Community designs should
    encourage both pedestrian and bicycle use.
15. Encourage the creation of cultural and recreational resources that are unique to Downtown Hemet and that benefit from close
    proximity to other attractions in Hemet and nearby communities. Incorporate Downtown parks, recreational services and/or open
    space elements into the overall design.
        C    I  T Y        O   F     H    E   M   E   T       G   E    N   E   R  A L      P   L  A   N      2 0 3 0
                                                                 2-51

                                                                                    LAND USE
The Hemet Heritage Foundation (HHF), a California nonprofit
corporation, is the sponsoring agency for the Hemet Museum located in the
historic Santa Fe Depot on Florida Avenue. The museum is run entirely by
volunteers and receives no governmental support. The Hemet
Redevelopment Agency also plays a role in existing and future
redevelopment efforts in downtown.
The Hub of the Valley Downtown Plan (1999) was created to encourage the
provision of a “hub” of activity within downtown. The Hub of the Valley
Downtown Plan emphasized links to government, transportation, medical,
historic, retail, and cultural/entertainment uses. Land uses that create places
for people to gather and promote pedestrian and vehicular traffic in a safe
environment day or night are encouraged. Downtown uses should create a
reason for people to visit, enhance retail viability, increase property values,
attract private investment, and develop a sense of community. The land use
and design concepts from the Hub of the Valley Downtown Plan have
been integrated and expanded within this element and the Community
Design Element.
Old Florida Corridor
Flanking the east and west ends of the historic downtown along Florida
Avenue is the Old Florida Corridor as shown in Figure 2.4. This area
provides for a retail and office transition from the downtown area to the
more shopping center oriented businesses further to the east and west from
downtown. It is anticipated that the area will change over time and the City
will encourage the adaptive reuse of buildings to uses such as restaurants,
office and specialty retail as well as encouraging new infill development
commensurate with the size and scale of surrounding buildings.
State Street Mixed-Use Neighborhood
The City will encourage transformation of areas along State Street and
throughout the downtown district into single-use and mixed-use
neighborhood centers. Development designs along State Street should
focus on creation of an activity center that opens onto the downtown core.
Discouraging heavy industrial and warehousing
uses, especially in areas adjacent to residential
uses, will reduce the potential for intrusion of
noise and truck traffic into surrounding
residential areas. Other residential uses, mixed-
use projects, and neighborhood-serving
commercial, office and retail uses should be
encouraged, as well as incubator light
manufacturing uses, which provide jobs for
local residents.
Special areas within the State Street mixed-use
neighborhood include:
Hemet Stock Farm A prominent future
development site within the Downtown District Hemet’s Stock Farm, located on Devonshire Avenue, provides
is the Hemet Stock Farm. W. F. Whittier, one of both historic character and adaptive reuse potential.
Hemet’s founding fathers, built the Hemet
         C   I   T Y      O  F    H   E  M E   T    G    E  N  E  R  A L      P L A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                        2-52

              LAND USE
                                      Stock Farm to satisfy his passion for trotting races. A cottage originally built
                                      in 1888 as a bunkhouse near Park Hill is located on the property along with
                                      a half-mile race track. In the mid-1890s, the bunkhouse was relocated to
                                      Latham Avenue, and then to the Stock Farm in 1909 where a wide porch
                                      was added and the building converted to an office and later a manager’s
                                      cottage. As of 2010, the cottage is the oldest building in the Hemet.
                                      The City seeks to build on the Hemet Stock Farm’s character and history to
                                      create an exceptional mixed-use project. The site’s history should guide its
Higher density residential housing    future redevelopment into a mixed-use development that both preserves its
can be accommodated near the          historical integrity and complements downtown.
planned Metrolink station near
Oakland Avenue.
                                      High Density Transit-Oriented Development The City will work with
                                      Southern California Regional Rail Authority (SCRRA), Riverside County
                                      Transportation Commission (RCTC), and others to define the future
                                      Metrolink station as a new destination in Hemet. The Metrolink station
                                      should become a multi-modal hub surrounded by high density residential
                                      and mixed-use projects located within a quarter-mile walking distance of the
                                      station site. Higher buildings of up to four stories and increased residential
                                      densities could be supported in areas within walking distance of the future
                                      Metrolink station.
                                      The City also supports the concept of a pedestrian link along the rail line in
                                      the Downtown District area. The future Metrolink station could be linked
                                      to the historic downtown core by way of an attractive and inviting greenbelt
A greenbelt paralleling the train     providing both practical mobility and visual interest.
tracks would provide bicycle and
pedestrian access to and from the
future Metrolink station              Hemet Medical Centre Complex
                                      Expanding the Hemet Valley Medical Center and adding supporting uses,
                                      such as medical office space, will help the Center to keep up with
                                      population growth expected within the region. The City seeks to maintain
                                      and expand the medical campus complex based along St. John’s Place and
                                      Latham Avenue through to San Jacinto Avenue. Proximity to the Hemet
                                      Valley Medical Center is an asset that all new development in this area could
                                      build upon. Improving through circulation in the area by the extension of
                                      Devonshire Avenue will also enhance the potential for new development in
                                      the area.
                                      State Street Business Park
The Hemet Valley Medical Center is
                                      Currently, the area north of the State Street mixed-use area, south of
the only medical center in the San    Esplanade, and on both sides of State Street is being used for industrial
Jacinto Valley.                       purposes. The area is geographically distinct from the adjoining
                                      neighborhoods and districts because the San Jacinto Fault lies along the
                                      southern boundary with the result that this area is 20–30 feet lower than its
                                      southerly neighbors. As the northerly gateway to the City of Hemet, the
                                      area is underutilized and lacks attractive design elements and identity. The
                                      long term vision for this area is that it transitions to clean industrial,
                                      business park uses within a landscaped framework, particularly along State
                                      Street. Distinctive entry monumentation and signage should be provided at
                                      the State Street and Esplanade Avenue intersection.
            C   I  T Y        O   F H  E   M  E   T     G    E  N E R   A L      P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                            2-53

                                                                                    LAND USE
Downtown Residential Neighborhoods
Historically, the Gilbert Street, Franklin Street, and Kimball Avenue
neighborhoods have complemented Hemet’s downtown core by housing
residents who worked or shopped in the core area. The neighborhoods’
history has shaped its current land uses, and due to its proximity to and
symbiotic relationship with the core area, this historic integrity should be
maintained and enhanced where neighborhoods are stable and well
maintained. Development of infill lots in this area should be of a
compatible scale and density to the surrounding neighborhoods.
2.9.2          WEST FLORIDA CORRIDOR DISTRICT
Issues and Opportunities
Florida Avenue is the most important road in Hemet, both
historically and today. It is both the principal east-west
circulation route through Hemet, and the City’s primary
commercial corridor. Although other east-west roadways
provide routes through the City, most of these routes are
disconnected and none provides access to local businesses as
efficiently as Florida Avenue. Buildings along Florida Avenue
today are uneven and irregular, and much vacant land remains
between developed parcels, despite the tremendous growth           Development along Florida Avenue today appears
Hemet has experienced in recent decades. As a result, Florida      haphazard, characterized by a variety of uses
Avenue fails to communicate a unified, clear, and distinct         incompatible with a major state highway and busy
community identity to visitors. In addition, while historically    commercial corridor.
Florida Avenue was attractively lined with Palm trees, these
have been removed over the years and no consistent street tree
theme is present.
Florida Avenue is also a state highway (SR 74), and an important regional
transportation corridor connecting Hemet to other communities in
southern California and beyond. The road is designed to carry high levels of
through traffic, as well as to provide access to shopping and facilities of
regional importance. Hemet residents need viable alternatives for east-west
travel through the Planning Area beyond Florida Avenue. Acacia Avenue
and Devonshire Avenue can provide alternative through routes, while
Florida Avenue can continue to serve as the principal access route for
Hemet businesses.
         C   I  T Y    O  F    H   E  M  E  T    G    E  N   E  R  A L     P   L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                     2-54

 LAND USE
              Land Use Considerations
              Florida Avenue will continue to provide retail and office uses in the
              foreseeable future with industrial and service providers focusing along
              Acacia Avenue. An area of change however, will be the gradual
              transitioning of smaller mobile home parks within the corridor to higher
              intensity residential uses such as condominiums and apartments. The City
              encourages this transition and has included an implementation program to
              change the zoning code to address the appropriate transition of mobile
              home parks within the Florida-Acacia-Devonshire Corridor. Florida
              Avenue also has a number of large parcels or existing “big box” stores than
              continue to be sites for regional retail or entertainment uses and need to be
              developed or retained for their “highest and best use”.
              Portions of the West Florida Corridor District are located within Area III
              and the Transition Area of the Hemet-Ryan Airport Land Use Plan, as
              shown in Figure 2.6a and discussed in more detail in Section 2.10. Land Use
              Policies 10-1 through 10-5 further address potential land use constraints
              related to the Airport.
              2.9.3         DIAMOND VALLEY LAKE DISTRICT
              Consisting of approximately 23+ square miles, the Diamond Valley Lake
              District is one of the largest districts within the City’s Planning Area and
              serves as the City’s primary focal point for open space and recreation
              centered activities. Almost all of the land area within the District is under
              the ownership of Metropolitan Water District (MWD).
              The centerpiece of the district is Diamond Valley Lake itself. Diamond
              Valley Lake can hold 800,000 acre-feet of water, or roughly 260 billion
              gallons, making the lake the largest reservoir in southern California. Its
              capacity is more than six times that of Lake Perris (124,000 acre feet).The
              construction of Diamond Valley Lake's West Dam, East Dam, and Saddle
              Dam represents the largest earthwork project in the history of the United
              States, involving over 40 million cubic yards of foundation excavation and
              110 million cubic yards of embankment construction. One of the unique
              characteristics of Diamond Valley Lake is the fact that the lake’s surface is
              elevated over 200 feet above the surrounding land. Bracketing both the east
              and west sides of the lake are lands owned by MWD. The Diamond Valley
              Lake East End Planning Area (within City limits), is home to the Western
              Science Museum, the world’s first Leadership in Energy and Environmental
              Design (LEED) Platinum-certified museum.
              Issues and Opportunities
              As the west and east Diamond Valley Lake Planning Areas are primarily
              owned by the MWD, any future activity will have to be done through a
              cooperative effort involving MWD, the City of Hemet, Valley Wide
              Recreation and Park District, and private enterprises. At present, the MWD
              Board has indicated that although MWD will participate in the development
              process, the actual development of the MWD-owned areas would be done
              through private investment.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T    G    E  N  E R   A L      P  L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                                   2-55

                                                                                     LAND USE
A major issue facing the east side planning areas is the fact that most of the
DVL site was used for excavation and fill activities during lake construction
resulting in the need to overexcavate and recompact any area (sometimes to
a depth of over 40 feet) where new structures are proposed. Due to the
costs of overexcavation, it is anticipated that much of the east side area will
be given to primarily recreational uses with retail and educational/museum
facilities occupying the edges.
MWD also owns property north of Domenigoni Parkway both along State
Street and Warren Road. The Warren Road properties are located in the
Page Ranch District. Originally, these properties were purchased by MWD
for purposes associated with flood retention capabilities. Subsequent
activities, however, such as locating the flood control basin further to the
south, have removed the need to use the parcels for flood retention.
Consequently, MWD has initiated preliminary planning studies to identify
alternative uses for their properties that focus on provision of a sustainable
campus business park with research and development facilities as well as
educational facilities that promote sustainability and renewable energy. One
of the primary issues associated with evolving changes to land uses is the
fact that the General Plan designates these two property areas primarily for
residential uses which may be contrary to the long term plans being
contemplated by MWD. The City of Hemet recognizes this issue and
contemplates changes by MWD to land uses and has included portions of
these properties within Mixed Use Areas #4 and #5 (see Section 2.5 for
discussion of these areas). A future amendment to the General Plan for the
MWD owned properties north of Domenigoni Parkway would be in
keeping with the overall goals and vision of the General Plan if the
following were to occur:
     The change of land uses results in development of truly sustainable
     uses such as a business park focusing on renewable energy and which
     would be comprehensively developed to include items such as internal
     transportation opportunities, provision of educational facilities, and a
     balance of public as well as private business opportunities.
     The change of land uses provides for jobs which in turn, would reduce
     vehicle miles travelled as residents will not have to leave the valley for
     employment and result in an overall reduction in traffic generation.
     This in turn will result in reduced vehicular emissions and further the
     City’s goal of reducing greenhouse gases.
Land Use
The Diamond Valley Lake District has five distinct areas described as
follows:
     Diamond Valley Lake West Located between Winchester Road and
     the West Dam face, the 1,100-plus acre area could serve as a regional
     destination for both passive and active recreation uses. One of the
     primary restrictions in this area is the lack of direct access to the lake,
     which limits lake related activities such as boating and fishing.
     Conversely, SR 79 is immediately adjacent to Diamond Valley Lake
     West, which could attract users that rely on regional access such as
          C  I T Y       O  F    H   E   M  E   T    G   E  N  E  R   A L     P  L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                        2-56

 LAND USE
                   camping or a water park. MWD is also currently exploring the potential
                   of a solar power facility and development of other renewable energy
                   resources and sustainable tourism at this location.
                   Diamond Valley Lake East Located within City boundaries between
                   State Street and the East Dam face, 538 acres of this 1,300+ acre area is
                   currently shown for recreational development under an existing specific
                   plan (Diamond Valley Lake Park Specific Plan SP02-001). Anchored by
                   the Western Science Center, MWD’s Diamond Valley Lake Visitor’s
                   Center and the Diamond Valley Lake Regional Park, the area will
                   provide regional recreation uses such as ball fields, educational facilities,
                   hiking, camping, equestrian trails, aquatic center, and lake marina.
                   MWD also has leased portions of the existing facilities to the Western
                   Center Academy Charter School, and is exploring possibilities to
                   expand educational facilities and establish a research based institute
                   focused on renewable energy and water conservation technologies.
                   Alamar Mesa This 7.5 acre enclave is the only residential area within
                   the district and is characterized by rural estates providing equestrian
                   and animal husbandry uses. No further expansion of the area is
                   anticipated as all surrounding properties are within permanent open
                   space / habitat areas.
                   Open Space/Lake The majority of the Diamond Valley Lake District
                   is utilized by MWD for water storage with the surrounding hills set
                   aside as permanent open space / habitat conservation area. The lake
                   offers recreational opportunities such as fishing and boating while the
                   surrounding open space area is served by an existing trail network
                   accessible to hikers and mountain bikes. Equestrian uses are limited to
                   the existing trail north of the lake on the other side of the ridgeline and
                   adjacent to Domenigoni Parkway.
                                                                               McSweeny
                                                                               Ranch
                    Alamar Mesa
                                                                             Diamond
                                                                             Valley Lake
                                                                             East
             Diamond
             Valley Lake
             West
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G   E  N   E  R  A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   2-57

                                                                                     LAND USE
     McSweeny Ranch Specific Plan Area MWD purchased the 740 acre
     McSweeny Ranch Specific Plan property to provide flood control
     facilities associated with construction of Diamond Valley Lake.
     However, no change to the McSweeny Ranch Specific Plan was ever
     initiated by MWD; the property is still governed by the Specific Plan
     provisions and provides primarily for single family residential uses. An
     alternative land use proposal for this site is an environmental campus
     and/or business park focusing on sustainable and renewable energy,
     educational facilities, and incidental retail/commercial support services.
     Such an alternative will require an amendment to the Specific Plan and
     General Plan. MWD is currently in the process of preparing plans for a
     solar energy project that would encompass approximately 200 acres in
     the northern portion of the McSweeny Ranch Property. Future
     development plans may include a sustainable campus and clean
     technology business park which would encompass an additional 400
     acres, with the remaining approximately 150 acres devoted to open
     space and recreation.
Future Development
Development of the east and west side planning areas shall be done
through a specific plan. Currently, a specific plan has been approved for the
east side planning area. However, the City anticipates that changes to the
plan will be made in the future. Additionally, any development in the
McSweeny Ranch area contrary to the existing specific plan would require
either a specific plan amendment or preparation of a new specific plan in
lieu of the existing McSweeny Ranch plan. In preparing the specific plans,
General Plan considerations should include items such as:
     land uses that are compatible with and enhance the areas’ existing
     museum complex, science based charter school and recreation facilities;
     integration of the planning area with the City’s and County’s regional
     and local trail systems through connections and continuation of trails
     through the project area;
     provision of ancillary services such as restaurants, hotels, coffee shops,
     specialty retail, and similar hospitality uses which provides for the daily
     and short term needs of visitors;
     optimizing sustainable concepts such as green streets, use of alternative
     energy such as solar and use of recycled water and alternative modes of
     transportation; and
     consistency of design themes throughout the area and within the public
     right of way, with a special focus on wayfinding signs and streetscape
     landscaping.
2.9.4           WEST HEMET DISTRICT
The West Hemet area is located at the west end of the planning area, north
of Diamond Valley Lake, west of the Hemet-Ryan Airport and south of
Florida Avenue as shown in Figures 2.3 and 2.5. Today, the West Hemet
          C   I  T Y     O   F    H   E  M    E  T   G   E  N  E   R  A L     P  L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                        2-58

                                                                   Aqu
                                                                       edu
                                                                           ct
ide
                                                                  iego
                                                                 San
 y
                                                                     D
                                    1du/                1du/
                                    2.5 ac              2.5 ac
                                                                            LEGEND
                                                                                   Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                   Planning Area
                                                                                   Metrolink Station
                                                                                   SR79 Realignment
                                                                                   Street
                                                                                   Railroad
                                                                                   Creek/Canal
                                                                                   River/Lake
                                                                                  Areas subject to MSHCP criteria
                                                                            Land Use Designations
                                                                                   Hillside Residential
                                                                                   Rural Residential
                                                                                   Low Density Residential
                                                                                   Low Medium Density Residential
                                                                                   Medium Density Residential
                                                                                   Neighborhood Commercial
                                                                                   Community Commercial
                                                                                   Mixed Use
                                                                                   Industrial
                                                                                   Business Park
                                                                                         Lake
                                                                                 ValleyFacilities
                                                                         DiamondPublic
                                                                                   Open Space
      DIAMOND
  X06268298.11 083 VALLEY
                   1/24/2012
                                                                                   Interim Airport Overlay Zone
             WEST
                   Sources:
                   Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                   ESRI 2010
                                                                                              F i g u r e         2 . 5
                   1,500 750   0    1,500    3,000                                  WEST HEMET PLAN
                                                 Feet
                                                                   H e m e t         G e n e r a l           P l a n
                                                                                  LAND USE
area can be generally characterized as sparsely populated and rural. The size
of West Hemet along with the relocation of SR 79 offers the City the
opportunity to comprehensively plan a new community within the San
Jacinto Valley that will complement present development in the City; meet
the retail, office and manufacturing needs of the community; add new jobs
and contribute to the City’s economic foundation. Although much of West
Hemet is currently under the County’s jurisdiction, planning for the future
of this area can encourage development that reflects the City’s vision for
the future and promotes logical and orderly development. By taking a
proactive planning approach, Hemet is positioning itself, and West Hemet
in particular, to be a vibrant area featuring attractive new residential
communities, mixed-use activity centers, and unparalleled retail and
employment opportunities.
Development Context
There are several major factors that influence the future development of
West Hemet and the surrounding areas as noted below:
    SR 79 Highway Realignment RCTC and Caltrans are in the process
    of planning and designing the realignment of SR 79 between Gilman
    Springs Road and Domenigoni Parkway. The SR 79 realignment will
    provide a more direct north-south route for through traffic, improve
    mobility on local streets and expedite the movement of goods and
    people within the San Jacinto Valley. The Burlington Northern and
    Santa Fe (formerly Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe) railroad that
    traverses West Hemet also serves to guide land uses and is an
    important link to the City and region. This rail line is anticipated to
    support the addition of Metrolink service to West Hemet in the future
    as well as further east to the City’s Downtown.
    Hemet-Ryan Airport The Hemet-Ryan Airport safety zones and the
    potential for a runway extension also influenced the creation of the
    West Hemet land use plan. The airport can also present an opportunity
    to integrate the surrounding area as a business district. Safety zones
    surrounding airports are established by the Riverside County Airport
    Land Use Commission based upon regulations and guidelines of the
    California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), Division of
    Aeronautics and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), to limit
    land uses and the size of new construction near airports. The safety
    zones considered in the creation of the existing 1992 Airport Land Use
    Plan (ALUP) are based on a proposed runway extension at the airport.
    However, the 2011 Draft Airport Master Plan does not propose a
    specific runway extension at this time. The Airport Land Use
    commission is also commencing the process of updating the 1992
    ALUP. At present, much of the West Hemet District is within Areas I
    and II of the ALUP, and as such certain land uses are limited, as shown
    in Table 2.5 of this Element. Until the new Airport Land Use Plan is
    adopted by the Airport Land Use Commission, an Interim Airport
    Overlay has been established for portions of the West Hemet District
    as well as other similar undeveloped properties in Areas I and II of the
    Airport Land Use Plan (per Figure 2.6a) that may be incompatible with
    the 1992 ALUP. For example, at present, the 1992 ALUP restricts
         C   I  T Y     O   F    H   E   M E T    G   E  N  E  R   A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                     2-60

 LAND USE
                residential development in Areas I and II to one du/2.5 acres. Land
                Use Element Policy LU-10-4 addresses uses allowed in the Interim
                Airport Overlay. At such time as the new Airport Land Use Plan is
                adopted, the City will update the General Plan for consistency and
                remove the Interim Airport Overlay.
                Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan Development in West
                Hemet is also constrained by the Western Riverside County MSHCP.
                The MSHCP is a comprehensive, multi-jurisdictional effort that
                includes the County and fourteen cities. Rather than providing habitat
                mitigation for endangered species on a case-by-case basis, the MSHCP
                focuses on the conservation of 146 species throughout western
                Riverside County. The MSHCP consists of a reserve system of
                approximately 500,000 acres; of which approximately 347,000 acres are
                currently within public ownership, and 153,000 acres are currently in
                private ownership. The reserve system is broken down into criteria
                cells, 160-acre areas with specifically designated conservation criteria. In
                the Hemet Planning Area, the habitat reserve system consists primarily
                of vernal pool communities, which provide habitat for the federally
                threatened vernal pool fairy shrimp (Branchinecta lynchi); federally
                endangered San Diego fairy shrimp (Branchinecta sandiegonensis); and the
                federally endangered Riverside fairy shrimp (Streptocephalus woottoni).
                Vernal pools are seasonally flooded depressions with an impermeable
                layer that allows the pools to retain water much longer than the
                surrounding lands. Vernal pools often fill and empty several times
                during the rainy season.
                Part of the habitat reserve system lies within portions of West Hemet
                (see Figure 2.1) and any future development within a reserve must be
                consistent with the conservation requirements of the MSHCP.
                Development proposals outside of criteria cells will also be evaluated
                for MSHCP consistency as the MSHCP contains requirements that are
                applicable to proposed projects whether or not they are within criteria
                cells. A portion of the land in the West Hemet Planning Area lies
                within the 1,600 acre MSHCP-defined criteria cells. Within these cells,
                the City may not achieve the full development potential of the land use
                designations shown on the Land Use Map, as portions of the cell will
                be maintained as open space to comply with the MSHCP habitat
                conservation efforts. Under current MSHCP criteria, approximately 70-
                80 percent of the total 1,600 acres will need to be conserved
                representing approximately 1,100 acres of land. This amount could be
                reduced through a criteria refinement, a process which permits a
                refinement of the MSHCP criteria and acreage through development of
                alternatives such as improving drainage flows to rehydrate the vernal
                pool complex. Under this scenario, habitat quality could actually
                improve, promoting MSHCP objectives of endangered species
                preservation while freeing marginal habitat lands for other uses such as
                commercial or business park opportunities.
                Existing Rail Line The existing San Jacinto Branch rail line traverses
                the area from west to east and is planned by RCTC as a future
                commuter rail line. The line has also been used for limited industrial
C I T Y O F H E M   E   T    G   E  N  E   R  A L       P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                2-61
                                                                                   LAND USE
     and rail activity. As rail activity increases, the issue of at-grade rail
     crossings and the need for grade-separated street crossings at key
     intersections will be a major consideration for future development.
     Hydrology and Drainage A large portion of the West Hemet Area is
     currently within the 100 year flood plain, and the existing Salt Creek
     drainage channel is located in the southern portion of the district. An
     updated storm water management plan and drainage infrastructure
     systems will be needed to remove development areas from the flood
     plain.
     Infrastructure and Services There is a lack of existing infrastructure
     within the West Hemet District and a comprehensive infrastructure and
     community facilities plan will need to be developed to properly serve
     new development. An equitable funding mechanism will also need to
     be put into place to ensure a “fair share” distribution of the costs of
     new infrastructure and services to new development.
West Hemet Development Strategies
Proactive planning by the City will ensure that development in West Hemet
adheres to the City’s vision and occurs in an orderly manner with
infrastructure and public services provided to adequately support
development.
In 2010, the City of Hemet was chosen by the Urban Land Institute Edge
Development Initiative Council as a case study for development on the
City’s western edge (ULI, October, 2010). Essentially, the purpose of the
study was to analyze rapidly growing cities such as Hemet and explore how
development at the City’s edge affects factors such as urban sprawl, loss of
open space and loss of identity. While the study is a separate document and
encompassed more land area than that indentified as the West Hemet
District in Figures 2.3 and 2.5, there are several goals identified within the
study that have been used by the City as overarching development goals for
the west end. They are:
     Promote the proposed development of a realigned SR 79 as a
     significant opportunity to attract new businesses and jobs.
     Provide a better balance of jobs and housing to help build a stronger,
     healthier City economy.
     Create a unique identity for West Hemet and the City.
     Annex unincorporated land around the proposed SR 79 realignment to
     maintain and control the City’s edge, entrance and job appeal.
     Capture the synergy of regional transportation facilities such as the
     future SR 79, commuter rail, and the airport to create regional serving
     commercial, office and industrial uses.
     Protect existing residential areas and associated lifestyles by making
     sure new development is complimentary.
         C   I  T Y      O  F    H   E   M E   T    G   E  N  E   R A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                       2-62

            LAND USE
                                         Initiate a Criteria Refinement process to identify potential development
                                         potential within the west end area
                                         Update the City’s Master Drainage Plan to address the unique drainage
                                         and habitat characteristics with the area.
                                    Future development in West Hemet will occur in the context of specific
                                    physical constraints. Foremost are the realignment of SR 79, the presence
                                    of steep hillside areas, the railroad that bisects the area in the south, and
                                    proximity to the Hemet-Ryan Airport.
                                    Improved access to West Hemet due to the realignment of SR 79,
                                    availability of large vacant parcels, and recreation potential associated with
                                    Diamond Valley Lake make West Hemet an ideal location for future
                                    development. However, West Hemet also includes valuable habitat
                                    resources that must be conserved and existing communities that must be
                                    respected. The following concepts provide a foundation for the City’s
                                    strategy to ensure the orderly development of quality communities.
                                    Create a Unique Place
                                    The land use plan for West Hemet strives to create a unique place that
                                    maintains the character of Hemet, yet differentiates West Hemet from
                                    other newly built, traditional suburban communities in southern California.
                                    The City will work to maintain high quality design and property
                                    maintenance standards that encourage owner satisfaction and community
                                    pride, inspiring ongoing concern and care for the community. Creating a
                                    new community, as opposed to merely providing additional housing and
                                    businesses, will require such amenities as parks, recreational services,
                                    educational facilities, and open spaces for residents to enjoy. Additionally,
                                    the City recognizes that the form and function of new developments in
                                    West Hemet will be inherently different than within the established City and
                                    will need to accommodate a broad range of land uses.
                                    To ensure that development occurs in an orderly manner, major
                                    developments should occur within the context of an overall community
                                    plan or specific plans. Using specific plans provides the right balance of
                                    City and developer involvement in major projects to ensure that all parties’
                                    goals are met, while allowing the majority of land to develop in response to
                                    market trends. Planning for West Hemet will also encourage creation of
                                    cultural and recreational resources that are unique to Hemet and that
                                    benefit from close proximity to Diamond Valley Lake and other nearby
                                    attractions. Establishing West Hemet as a destination and a job center will
                                    contribute to the City’s economic development goals and provide expanded
                                    opportunities for Hemet residents and businesses.
                                    Establish a Complementary Mix of Land Uses
Commercial uses in West Hemet       Planning for West Hemet should stress the importance of establishing
will expand retail and employment   neighborhoods that balance the need for a diverse range of retail centers,
opportunities and complement land
uses in other Hemet activity
                                    mixed-use projects, business parks, industrial uses , offices and housing
centers.                            with a viable economy that sustains the area’s tax and jobs base. In West
                                    Hemet, residential, commercial, and employment-creating land uses will be
                                    balanced to establish a sustainable economic foundation characterized by
           C   I  T Y      O F    H  E   M   E   T    G   E   N  E R  A L      P   L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                         2-63

                                                                                    LAND USE
solid financial resources, multiple employment opportunities, and a
diversified tax base.
A major component of the West Hemet area is the proposed business park
complex shown on both sides of the future SR 79 and north of Salt Creek.
It is anticipated that concurrent with the development of the realigned SR
79, the business park will evolve over time to provide service sector jobs,
clean technology industries, manufacturing opportunities, and ancillary
support services for not only Hemet but much of southwestern Riverside
County. Development of the business park will help bring Hemet’s job to
housing balance ratio in line with the southern California average as well as
help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by locating jobs closer to residents
thereby reducing vehicular emissions.
The new alignment of SR 79 and proximity to Diamond Valley Lake
present tremendous opportunities for new development in West Hemet. To
leverage these opportunities while protecting residents from noise and
increased activity levels associated with transportation, new developments
must establish land uses compatible with and complementary to SR 79.
Protect Natural Resources
The large scale of development that may occur in West Hemet over the
next 10 to 20 years compels the City to carefully consider potential effects
on natural resources from the construction and occupation of Hemet’s
newest communities. To protect the area’s natural resources, the City will
ensure that sensitive habitat areas are protected, habitat connectivity is
preserved, and habitat areas are used and preserved as scenic resources to
the extent feasible. In areas of high scenic value, such as hillsides, land use
designations will accommodate some development while also preserving
scenic resources and ensuring safety for new developments.
To help conserve energy resources, green building design, construction and          Pedestrian walkways and
operation techniques will be used during construction and through the life          access points facilitate easy
of West Hemet developments. Green building design includes use of                   and safe walks to neighboring
building materials and methods that promote resource conservation and               development without
energy efficiency, particularly alternative energy solutions.                       automobiles.
Encourage Alternatives to Driving
Land use planning and circulation planning must be coordinated. West
Hemet developments will be designed to provide adequate automobile
circulation as well as alternatives to driving. Many newly built communities
in southern California focus on getting residents and visitors in and out of
the area in their cars. In West Hemet, new developments will create
connections between land uses that also make alternatives to the
automobile safe and attractive. Community designs should encourage both
pedestrian and bicycle use.
Traveling within the community on bikes, by walking or taking public
transportation will become attractive, safe, and economical options for
residents and visitors. In areas with a large number of residents or visitors,
increased levels of traffic control strategies must be established to ensure
that that car traffic does not become unmanageable. The City’s strategy will
         C   I  T Y     O   F     H   E  M   E T     G   E  N E   R  A L      P L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                        2-64

          LAND USE
                                      be to locate higher intensity uses, such as higher density residential uses and
                                      commercial and employment activity centers, around major transportation
                                      nodes, such as SR 79, a future Metrolink station in West Hemet, and transit
                                      routes. This strategy allows access to these uses, minimizes disruptions to
                                      the local circulation system, and makes auto travel alternatives practical.
                                      Achieve Balance with Other Parts of Hemet
                                      The vision and plan for West Hemet does not create competition for
                                      properties in other parts of Hemet such as downtown. The land uses and
                                      character of the area south of Florida Avenue will differ from other parts of
                                      Hemet, as it will be more urban in nature than most parts of the City. West
                                      Hemet has the available land to accommodate uses that are not appropriate
                                      downtown, such as major commercial activity centers and employment-
                                      generating business parks that may not fit in size or character within
                                      downtown.
                                      West Hemet Land Use Plan Features
                                      Specific strategies and recommendations for the West Hemet area are
                                      incorporated into the goals, policies and implementation programs for the
                                      West Hemet area. The overall land use plan for West Hemet sets a
                                      framework for orderly and fiscally responsible development that avoids the
                                      haphazard development patterns present in many developing communities.
                                      The plan was created through a collaborative process involving
                                      stakeholders, property owners, and City leaders. The end-goal for this
                                      collaboration was not to develop for development’s sake, but rather to
                                      create a community that balances the need for economic development,
                                      through sales tax revenue and job generation, and creates a variety of
                                      housing opportunities. The circulation plan for this area was formulated in
                                      tandem with the land use plan to ensure that circulation infrastructure is
                                      able to support the proposed level of development.
                                      Business Park
                                      The business park complex will include corporate and general business
                                      offices, medical uses, technical and trade schools, research and
                                      development, e-commerce, new clean technologies, and light
                                      manufacturing. Ancillary support commercial uses, restaurants, and
                                      hospitality uses intended to serve the business community may also be
                                      permitted. The City will need to identify and encourage industrial uses that
                                      are not dependent on the proximity to a major freeway, such as the
                                      distribution uses that existing along I-215. Exploring a business niche
                                      opportunity will assist in creating an image and identity for Hemet that will
                                      distinguish it from other sub-regions.
                                      The business park complex will focus on providing high end employment
                                      opportunities, especially in emerging technologies such as solar and
                                      alternative energy in a campus like setting. Central to the business park
Mixed-use development should          concept is the integration of all land uses along a comprehensive trail
support a street-oriented pattern,    network serving pedestrians and bicyclists which serves not only to facilitate
with buildings sited at or near the
sidewalk edge.                        alternative modes of transportation, such as the Metrolink, transit and
                                      NEV’s, but also to encourage recreational opportunities such as walking
                                      during lunch time.
         C   I  T Y       O   F     H  E   M  E   T     G   E  N  E  R  A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                           2-65

                                                                                   LAND USE
A critical factor to the business park’s success is the eventual construction
of the realigned SR 79 and interchange at Stetson Road. As the business
park develops, the circulation pattern will evolve to facilitate access to and
from SR 79 as well as taking advantage to rail access which traverses the
complex, and the potential for a West Hemet Metrolink train station.
Mixed Use
There are three mixed uses nodes in West Hemet, Mixed Use #2 and
Mixed Use #3 and the southerly portion of Mixed Use #1, as discussed in
more detail in Section 2.5 of this element. The mixed-use areas in West
Hemet will create activity centers for regional retail, office and
entertainment uses, supported by medium- to high-density residential
development. Such development is intended to facilitate groupings of retail,
entertainment, and office uses along with residential development, public
gathering spaces, and other community amenities. Key considerations
include high-quality pedestrian-oriented design, incorporation of
community open spaces, innovative housing options, and ease of access
from major highways, freeways and alternative transportation modes.
Successful completion of high-quality mixed-use projects will assist the City
in accomplishing multiple land use and economic development objectives.
A key component will also be the potential for a Metrolink station and
transit oriented development in the West Hemet area.
Residential
As shown in Figure 2.5, the planned residential land uses range in density
and character from Hillside Residential and Rural Residential to Multifamily
Residential associated with the mixed-use areas of the plan. In order to
preserve the character and quality of life that exists in the low density
residential and rural areas of the plan, landscaped buffers and setbacks will
need to be created where these areas are adjacent to more intense land uses.
The development of the Highway 79 alignment through West Hemet will
also change the character of the area, and new residential development
should be separated from this major transportation facility.
Commercial and Institutional
In addition to retail areas within the mixed use nodes, community
commercial uses are identified in the land use plan for West Hemet. To
establish a strong commercial and employment base include growth
industries such as health care, environmental services, computer technology
and education facilities. Increasing the education potential and
opportunities for residents in the area will have a direct benefit on the
community’s economic well-being. Higher education and vocational
schools such as nursing, environmental and clean technology specialists and
professional support services are also desirable.
Recreation and Leisure
Natural features and open space such as trails and other linkages for bikes
and pedestrians should be woven throughout future development in the
area, linking commercial, office, industrial, residential and recreational
facilities. The Salt Creek Channel provides an excellent opportunity for a
multi-use trail and serves as a visual buffer adjacent to new development.
As more detailed specific plans are developed, sites also need to be reserved
          C  I T Y      O  F     H  E  M   E  T     G   E  N  E   R  A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                       2-66

           LAND USE
                                      for public open spaces and plazas, creating opportunities for the
                                      community to gather and socialize. Wherever possible, open space should
                                      be preserved and enhanced and used to define the edges of the West Hemet
                                      District from other communities.
                                      West Hemet Circulation Plan
                                      To ensure that residents and visitors have access to West Hemet and other
                                      activity centers throughout the City, circulation system improvements and
                                      transit connectivity are key priorities. The circulation system for West
                                      Hemet was created in tandem with the land use plan and provides the
                                      backbone arterial streets needed to serve new development. The goal of the
                                      circulation plan is to accommodate potential future growth in the area and
                                      improve regional access. The most significant design feature within the
                                      Circulation Plan is the realignment of SR 79.
                                      The major north-south feature of the circulation plan is SR 79. Interchanges
                                      and activity nodes are currently proposed at Esplanade, Tres Cerritos Road,
                                      Florida, and Stetson Avenues and Domenigoni Parkway. The Florida
                                      Avenue and Stetson Avenue interchanges will provide access to proposed
                                      mixed-use and business park activity centers in these areas. Florida Avenue
                                      and future extensions of Stetson Avenue, Simpson Road, and Domenigoni
                                      Parkway form the major east-west roadways that provide access between
                                      the City center, West Hemet and areas to the west. Regional access will be
                                      improved through a proposed Metrolink station near the Stetson Avenue
                                      intersection with the existing railroad alignment. These locations will benefit
                                      from increased activity from future mixed-use, business park, and
                                      manufacturing/logistics uses and from the extension of the main runway at
                                      Hemet-Ryan Airport.
                                      2.10 H EMET -R YA N A IRPO RT
                                      Noise and safety factors resulting from airport operations and overflight
                                      patterns at the Hemet-Ryan Airport affects much of the western portion of
                                      the City. Due to the strategic role the airport plays in determining land uses,
                                      the Land Use Element provides an overview of the Hemet-Ryan Airport
                                                           and a discussion of land use policies associated with its
                                                           continued operation.
                                                           The Hemet-Ryan Airport was founded in 1940, shortly
                                                           before World War II, as a federal pilot training center
                                                           run by the Ryan School of Aeronautics. After the war,
                                                           the County assumed management of the 318-acre facility.
                                                           Today, the County-owned, public use airport covers 440
                                                           acres and is managed by the Riverside County Economic
                                                           Development Agency. The Airport primarily serves the
                                                           Cities of Hemet and San Jacinto, but also offers easy
                                                           access to the various mountain resorts around Hemet.
                                                           As a general aviation facility, Hemet-Ryan Airport
                                                            provides a base of operations for local pilots while also
Hemet-Ryan Airport is an important development              supporting a variety of recreational, medical, fire
constraint and asset located in the western portion of the suppression and business uses. Between 2011 and 2013
Planning Area
         C   I  T Y       O   F     H   E  M   E   T     G   E  N  E  R  A L      P L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                            2-67
                                                                                      LAND USE
aircraft activity at the airport is expected to increase by 25 percent from the
existing 69,500 annual flight activity to approximately 87,150 operations
annually.
The primary runway is 4,315 feet long and 100 feet wide and can                 Additional discussion, goals, and
accommodate an 80,000-pound, single wheel aircraft. The 2004 Airport            policies regarding the Hemet-Ryan
Master Plan recommends a future runway length of 5,300 feet. The existing       Airport are contained in the
Master Plan recommends a southwesterly extension which would require            Circulation and Public Safety
the relocation of both Warren Road and Stetson Avenue. The County of            Elements of the General Plan.
Riverside is currently in the process of updating the Master Plan for the
airport, (expected to be adopted in 2012) including the future runway
configuration. Although various runway extension alternatives are discussed
in the proposed 2011 Draft Airport Master Plan, the Plan does not propose
a specific runway extension at this time.
Fire and police protection for the airport is provided by the City of Hemet,
with additional fire protection assistance from the California Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE). Since 1957, CAL FIRE has
based its regional air attack base at Hemet-Ryan Airport. CAL FIRE had
been preparing to move its regional air attack base from Hemet-Ryan
Airport to March Air Reserve Base in Moreno Valley, but in early 2006
decided to remain at Hemet-Ryan with the understanding that
improvements will continue to be made at the airport to accommodate
larger aircraft. To be consistent with the existing 2004 Airport Master Plan
and ensure the future viability of Hemet-Ryan Airport, the Land Use Map
(Figure 2.1) currently assumes future runway expansion and the potential
realignment of Warren Road, Stetson Avenue, and Cawston Avenue to
accommodate the expansion. However, as noted above, the new Draft
Master Plan does not propose a specific runway extension at this time. The
decision to include this runway in the 2004 Airport Master Plan was directly
related to CAL FIRE’s needs and a previously anticipated increase in
airport activity due to future development at the airport and in the area.
While the City supports the retention of CAL FIRE at Hemet-Ryan
Airport, the need for a longer runway raised two issues which are:
     Effect on Cawston Road Alignment The extension of Cawston
     Avenue along the easterly edge of the airport is a key circulation
     component for the City. If the runway is lengthened to the west, then
     the ability to extend Cawston Avenue is maintained. However, any
     lengthening of the runway to the east could impede the City’s ability to
     extend Cawston Avenue, thereby adversely affecting citywide traffic
     circulation patterns, including Fire response from Station 4, located on
     Cawston Ave.
     Effect on existing residents The City has historically favored any
     expansion of the airport to the west of existing configurations. The
     City’s primary intent is to protect existing residents located easterly of
     the airport from adverse impacts, such as noise, that could occur if the
     runway is lengthened to the east.
These two issues, along with other potential issues associated with
expansion, require that the City work closely with the County on any future
         C   I  T Y       O  F     H   E  M  E   T    G   E  N  E  R  A L     P L  A    N    2 0 3 0
                                                         2-68

 LAND USE
              master plans for the airport. The City recognizes that the airport can and
              should have a critical and positive role for the City and supports Hemet
              Ryan Airport’s ongoing activities and desires to ensure that ongoing
              operations and expansion plans benefit all interested parties without
              adversely affecting critical transportation needs.
              2.10.1 COMPREHENSIVE AIRPORT LAND USE PLAN
              The variety of air services and separate flight paths in southern California
              require regional coordination in order to prevent confusion in flight
              patterns and to maintain safety. Potential damage to aircraft may also result
              in loss of life and property within flight paths. Aircraft noise may also affect
              residents and businesses located close to the flight path. To avoid such
              outcomes, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has established land
              use restrictions for areas surrounding airports and flight paths. To comply
              with FAA regulations, the 1992 Hemet-Ryan Airport Comprehensive Airport
              Land Use Plan was prepared by the Hemet-Ryan Sub-Committee, comprised
              of members from various departments and commissions within the City of
              Hemet and the County of Riverside. The land use plan responds to
              concerns about residential encroachment toward the airport.
              Land use policies in the 1992 ALUP are structured around four distinct
              land use compatibility areas within and surrounding the airport determined
              using the following land use compatibility criteria: intensity of use,
              residential versus non residential function, and sensitive uses that require
              special protection from aircraft related hazards. The ALUP is also based
              upon the Airport Master Plan and the runway configurations and level of
              operations. Subsequently, in 2002 the California Airport Land Use
              Handbook was adopted by the California Department of Transportation
              Division of Aeronautics and contains updated recommendations and
              practices that are not always consistent with the ALUP. The ALUC
              recognizes that the Hemet-Ryan ALUP is outdated and is in the process of
              updating it with an anticipated completion in 2013, following the expected
              adoption of the updated Airport Master Plan in 2012.
              Figure 2.6a shows the airport land use compatibility areas for Hemet-Ryan
              Airport, based upon the four land use compatibility zones set forth in the
              1992 ALUP and overlaid on the General Plan Land Use Map. The four
              zones comprise the Airport Influence Area. Figure 2.6b illustrates the
              conceptual Airport Safety Zones and permitted uses based upon the 2002
              Cal-Trans Division of Aeronautics Handbook. However, the ALUP takes
              precendence as the adopted plan by which the Riverside County Airport
              Land Use Commission makes its findings and recommendations regarding
              land use consistency. The majority of the land within the Airport Influence
              Area shown in Figure 2.6a is already developed or entitled, and therefore
              not subject to the land use restrictions. However, there are several
              undeveloped parcels located to the west and south of the airport that are
              under the ALUP, as well as certain infill parcels located to the north and
              east of the airport.
              Airport land use compatibility zones shown in Table 2.5 indicate that land
              in the highest risk area (Area 1: Extreme Risk) is limited to agricultural or
              open space development, and commercial, industrial and rural residential
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E   T     G   E  N   E  R  A L      P  L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                   2-69

                                                                                                       LAND USE
                                                             Table 2.5
                               1992 ALUC Airport Land Use Compatibility Zones
   Area I: Extreme Risk               Area II: High Risk                    Transition Area              Area III: Moderate Risk
Permitted uses:                  Permitted uses:                     Permitted uses:                   Permitted uses:
agriculture and open space        industrial, agriculture,           commercial, industrial,           wide range of uses
                                 residential (> 2.5                  manufacturing, and
                                 acres/dwelling)                     agriculture, residential single
                                                                     family
ALUC Discretionary               ALUC Discretionary                  ALUC Discretionary                ALUC Discretionary
review uses:                     review uses:                        review uses: schools or           review uses:
commercial, industrial,          commercial                          institutional uses, hazardous     Structures over 35 feet or
residential on lots of 2.5                                           materials facilities and          two stories, whichever is
ac/du or larger                                                      “places of assembly”, multi-      greater,
                                                                     family residential up to 20       Schools or Institutional uses,
                                                                     du/ac                             Hazardous materials
                                                                                                       facilities and
                                                                                                       Places of assembly
Incompatible Uses:               Incompatible Uses:                  Incompatible Uses:
Residential Uses within one      Hazardous materials                 Residential density over 20
mile from runway                 Critical facilities                 du/ac.
threshold                        Places of Assembly                  Structures over 35 feet or
Hazardous materials              Institutional uses or schools       two stories, whichever is less
Critical facilities              Residential Uses on lots less
Places of Assembly               than 2.5 ac/du
Institutional uses or
schools
Source: 1992 Hemet-Ryan Airport Comprehensive Airport Land Use Plan.
with discretionary review. As the risk associated with each area decreases,
developments of varying types, heights, and activity levels are permitted.
For example, Area III: Moderate Risk, places no limit on residential
densities but requires discretionary review for high intensity uses and places
of assembly.
New development projects that are located within the compatibility zones
will undergo various levels of City discretionary review, depending upon the
proposal. At a minimum, a Site Development Review will be required to be
approved by either the Community Development Director or Planning
Commission, and will include review of compatibility with the standards of
the Comprehensive Airport Land Use Plan and the California Airport Land
Use Planning Handbook. Any legislative proposals (General Plan
Amendments, Specific Plans, Ordinances, etc.) will be also forwarded to the
County Airport Land Use Commission for review, as will any uses listed as
ALUC Discretionary Review or Incompatible Uses in Table 2.5., per the 1992
ALUP. In addition to compliance with the Comprehensive Airport Land Use
Plan and California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook, projects may need
to prepare an Airport Compatibility Study and CEQA review for
discretionary uses, and comply with the General Plan policies regarding the
airport as contained in the Land Use, Circulation, and Public Safety elements
of this General Plan.
           C   I   T Y      O   F      H   E    M    E T      G    E    N   E  R   A L        P  L   A   N       2 0 3 0
                                                                  2-70

                                                                       California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                       Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                               Warr
                                                                                                    Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                   en R
                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lyon Ave            Palm Ave                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Menlo Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oakland Ave
                                                                                                                                                Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                     Devonshire Ave
                                                                                                                                                       Myers St                                                                                                                         Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                          Ave                                           Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                             rida
                                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                          Flo                                   Acacia Ave                                                                                                                          Acacia Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Whittier A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kirby St
                                                                                                                          Aqu                         HEMET-RYAN                                AY
                                                                                                                              edu                                                             LW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yale St
                                                                                                                                  ct                                                      RAI                                                    Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                       AIRPORT                 S      F
                                Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                           AT&
verside
                                                                                                                         iego
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Stetson Ave                                                                                     Stetson A
                                                                                                                        San
o u n t y
                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thornton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Elk St
                                                                                                                                                       Fisher St
                                                                                                                       n Ave                                                                                                                        Chambers St
                                                                                                                   tso
                                                                                                                                    Warren Rd
                                                                                                                Ste
                                                                                                                                                  Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                      RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BOWL
                                                                                   California Ave                                                                                                                                                                         State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               go
                                                                                                                                                 ky                                                                                                 ni
                                                                                                                                                P                                                                                                        Pk
                                                                                                                                              i                                                                                                            y
                                                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                      o                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                 n ig                                                                                                                                                                                                ib bel
                                                                                                                                e                                                                                                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                              om
  X06268298.11 074 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                          D
                                                                   LEGEND
                            Note: Zones subject to change based
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Girard St
                            on updates to Hemet - Ryan Airport     Airport Land Use Compatibility Zones                         General Plan Land Use Designations                          Very High Density Residential           Business Park                        Hemet City Boundary
                            Master Plan and Riverside County                 Area I (Extreme Risk)                                        Hillside Residential                              Regional Commercial                     Airport                              Street
                            Airport Land Use Plan.                           Area II (High Risk)                                          Rural Residential                                 Neighborhood Commercial                 Public Facilities                    Railroad
                    Sources:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Creek/Canal
                                                                             Transition Area                                              Low Density Residential                           Community Commercial                    School
                    Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                    Hemet Ryan Airport Comprehensive                         Area III (Moderate Risk)                                     Low Medium Density Residential                    Mixed Use                               Park                                 Metrolink Station
                    Airport Land Use Plan 1992                                Interim Airport Overlay Zone                                Medium Density Residential                        Office Professional                     Open Space                           SR79 Realignment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F i g u r e           2 . 6 a
                    ESRI 2010                                                                                                             High Density Residential                          Industrial                                                                                                         AIRPORT LAND USE
                    3,000   1,500           0          3,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             COMPATIBILITY ZONES
                                                          Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H e m e t                G e n e r a l             P l a n
                                                        LAND USE
Back of Figure 2.6a
        C  I T Y    O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                    2-72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                             California A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave         Sanderson A
                                                                                                                                                                                      Warr
                                                                                                                                                        Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                          en R
                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lyon Ave            Palm Ave                State St
      Zone 1:              Max. residential density: 0 du/ac
                           Allowed uses: uses with very low intensity nonresidential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Menlo Ave
      Runway
     Protection            character and confined to the sides and outer end of the area
        Zone               Prohibit: New structures and residential land uses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oakland Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rose Rd
      Zone 2:              Max. residential density: 1 du/10-20 ac                                                                                                                                                                          Devonshire Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Myers St
       Inner               Allowed uses: nonresidential uses that attract few people
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ave                                             Elk St
     Approach/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gilbert St
                           Prohibit: Schools, hospital/medical, meeting places, hazardous,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     da
     Departure
        Zone               labor intensive manufacturing
                  Florida Ave                                                                                         Florida Ave                                                                                            F   lori                             Acacia Ave
                           Max. residential density: 1 du/2-5 ac
      Zone 3:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mayberry Ave
        Inner              Allowed uses: very low density residential uses and low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lyon Ave
       Turning             intensity nonresidential uses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kirby St
        Zone               Prohibit: Schools, day care, hospital, nursing homes                                                                                                   Aqu                       HEMET-RYAN                               AY
                                                                                                                                                                                      edu                                                        AILW
                                                                                                                                                                                          ct                 AIRPORT                         F R                                                       Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                       Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AT&
                                   Riverside                                                                                                                                                                   5
      Zone 4:              Max. residential density: 1 du/2-5 ac                                                                                                                iego
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                       1
       Outer               Allowed uses: Very low density residential uses and low                                                                                          San
                                        C large
                                              ouday n
                                                    care,thospital,
                                                            y nursing homes
                                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sanderson Ave
     Approach/             intensity nonresidential uses
                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Thornton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Elk St
     Departure
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fisher St
                           Prohibit: Schools,
                                                                                                                                                                             Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
       Zone
                                                                                                                                                                           n                                                                                                                            Chambers St
                                                                                                                                                                       tso
                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                           Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                    Ste
                                                                                                                                 4
                           Max. residential density: 1 du/1-2 ac
      Zone 5:                                                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way
                           Allowed uses: aviation related activities, lower
      Sideline             intensity nonresidential uses
                                                                                                                                       California Ave
        Zone               Avoid: nonresidential uses as noise is a factor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D om
                           Max. residential density: no limit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e ni
      Zone 6: Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          go
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ky                                                                                              ni
                           Allowed uses: most residential and nonresidential uses
                                                                                                                                                                                                      P                                                                                                     Pk
        Traffic
                                                                                                                                                                                                    i                                                                                                             y
       Pattern             Prohibit: stadiums and high intensity uses                                                                                                                          on
                                                                                                                                                                                          ig
                                                                                                                                                                                       en
         Zone
                           Avoid: Schools, large day care, hospital, nursing homes
                                                                                                                                                                                     om
X06268298.11 075 1/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                Note: Zones subject to change based
                                on updates to Hemet - Ryan Airport    LEGEND
                                Master Plan and Riverside County
                                Airport Land Use Plan.                    Hemet City Boundary          General Plan Land Use Designations                                       Regional Commercial                          Airport
                   Sources:                                               Planning Area                      Rural Residential                                                  Neighborhood Commercial                      Quasi Public
                   Census Tiger Line Data 2005                            Street                             Low Density Residential                                            Community Commercial                         School
                   DMJM 2011
                   ESRI 2010                                              Railroad                           Low Medium Density Residential                                     Mixed Use                                    Park
                   California Airport Land Use Handbook                   Creek/Canal                        Medium Density Residential                                         Office Professional                          Open Space                                                       F i g u r e               2 . 6 b
                   3,000     1,500     0                3,000             River/Lake                         High Density Residential                                           Industrial                                                                                        AIRPORT SAFETY ZONES
                                                           Feet                                              Very High Density Residential                                      Business Park                                                                           H e m e t        G e n e r a l                  P l a n
                                                      LAND USE
            Back of Figure 2.6b
C I T Y O F   H   E  M  E   T   G  E  N E R A L P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                  2-74
 LAND USE
              State law requires that General Plans be consistent with land use
              compatibility plans established by airport land use commissions. At the time
              of writing for this General Plan, the Riverside County Airport Land Use
              Commission had not established updated compatibility zones for Hemet-
              Ryan Airport consistent with the proposed Airport Master Plan. The City
              will work with the County as it updates its airport master plan and
              coordinate with the ALUC to integrate the City’s goals for land uses and
              infrastructure surrounding the airport in balance with the ALUC’s goals of
              ongoing, safe, and efficient operation of the airport as the update process
              for the ALUP progresses. Until a new Airport Master Plan and ALUP are
              adopted, the City will use the 1992 ALUP and corresponding safety zones
              to guide future development in and around the airport. In addition, at the
              request of the ALUC, the City has included an Interim Airport Overlay
              Zone on Figure 2.6a which identifies those properties with General Plan
              land uses that may be inconsistent with the existing or updated ALUP, and
              require additional development considerations while the 1992 ALUP is
              being updated. The Interim Airport Overlay, in conjunction with Table 2.5
              and Land Use Policies LU-10.1 through LU-10.5, and Implementation
              Program LU-P-35, all work in concert to achieve consistency between the
              1992 ALUP and the City of Hemet’s 2030 General Plan. Additional policies
              related to the airport are also included in the Public Safety Element and
              include Policies PS-4.1 through PS-4.10. Once the new Airport Master Plan
              and the updated ALUP are adopted, the City will amend the General Plan
              as needed and repeal the Interim Airport Overlay designation.
              The General Plan requires that an analysis of the project’s consistency with
              the ALUP, the latest California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook, and
              relevant General Plan policies pertaining to airport safety be provided to the
              approving body to ensure consistency with adopted airport goals and
              policies. In addition, the City’s Municipal Code Article VI, Section 70-163
              can require subdivision developers to submit an airport land use
              compatibility study as a requirement of an application for vesting tentative
              maps, and policy LU-10.2 authorizes the City to require the preparation of
              an airport land use compatibility study when warranted for legislative or
              discretionary projects within the Airport Influence Area.
              In summary, the City will work with the Riverside County ALUC to update
              the airport safety zones, and protect the airport from encroaching non-
              compatible uses. In addition to this element, the Circulation Element and
              the Public Safety Element contain pertinent discussions and polices
              pertaining to the Hemet-Ryan Airport.
              2.11 E CO NOMIC D EVELOPM ENT                         AND
                       R EDEVELO PMENT
              Land use decisions and the City’s long-range economic development
              strategy are directly interrelated. This element emphasizes creation of
              business parks with employment generating land uses, proposes new
              development strategies for a number of the City’s most important
              commercial corridors, and advocates intensification of certain areas as
              mixed-use corridors. These proposals are designed to maximize the
              economic potential of untapped or underutilized resources within the City,
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E   T    G   E  N  E   R  A L     P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                  2-75

                                                                                    LAND USE
such as potential future commuter rail service, medical uses near Hemet
Valley Medical Center, and access to the SR 79 freeway. Economic
development and growth within the Planning Area is enabled by the
General Plan land use plan, and are key to achieving the long-term fiscal
objectives of the City. A strong tax and employment base will allow the City
to support a higher quality of life for its residents by providing adequate
public services and creating skilled and higher paying jobs. The
community’s value is also increased by the provision of infrastructure
improvements and the elimination of blight, which raises property values
and the overall standard of living for all residents.
Successful economic development in Hemet begins by preserving and
promoting the area's special qualities, resources, and local businesses.
Tourists and businesses alike are attracted to a community which values its
natural resources, appreciates the richness of its cultures and traditions, and
reflects an image of pride and well-being. The external image presented by
Hemet can determine the location decisions of new or relocating
businesses. Existing businesses are more likely to expand and reinvest in a
community with a positive self-image and a strong sense of civic pride,
confidence, and well-being.
Throughout the General Plan update process, residents voiced a desire to
create a stronger sense of place or a unique local identity for Hemet to keep
the City fiscally strong. A major goal of this General Plan is to create a
sense of place by promoting development of attractive new planned
communities, reinventing downtown Hemet, attracting better jobs, and
expanding commercial and recreational activities. Hemet’s location near
recreation and open space amenities can be used as a selling point to bring
tourism and a strong tax base to the City. Hemet can build on the tourism
and recreation potential offered by Diamond Valley Lake, and its scenic and
historic attributes, art and culture events, outdoor activities, and the
potential creation of convention and conference facilities to emphasize its
appeal to tourists, visitors, and new businesses and residents.
Community image also has a profound effect on economic development
activities. Beautification, revitalization and economic development must go
hand-in-hand. To ensure a coordinated, comprehensive approach to
economic growth, Hemet’s economic development activities should address
an articulated, shared vision and goals that echo the values and vision of
residents and the businesses community. The City has identified a series of
strategies to promote economic development and encourage redevelopment
investment as identified in this section and the corresponding goals, policies
and implementation programs.
2.11.1         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES
The following sections identify key components of an overall economic
development strategy for the City. Many of these concepts are also
discussed in other elements and sections within this general plan, and are
supported by goals, policies and implementation programs designed to
achieve a fiscally and economically thriving community over time.
          C  I  T Y      O   F     H   E  M  E  T     G  E  N  E  R  A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                        2-76

 LAND USE
              A.        Focus Economic Efforts
              The City needs to take a more comprehensive and strategic approach to
              economic development that can be implemented over the long term and
              should be embodied in an Economic Development Strategy. Over-arching
              themes to focus these efforts include the following:
                   Enhance the City’s image as a desirable place to live, work and play.
                   Promote employment opportunities particularly in higher paying,
                   higher skilled jobs.
                   Provide quality of life features attractive to maturing families and a
                   professional workforce such as low crime, move-up housing, and ample
                   cultural and recreational activities.
                   Promote the use of recreation, art and culture in the City’s economic
                   development efforts of marketing, branding, communication,
                   increasing the pool of educated and qualified employees, attracting the
                   creative industries, and creating an aesthetic environment for tourists
                   and potential businesses.
                   Enhance Hemet’s position relative to surrounding communities to
                   appeal to higher paying employers and more affluent and educated
                   residents.
                   Attract new retail, entertainment and dining establishments that are
                   currently underserved in Hemet and the Valley.
                   Encourage the establishment of expanded educational institutions and
                   facilities including skilled technical school opportunities.
              B.        Champion the Realignment of SR 79 and the Metrolink
                        extension to Hemet
              The realignment of SR 79 presents the City with new opportunities to
              develop uses along the freeway that encourage people to get off the road
              and visit Hemet and provides the mechanism to attract new industries. The
              City will set the tone for expected development quality through its
              encouragement of desired uses and businesses along SR 79. The extension
              of the Perris Valley Metrolink line into Hemet will be a valuable
              transportation link with other communities and allow Hemet to be a
              destination as well as encouraging an efficient commuter option for
              residents and employees.
              C.        Retain and Expand Hemet’s Employment Base
              The prosperity of Hemet’s business community is of paramount
              importance to the future economic well-being of the City. Retention and
              expansion efforts should focus on industries such as manufacturing and
              targeted industry clusters, which provide higher wages and better benefits
              such as health care, professional services and new technology. The City, in
              coordination with economic development agencies in the Valley, will
              proceed with proactive programs that foster the retention and expansion of
              existing successful enterprises in the community.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T     G   E  N   E  R   A L      P L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                    2-77

                                                                                  LAND USE
Health care facilities in Hemet are an important source of employment for
area residents. Demand in the health care industry is expected to grow and
can benefit Hemet through state-of-the-art medical services and a variety of
well-paid professional jobs. As a result of increased medical services
demand, the employment outlook for medical personnel is excellent. This
increased demand can benefit Hemet, as average earnings of most
nonsupervisory health care workers are generally higher than those in other
professions.
D.       Attract New Businesses that Benefit Hemet
Attracting and retaining businesses is only a first step to securing Hemet’s
economic stability. The City will also need to prioritize attracting new
businesses that benefit the City through revenue generation and job
creation, as well as businesses that will help diversify the City’s tax base.
Attracting businesses that offer higher-wage jobs with benefits and training
potential will create a skilled, well-paid population base, strengthen the
City’s overall economic health, and improve Hemet’s quality of life.
Economic diversification creates a broader tax base to position Hemet with
long-term benefits and economic stability, and it can also help reduce retail
leakage.
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) released its
Economic Recovery and Job Creation Strategy (May, 2011) which identified
key job growth industries for Riverside County. Job growth in the area is
projected to occur primarily in the following industries:
     Healthcare Services
     Green Technology/Renewable Energy
     Leisure and Hospitality
     Manufacturing
     Construction
     Transportation and Logistics
     Agriculture/Organic Foods
In addition to the potential for these industries in Hemet, the City has a
successful base of service industries, financial institutions, government
services, auto sales, and general retail businesses that can be further
expanded and diversified to serve the population of the City and
surrounding areas. Continuing to pursue new retail businesses to meet the
demand and expanding the City’s retail position within the sub-region will
continue to be a priority. Hemet is also currently underserved in terms of
department stores, apparel, entertainment venues and fine dining options.
As the overall economic viability of the community improves, these uses
will be more in demand and should be actively pursued to locate in Hemet.
To provide land for new businesses, the City must preserve land zoned for
employment uses. With increased demand for housing in the region,
pressures are increasing to rezone commercial and industrial lands for
residential use. The City will seek to maintain an inventory of strategically
         C  I  T Y      O  F    H   E   M E  T     G    E  N  E R   A L    P  L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                       2-78

        LAND USE
                                located commercial and industrial land for future development, as
                                designated in the Land Use Plan.
                                Attracting industrial firms to the City will lead to better paying jobs for
                                Hemet residents and will attract new professional employees that may
                                choose to live in the community. In West Hemet, employment-generating
                                uses will be located in the Business Park and Industrial land use
                                designations. Visually attractive developments that reflect high-quality
                                development standards will define these areas, rather than typical,
                                unattractive industrial uses. Providing for upscale residential development
                                in the city will also help attract high-end businesses and their employees to
                                Hemet.
                                Develop a Marketing and Image Plan
                                As underserved employment categories and niche industries are identified
                                for the City, a marketing and image/branding plan should be created to best
                                position the City for the next wave of development. The image plan should
                                explore ways to blend the old with the new Hemet and maintain what is
                                unique and desirable with future opportunities. In addition to marketing
                                materials for targeted businesses and industries, the image campaign should
                                extend to creating a physical gateway to the City at key points, developing
                                attractive public directional signage, updating the City’s logo, and
                                establishing distinct neighborhood or district design themes.
                                Expanding and retaining the employment base requires area-specific market
                                research to determine what types of industry can be attracted to the city.
                                Factors that will be analyzed include the adequacy of the infrastructure,
                                availability of land and buildings, quality of life in the community, level of
                                skill and education in the labor force, proximity to transportation corridors,
                                and business incentives or hurdles to operate a business in the City
                                2.11.2        REDEVELOPMENT
 REDEVELOPMENT RULING           The redevelopment process was established by the state to assist local
                                governments in eliminating blight and revitalizing designated project areas.
On December 29, 2011, in        Redevelopment provides communities with the ability to obtain funding to
response      to     lawsuits   improve infrastructure, acquire property, and otherwise enable desired
regarding redevelopment         development, reconstruction, and rehabilitation. A portion of
law, the California Supreme     redevelopment funds must also be used to promote affordable housing
Court ruled that the State      opportunities in the community. The ability to use tax increment revenue
of California had the           allows redevelopment agencies to invest money into a community to
authority to abolish local      encourage private business to do the same. Hemet has five redevelopment
redevelopment agencies in       project areas as shown in Figure 2.7:
California. At the time of
the adoption of this                 Downtown,
General Plan, the final
ramifications of the ruling          Combined Commercial
had     not      yet    been         Farmer’s Fair,
determined.
                                     Hemet, and
                                     Weston Park.
      C   I T Y       O  F    H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N  E   R  A L     P  L   A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                     2-79

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              River
                                                                                                                        Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Commonwealth Ave
                        California Ave
                                                                                                                                                  Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                  Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                          Cawston Ave
                                                                                    Rd
                                                     Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                Wa rr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                State St
                                                                                      en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                  Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                               Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                      Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                     Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Girard St
                                                                                                                                        Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                                   Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                           Myers St                                                                                                                           Florida Ave                                                                                 Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                             Ave                                             Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gilbert St
                                                                                                                             rida
                    Florida Ave                                                                                          Flo                                      Acacia Ave                                                                                                                               Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                  Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                       Kirby St
                                                                                   ct
                                                                               edu                        HEMET-RYAN                                 AY
                                                                                                                                                 AILW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yale St
                                                                                                           AIRPORT                           R                                                        Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                         Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                        SF
                                                                               A qu
Winchester Rd
                                                                          iego                                                AT&
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Stetson Ave                                                                                          Stetson Ave
                                                                         San
                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                  Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                    ain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  et M
                                                                                                                                                                                             Elk St
                                                                                                            Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                                                                               Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Crest Dr                                           e   He
                                                                     ts   on                                                                                                                             Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                         Warren Rd
                                                                 Ste
                                                                                                      Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                        RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BOWL
                                    California Ave                                                                                                                                                                              State St
                                                                                                                                                                                     Dom
                                                                                                                                                                                             en i
                                                                                                                                                                                                    go
                                                                                                     ky                                                                                                  ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pk
                                                                                                iP                                                                                                                 y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                           on                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                         ig                                                                                                                                                                                                   b     el R                                        PARK
                                                                                    en                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gib
                                                                               om
                                                                           D
      X06268298.11 084 01/24/2012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Girard St
                                                                                                                                   LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                          Combined Commercial
                          Sources:
                          Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                     Downtown
                          ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F i g u r e                2 . 7
                                                                                                                                                          Farmers Fair
                          0 0.25 0.5                                           1                                                                          Hemet                                                                                                        REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREAS
                                                                                   Miles                                                                  Weston Park                                                                                                                    H e m e t                      G e n e r a l                       P l a n
 LAND USE
              Redevelopment projects in these areas are designed to restore economic
              vitality to vacant, blighted, and underutilized areas of the community.
              Conserving and rehabilitating existing neighborhoods and commercial
              districts will maintain their value and economic viability.
              In 2010, the Redevelopment Agency approved strategies for the City of
              Hemet as part of the agency’s 5-year Implementation Plan, which is
              required to be updated every five years pursuant to state law. The
              Implementation Plan strategies are presented as follows and serve as a
              foundation for redevelopment activities in the City of Hemet:
              The Five Year Redevelopment Implementation Plan identifies specific
              projects within the redevelopment areas to be undertaken and funded
              during the five year period. In general, these projects fall under the
              following categories:
                   Public/Private investment in Development, Preservation, Restoration
                   and Revitalization.
                   Public Infrastructure Projects.
                   Specific Plans and other Planning efforts.
                   Community Facilities Planning and Development.
                   Business Incentive Programs.
                   Housing Assistance Programs.
                   Housing acquisition and rehabilitation programs.
              The Five Year Plan acts to prioritize available redevelopment funding to
              ensure that the agency’s efforts are strategic and in line with the community
              and the City Council’s overall goals.
              2.11.3         REVITALIZING HEMET’S NEIGHBORHOODS AND
                             DISTRICTS
              As Hemet continues to grow, additional emphasis needs to be placed on
              maintaining and enhancing the City’s older residential neighborhoods and
              commercial and industrial areas. As new development occurs, private
              investment in these areas is often overlooked. These areas still serve an
              important function in Hemet as they provide housing opportunities for
              residents and offer commercial services and employment opportunities.
              Thus, a comprehensive approach to business retention, property
              maintenance and improvement will play an important part in ensuring that
              these areas do not become obsolete or undesirable.
              Revitalization through Infill Development
              Hemet contains numerous vacant or underutilized lots that can
              accommodate infill development. By absorbing growth into the existing city
              framework, such infill relieves growth pressures on rural areas and can
              improve quality of life, property values, and investment within older areas
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N   E  R  A L     P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                   2-81

                                                                                      LAND USE
of the City. Infill can also benefit Hemet by revitalizing older areas of the
City, preserving open space and other natural areas, and minimizing the
high cost of building infrastructure to support development that has spread
far from the traditional City center.
                    Adopted Redevelopment Plan Goals
                              2009-10 thru 2013-14
     Rehabilitate and Restore. Eliminate and prevent the spread of
     conditions of blight, including but not limited to: underutilized
     properties and deteriorating buildings, incompatible and uneconomic
     land uses, deficient infrastructure and facilities, obsolete structures, and
     other economic deficiencies, in order to create a more favorable
     environment for commercial, industrial, office, residential, and
     recreational development.
     Promote Economic Development. Promote the economic
     development of the Project Area by providing an attractive, well-
     serviced, well-protected environment for all residents and visitors.
     Expand the commercial base of the Project Area. Promote local job
     opportunities.
     Sustain Unique Qualities. Preserve and enhance the unique cultural,
     historical, and recreational qualities of the Project Area. Implement
     design and use standards to assure high aesthetic and environmental
     quality, and provide unity and integrity to developments within the
     Project Area.
     Community Involvement. Encourage the cooperation and
     participation of residents, businesses, business persons, public agencies,
     and community organizations in the redevelopment/revitalization of
     the Project Area.
     Remedy Existing Deficiencies. Improve public facilities and public
     infrastructure. Remove impediments to land disposition and
     development through the assembly of property into reasonably sized
     and shaped parcels served by improved infrastructure and public
     facilities. Address parcels of property that are of irregular form and
     shape, are inadequately sized for proper usefulness and development,
     and/or are held in multiple ownership. Recycle and/or develop
     underutilized parcels to accommodate higher and better economic uses
     while enhancing the City's financial resources.
     Quality Housing for All Residents. Preserve and improve residential
     neighborhoods in the project area. Promote the rehabilitation of
     existing housing stock. Increase, improve, and preserve the supply of
     housing affordable to very low, low, and moderate income households.
          C   I  T Y    O   F     H  E   M  E  T      G    E  N  E  R  A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                          2-82
             LAND USE
                                 Hemet Valley Mall
                                 Hemet Valley Mall is located on Florida Avenue at Kirby Avenue and is
                                 home to over 20 stores and specialty shops within approximately 250,000
                                 square feet of retail space. As commercial centers have been added
                                 throughout the City and in nearby communities, the Mall’s role as the
                                 Valley’s major shopping center has diminished. Many Hemet residents, and
                                 those in nearby communities, now frequent large retailers located in Hemet,
                                 or travel to Murrieta or Temecula for their shopping needs. The importance
Hemet Valley Mall represents     of keeping retail dollars within Hemet cannot be understated, as retail sales
a key development asset
to the City                      tax revenues are a major source of income for the City. Retail sales leakage
                                 to other areas is occurring, and can be minimized by locating retail
                                 businesses in Hemet to capture sales from its residents. Because of its
                                 central location, the Hemet Valley Mall is an ideal location for new retailers
                                 offering merchandise that can attract shoppers. The mall also owns adjacent
                                 vacant property and has the ability to expand and remodel to address new
                                 retail trends and shopping environments.
                                 Numerous recommendations have come forth in recent years to transform
                                 the mall into a regional shopping center with uses that keep Hemet
                                 residents from having to shop outside the City. Future development in this
                                 area will seek to create an attractive and functionally compatible center that
                                 can serve as a central focus for the Florida Avenue commercial corridor.
                                 The City also encourages a tenant mix at the Mall that offers commercial
                                 uses desired by residents, such as clothing stores, or entertainment uses
                                 such as theaters and bookstores.
                                 Revitalization of Neighborhoods
                                 Many of the older neighborhoods and mobile home parks in the central
                                 area of the City have deteriorated, in terms of property value, structural
                                 integrity and overall property maintenance. The extended downturn in the
                                 economy and lack of job opportunities has also been a major contributing
                                 factor. Neighborhoods that were once stable, well-maintained and owner-
                                 occupied have transitioned to a preponderance of rental properties. The
                                 City is addressing this issue with a multi-pronged approach including the
                                 following programs:
                                      Neighborhood Stabilization Program Federal grant program to
                                      purchase and rehabilitate foreclosure homes and re-sell them to home
                                      owners.
                                      Hemet ROCS (Restoring Our Community Strategy) A series of
                                      ordinances and implementation programs to improve property
                                      maintenance, hold landowners more responsible for rental units and
                                      tenants, and target factors and behaviors that lead to crime and the de-
                                      stabilization of neighborhoods.
                                      Housing Programs The City’s Community Investment Department
                                      and Redevelopment Agency implement a variety of housing assistance
                                      programs designed to improve living conditions and housing stock
                                      within the existing neighborhoods.
            C I T Y      O   F H  E   M   E   T    G   E  N  E  R  A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                      2-83

                                                                                      LAND USE
Downtown and North State Street Corridor
A description of the characteristics and opportunities within the Downtown
and North State Street Corridor is provided in detail in Section 2.6.9 and
2.9.1 of this Element. In addition to the land use and design objectives for
this area of the City, certain less tangible attributes must be in place to bring
about true revitalization. Some of these key factors are identified below:
     1. Create and Champion the Vision The vision for the future of
         Downtown needs to be clear, well known, and accepted by the
         general community, the property owners, business owners, City
         leadership and staff. Revitalization efforts need to be intentional,
         deliberate, consistent and have political and landowner support to
         be successful.
     2. Recognize that Downtown Revitalization is Incremental and
         long term The revitalization process for downtowns takes time,
         sometimes as long as 20 years to be fully realized. Individual
         opportunities and successes need to be celebrated and new
         investment encouraged to keep a momentum going over the long
         term.
     3. Revitalization is a Private/Public Partnership To a large extent,
         private sector investment will be the driving force in revitalization
         with public sector assistance in certain targeted areas, such as the
         public domain and infrastructure.
     4. Develop a Strategic Plan/Specific Plan Land use and business
         potential for the Downtown should be explored in a market-based
         technical analysis to determine what is supportable in the near and
         longer term, and what uses can be a catalyst for renewal. A Specific
         Plan would identify and appropriately locate these uses, and include
         infrastructure, streetscape, landscape and architectural guidelines, as
         well as financing mechanisms.
     5. Fix the Basics Revitalization will have the best chance of success
         and new investment if the area is perceived to be safe, well lighted,
         accessible, well maintained, and with adequate infrastructure to
         accommodate rehabilitation. One of the primary roles of
         redevelopment is to ensure the needs are met as the framework for
         new investment.
     6. Make the Right Things Easy In the context of the Specific Plan,
         establish specific zoning standards, design guidelines and building,
         signage, and landscaping codes that can be implemented without a
         cumbersome review process. Encourage the “best uses” as permitted
         “by right” and adopt business friendly policies and procedures.
     7. Provide Ongoing Activities and Events Successful downtowns
         have a business or chamber-based organization that markets and
         promotes Downtown businesses and events on a regular basis.
         These events give people new and interesting reasons to gather
         downtown.
         C   I T Y       O  F     H   E  M   E   T    G   E  N   E  R  A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                         2-84

 LAND USE
              2.12 S PHE RE OF I NFLU ENCE                    AND
                        A NNEXAT IONS
              The Planning Area boundary depicted on the Land Use Map and
              throughout the General Plan document is comprised of three main
              components: the existing incorporated City of Hemet (28.3 square miles),
              the adopted Sphere of Influence (SOI) for the City (37 square miles), and
              the surrounding unincorporated territory (32.1 square miles). Each
              component is directly related to, or may affect future development, plans or
              policies within the City. As required by state law, the SOI is an official
              boundary established by the Riverside County LAFCO for every city and
              special district within the County, and represents a probable future
              boundary for an agency. Land area within the SOI and the Planning Area is
              not subject to the City's jurisdiction; it is unincorporated and governed by
              the County of Riverside until it is annexed to the City. The establishment of
              the Planning Area boundary and land use designations under the City's
              General Plan allows for the possible expansion of the SOI, and ultimately
              the City's boundaries, at some point in the future. Any changes to the City's
              SOI or annexation of territory must be approved by LAFCO. Additionally,
              there is no requirement or obligation for a city to annex properties within
              the SOI or the Planning Area.
              The state's intention in creating LAFCOs was to discourage "leap frog"
              development and urban sprawl by encouraging the orderly formation of
              cities and districts within the counties, and ensuring the timely extension of
              infrastructure and services to new development areas. Ideally, growth is
              concentrated in the cities and has a logical outward extension as a more
              urban/suburban level of public services is provided. However, sometimes
              significant population and development enclaves are created within the
              unincorporated areas over time. These areas may ultimately become their
              own city, or annex to an adjacent existing city.
              As shown in Figure 2.8, the City's Planning Area located outside of the
              corporate boundaries can generally be divided into two main areas: the
              unincorporated area east of State Street and encompassing the Santa Rosa
              Hills, and the unincorporated area located west of the city limits and
              encompassing Diamond Valley Lake. These areas are briefly described
              below, and in more detail within the Land Use Element and other
              applicable elements within the General Plan. The entire Planning Area has
              been included and discussed within each element of the General Plan due
              to the proximity, ongoing relationship, annexation potential, and future
              effects these areas will have on the City of Hemet.
              2.12.1        EAST HEMET SPHERE OF INFLUENCE AND PLANNING
                            AREA
              The majority of the Planning Area located east of Hemet is coterminous
              with the existing SOI for this area. The Planning Area boundaries on the
              east end of Hemet generally include privately owned property located south
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N   E  R A L       P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                   2-85
                                                                                   LAND USE
of the City of San Jacinto and the Soboba Indian Reservation, and west of
the San Bernardino National Forest. The Santa Rosa Hills form the
backdrop for this area to the south. The East Hemet area encompasses
approximately 23,905 acres or 37.35 square miles, and is largely developed.
There are existing and proposed commercial and multi-family uses along
the Florida Avenue. corridor, and primarily single-family subdivisions
throughout the valley floor. This area also includes Simpson Park, the
Ramona Bowl, Batista Creek, hillside residential estates, and large expanses
of agricultural land and citrus groves. The East Hemet area has some of the
most scenic and historic features within the Planning Area. The land use
designations for the East Hemet area generally mirror the existing uses and
County of Riverside General Plan designations. Over the long term,
development potential for the area will primarily be infill development with
some opportunities for low-density development in the hillsides or if the
agricultural land converts to residential uses. Residents within the area have
long considered themselves part of the community of Hemet and are active
in many organizations within Hemet and San Jacinto.
2.12.2         WEST HEMET SPHERE OF INFLUENCE AND
               PLANNING AREA
The Planning Area located to the west of the City's corporate boundaries
encompasses approximately 18,208 acres or 28.45 sq. miles. The portion of
the Planning Area located north of Devonshire Avenue is primarily large lot
residential and incorporates the Reinhart Canyon area and portions of the
Lakeview Mountains. The General Plan designates this area for Rural
Residential and Hillsides. The southernmost portion of the Planning Area
includes the Diamond Valley Lake Reservoir and the surrounding land areas
owned by the MWD, portions of which are already within the City of
Hemet.
The portion of the West Hemet Planning Area located south of Florida
Avenue and north of Newport Road is currently residential and open
farmland. This area presents the most significant land use opportunities for
Hemet in terms of expanding the City's job base with the designation of a
future business/industrial park, and associated mixed-use nodes at key
intersections with the future alignment and expansion of SR 79. The
development opportunities and infrastructure constraints associated with
the West Hemet area are described in detail in Section 2.9.4 of the Land
Use Element. This area will define the western edge of the City of Hemet
and is a logical candidate for annexation.
Adjacent to (and partially encompassing) the West Hemet Planning Area is
the existing community of Winchester. In 2010, Winchester property
owners requested that the County of Riverside form a Municipal Advisory
Council (MAC) for their community in order to enhance the representation
of their area and to examine the potential for either independent Cityhood,
or becoming part of the adjacent cities of Hemet or Menifee. The City
recognizes the desire of Winchester to retain its own unique identity,
whether it forms a new city or becomes a distinct part of an existing city.
An opportunity exists for Winchester to be retained as a community within
         C   I  T Y     O   F    H  E   M  E   T    G   E  N  E   R  A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                       2-86
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                  ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                               HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                     ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                        iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                               g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 085 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                             LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                             Plan Areas                                                                       Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                     East Area                                                Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                     West Area                                                Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Street
                     Sources:
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                                                                                                              Railroad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   F i g u r e     2 . 8
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Creek/Canal
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                                   River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                           Hemet City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AND PLANNING AREAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                       LAND USE
Back of Figure 2.8
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                   2-88
     LAND USE
                                the larger City, and could be established as a separate district with local
                                agency representation and its own specific plan or area plan to guide future
                                development, if the residents so desired. LAFCO is required to notify the
                                Winchester MAC of any potential requests for annexations or SOI
                                amendments within the boundaries of the MAC, and provide them the
                                opportunity for review and comment.
                                2.12.3         CONSIDERATIONS FOR FUTURE ANNEXATIONS
                                Although the inclusion of properties within the City's SOI and Planning
                                Area demonstrates a logical extension of the City's boundaries, several
                                factors must be taken into consideration in reviewing the appropriateness
                                and timing of an annexation. The overall fiscal impacts of an annexation
                                both direct and indirect; as well as the willingness of the property owners to
                                be annexed, are critical components to any annexation proposal. Particularly
                                in times of limited government resources, the City will need to assess
                                whether the ongoing cost of services can be adequately borne by the
                                revenues generated by the land uses, and not result in an undue burden on
                                the City's existing services. Overall, if the entire Planning Area was annexed
                                to the City, it would result in an ongoing positive fiscal situation, assuming
                                build-out of the various land uses. In the interim, individual annexations
                                will need to be assessed based on the phasing of infrastructure and public
                                services to meet the need, and the potential revenues or project benefits
                                associated with the annexation.
Goal LU-14 and its              In addition to the considerations noted above, LAFCO has certain basic
policies and programs           criteria and requirements that it uses to analyze the appropriateness of
address annexation areas.       annexation proposals. Riverside County LAFCO has also adopted a set of
                                Policies and Procedures to guide its decision making. The following points
Proposed implementation         are general criteria for most annexations:
plans and additional criteria        Annexation areas must be physically contiguous with existing City
for annexation applications          boundaries.
are included in Chapter 12,
“Implementation                      Annexation areas should represent a logical extension of the City and
Programs.”                           create an easily identifiable and appropriate boundary for service delivery.
                                     Annexations should not create "islands" of unincorporated County
                                     territory.
                                     Areas to be annexed must have general plan and prezoning designations
                                     adopted by the annexing City for the subject property.
                                     The annexing City must provide a Plan of Services for how the annexed
                                     area will be served with existing or expanded infrastructure and public
                                     service capabilities and the funding mechanisms to insure the ongoing
                                     provision of services.
                                     Annexations of over 100 acres shall provide a fiscal impact analysis.
                                     Annexations with more than 12 registered voters residing in the
                                     annexation area are considered “inhabited,” and less than 12 registered
                                     voters are considered an “uninhabited annexation.” There are different
                                     processes for approval depending on the classification of the annexation.
    C   I  T Y      O   F     H  E   M   E   T    G    E  N   E  R  A L      P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                      2-89

                                                             LAND USE
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R A L P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                         2-90
 LAND USE
              G OALS AND P OLICIES
              C ITYWIDE L AND U S E
                          Achieve a balanced and sustainable pattern of land
              GOAL        uses, community services and amenities that provide
                          for the needs of the City’s residents and businesses
              LU-1        and enhance the overall quality of life in the
                          community.
              POLICIES
              LU-1.1     Land Use Mix Encourage a diverse mix of land uses
                         throughout the City and within large master planned
                         communities to provide opportunities for housing,
                         commerce, employment, recreation, education, culture,
                         social, civic and spiritual activity in balance with natural
                         open spaces and adequately supported by public services
                         and infrastructure.
              LU-1.2     Job Creation Promote job growth within Hemet by
                         establishing land use patterns that encourage commercial
                         and industrial growth opportunities, improve the City’s
                         job-housing balance, reduce commute distances and time,
                         lower vehicle emissions, and provide economic growth
                         and stability for all segments of the City’s population.
              LU-1.3     Housing Opportunities Create a broad range of housing
                         opportunities for all segments of the community and
                         ensure that a balance of housing types and densities are
                         available for existing and future residents.
              LU-1.4     Walkable         Neighborhoods            Create     walkable
                         neighborhoods that integrate pedestrian paths and trails
                         into a safe, cohesive and varied transportation system that
                         provides connectivity to nearby land uses and encourages
                         physical activity and less dependence on the automobile.
              LU-1.5     Strong Sense of Place Foster distinctive, attractive
                         community districts and neighborhoods with a strong
                         sense of place.
              LU-1.6     Open Space Preservation Recognize and preserve open
                         space, prominent landforms, natural beauty and critical
                         environmental areas through creative design and integrate
                         open space and trail networks within the urban fabric to
                         enhance the character and quality of life.
              LU-1.7     Integrate Land Use and Transportation Networks
                         Provide a variety of transportation choices to serve
                         adjacent land uses and integrate a comprehensive system
                         of streets, transit, passenger rail, bike paths and pedestrian
                         connections to serve the community.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N  E   R  A L      P  L  A    N     2 0 3 0
                            2-91

                                                                               LAND USE
LU-1.8        Balance Land Uses with Services Accommodate and
              locate the types, densities, and appropriate mix of land
              uses that can be adequately supported by the associated
              transportation network, utility infrastructure and public
              services such as schools, parks and emergency services.
LU-1.9        Consistency with Land Use Districts Require new and
              infill development to be in conformance with the land use
              character and development intention of each land use
              District established in the General Plan and implementing
              specific plans, ordinances, and design guidelines.
LU-1.10       Land Use District Identity Encourage the establishment
              of distinct districts and neighborhoods that have a unique
              identity and character defined by design elements that
              include edge and entry treatments, architectural features,
              landscape pallet, streetscape, and community signage
              elements.
LU-1.11       Master Planned Development Promote the preparation
              of Community Area Plans, Specific Plans, and Planned
              Unit Developments as appropriate to foster
              comprehensive, cohesive and well-designed residential,
              commercial, industrial projects and mixed-use projects.
LU-1.12       Flexibility Over Time Require development to occur
              within the designated range of density and intensity, but
              allow for flexibility in the types of uses to account for
              changes in industrial and employment markets, retail
              commercial enterprises, and housing needs and
              characteristics; provided that such uses are consistent with
              the overall vision, goals, and policy intentions of the
              General Plan.
LU-1.13       Build a Strong Community Support the development of
              a strong, socially connected and ethnically diverse
              community, by working to provide a balance of jobs and
              housing within the City, reducing commute times,
              promoting community involvement and activities,
              enhancing public safety, and providing a wealth of
              educational, cultural and recreational opportunities.
LU-1.14       New Residential Communities Design new residential
              communities to complement existing neighborhoods and
              assure a high level of livability. Establish cohesive
              development patterns united by a landscape and
              architectural design framework, and recreational amenities
              that create a distinct sense of place.
        C I T Y      O  F     H   E  M  E   T    G    E  N E R   A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                     2-92
 LAND USE
                          Provide for new and infill development in
              GOAL        compliance with Smart Growth Principles and in
              LU-2        accordance with infrastructure and public service
                          capacities.
              POLICIES
              LU-2.1     Adequate Infrastructure Ensure that growth in
                         developing areas of Hemet proceeds with the appropriate
                         addition of infrastructure, public services and facilities to
                         serve the new land uses and population. Ensure that
                         infrastructure improvements are in place prior to, or
                         concurrently with, new development
              LU-2.2     Public Service Levels Ensure that new development does
                         not lower service levels for parks, schools, fire, police,
                         libraries medical facilities, sewer, water, and flood control
                         facilities, and impacts to these services are appropriately
                         mitigated.
              LU-2.3     Public Improvement Costs Require all developments to
                         construct or pay their fair share cost for public
                         improvements that are specifically and originally attributed
                         to a single development, development area, or business.
              LU-2.4     Concentrate Land Uses Promote efficient use of land
                         resources through compact building design, infill
                         development, and land use patterns that reduce
                         infrastructure costs and make more effective use of
                         existing and planned transportation systems and public
                         facilities, and minimize impacts to natural environmental
                         resources.
              LU-2.5     Interconnected         Neighborhoods          Support     the
                         development of compact neighborhoods that locate stores,
                         offices, residences, schools, recreational spaces and other
                         public facilities within walking distance of each other and
                         that facilitate social interaction and alternative modes of
                         transportation.
              LU-2.6     Alternative Modes of Transportation Promote
                         alternative modes of transportation and provide street
                         systems that disperse rather than concentrate traffic
                         congestion. Provide short, connecting blocks in residential
                         neighborhoods and utilize traffic-calming design strategies
                         to reduce traffic speeds.
              LU-2.7     Capital Improvement Plans Ensure that the provision of
                         infrastructure master plans and capital improvement
                         programs to serve new development are in place in
                         anticipation of development demands, in order to facilitate
                         the viability and quality of new residential, commercial and
                         industrial development.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E   N   E R  A L      P   L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                            2-93
                                                                                 LAND USE
LU-2.8       Agriculture as a Permitted Use Allow for the continued
             production and use of agricultural lands as interim uses
             preceding urban development, or as a long term use.
LU-2.9       Sustainable Design Require that new development be
             designed to minimize consumption of water, energy and
             other resources and provide long-term sustainable site and
             building design features.
LU-2.10      Master Planning of Public Facilities In specific plans
             and master planned communities, identify and reserve sites
             for public facilities, schools, recreation, and civic uses, and
             integrate recreational opportunities with natural open
             space.
LU-2.11      Stormwater Management Require a Stormwater
             Management approach to drainage systems that promotes
             multiple purposes for flood protection, water quality,
             groundwater recharge, habitat hydration, and serves as an
             attractive community amenity. Promote naturalized, soft-
             bottom channels and basins with landscaped banks and
             setbacks that incorporate trail systems where appropriate.
LU-2.12      Use of Recycled Water Systems Require connections
             and use of recycled water facilities where possible to
             irrigate public landscapes and create water elements that
             will add to community value.
LU-2.13      Criteria Cell Refinement In conjunction with affected
             land owners and agencies, pursue a criteria cell refinement
             to the Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP)
             to provide for a more viable vernal pool habitat complex
             while accommodating a comprehensive development
             footprint and habitat interface buffer for future
             development.
LU-2.14      Maximize Existing Infrastructure Promote the use and
             reuse of existing developed areas with available
             infrastructure and service systems, and reinvest in the
             maintenance, rehabilitation and expansion of existing
             infrastructure to serve new development.
GOAL          Avoid land use conflicts and provide for compatible
              development.
LU-3
POLICIES
LU-3.1       Residential Variety Encourage a variety of residential
             development types which are physically and functionally
             compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.
LU-3.2       Preservation of Stable, Existing Neighborhoods
             Preserve the integrity, quality and livability of Hemet’ s
       C I T Y      O  F    H    E   M  E  T     G    E  N E   R  A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                     2-94

 LAND USE
                         existing residential neighborhoods by requiring that new
                         and infill development be designed to complement existing
                         residential uses, density and character.
              LU-3.3     Transitional Uses Use multi-family development as a
                         transition between commercial to single-family uses where
                         appropriate. Avoid density increases or intrusion of non-
                         residential uses that are incompatible with existing
                         neighborhoods.
              LU-3.4     Compatible Residential Development Integrate new
                         residential projects into existing neighborhoods so that
                         they are compatible with adjacent structures with respect
                         to scale, neighborhood architectural character, setbacks,
                         and other neighborhood design aspects. Assure that the
                         type and intensity of residential use is consistent with that
                         in the immediate neighborhood.
              LU-3.5     Buffering of New Development Require new
                         development to provide a transition from adjoining
                         development of different land uses and intensity through
                         the use of buffers, setbacks, edge treatments, site design,
                         landscaping and building scale and orientation.
              LU-3.6     School Site Compatibility Ensure that new development
                         is compatible with the location of existing and planned
                         school sites, particularly in relation to senior housing
                         projects or nonresidential uses.
              LU-3.7     Rural Residential Neighborhoods Promote the
                         preservation and continuation of rural residential and low
                         density neighborhoods that maintain the existing rural
                         character within the canyons, foothills, and equestrian
                         areas of the City and Planning Area, in accordance with
                         the Land Use Plan’s applicable density designations and
                         General Plan development policies.
              LU-3.8     Agricultural Buffers Maintain open space buffers between
                         agricultural operations and new residential development to
                         reduce potential conflicts.
              LU-3.9     Incompatible Uses Prohibit uses that lead to the
                         deterioration of residential neighborhoods, or adversely
                         affect it’s safety or residential character.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N   E   R  A L      P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                            2-95

                                                                                 LAND USE
GOAL          Revitalize and enhance older deteriorating
              neighborhoods and business districts.
LU-4
POLICIES
LU-4.1       Building        Rehabilitation       Encourage       building
             rehabilitation and maintenance, façade improvements and
             landscaping improvements, to revitalize Hemet’s older
             neighborhoods and districts.
LU-4.2:      Rehabilitation Programs. Establish rehabilitation
             programs and incentives for older commercial centers to
             prevent blight and maintain the quality of the built
             environment.
LU-4.3       Infill Development and Re-Use Actively promote the
             adaptive re-use and infill of economically underutilized,
             obsolete, and dilapidated commercial and industrial sites,
             and foster rehabilitation consistent with surrounding uses
             and the needs of the community.
LU-4.4       Age-Restricted Conversions Ensure that conversions of
             age-restricted       to      non-age-restricted     residential
             developments, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle
             parks are evaluated and pay their full fair share of fees not
             previously assessed in addition to the provision of required
             parking, open space, and other development standards
             applicable to family housing.
LU-4.5       Redevelopment of Existing Properties Support the
             upgrading and maintenance of the City’s housing
             inventory, commercial and industrial buildings, and aging
             infrastructure replacement, through technical and
             economic assistance where appropriate in Redevelopment
             and CDBG areas, and in partnerships with community-
             based efforts.
LU-4.6       Code Compliance Provide pro-active, equitable,
             consistent and effective code compliance activities,
             nuisance abatement, property maintenance enforcement,
             and rental housing registration and inspection functions to
             ensure that Hemet’s neighborhoods and business districts
             are attractive, safe and retain property values.
LU-4.7       Maintain and Enhance Property Values Monitor the
             appearance of residential, commercial and industrial
             properties to prevent areas of decline by requiring
             improved maintenance or rehabilitation, as necessary and
             practical.
LU-4.8       Healthy and Safe Housing Ensure that the City’s
             housing stock, including mobile home and RV parks, is
             clean, healthy, and safe for the benefit of all income levels
             and segments of the community.
       C I T Y     O    F    H   E   M  E  T    G   E   N  E  R  A L      P  L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                   2-96

 LAND USE
                          Create opportunities for mixed use and Transit-
              GOAL        Oriented Development to complement and support
              LU-5        vibrant city centers, regional commercial nodes, and
                          business districts.
              POLICIES
              LU-5.1     Siting of Mixed Use Districts Encourage the
                         development of mixed use and higher intensity residential,
                         commercial, and employment centers along major
                         transportation corridors and near future Metrolink rail
                         stations.
              LU-5.2     Land Use Connections Promote employment and
                         shopping centers in close proximity to residences in mixed
                         use or transit-oriented development areas, and integrate
                         with attractive and walkable pedestrian paths.
              LU-5.3     Specific Plans Promote the use of specific plans as a
                         means to ensure an adequate, integrated, and
                         complementing mix of land uses within mixed use districts
                         that exhibit a high level of quality design and cohesiveness.
              LU-5.4     Multi-Family Residential in Mixed-Use District
                         Design mixed use districts to avoid an over-concentration
                         of multi-family units of similar density, scale, and
                         architecture; and enhance the visual quality and character
                         of the development with extensive landscape features and
                         architectural diversity.
              LU-5.5     Public Spaces Establish interesting and attractive focal
                         points, public spaces or community uses within mixed use
                         and transit oriented developments that are within walking
                         distance and provide a source of activity and identity for
                         the district.
              LU-5.6     Transitions and Buffers Provide appropriate transitions
                         and buffers to minimize the potential incompatibilities of
                         mixed use or transit oriented developments on adjacent
                         neighborhoods and land uses.
              LU-5.7     Land Use Flexibility Accommodate flexibility in the
                         overall form and integration of land uses within the mixed
                         use districts provided that the district conforms to the
                         purpose and principles of mixed use and smart growth
                         concepts as embodied in the General Plan and
                         implementing plans and ordinances.
              LU-5.8     Open Space Require that adequate open space and for
                         larger projects, recreational or community serving uses, be
                         incorporated in mixed use development to serve the needs
                         of the residents and businesses.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N  E   R  A L      P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                            2-97
                                                                               LAND USE
GOAL          Establish a comprehensive range of attractive and
              economically viable commercial centers throughout
LU-6          the City that meet the needs of the community.
POLICIES
LU-6.1       Commercial District Diversity Maintain a land use
             pattern that accommodates a diversity of commercial
             districts that avoids unnecessary competition and are
             differentiated by their function, customer base, and
             physical character.
LU-6.2       Integrated Commercial Centers Promote the
             establishment of new commercial development as
             integrated centers rather than disjointed, small strip
             commercial projects. Concentrate driveway locations,
             integrate pedestrian access, parking, architectural design,
             landscape themes and signage throughout the center to
             unify the development.
LU-6.3       Commercial Growth Encourage the establishment of
             retail and other support and entertainment uses that
             provide a broader selection of high-quality goods and
             services for residents, workers, and tourists to enjoy, and
             to minimize sales leakages to other communities.
LU-6.4       Parcel Consolidation Encourage the consolidation and
             assemblage of adjacent commercial parcels to provide
             more viable commercial development opportunities.
LU-6.5       Joint Use Parking Promote reciprocal access and parking
             agreements between adjacent commercial centers and
             businesses to facilitate improved traffic safety and flow
             and to minimize land area devoted to surface parking lots.
LU-6.6       Regional Access Facilitate the location of major
             transportation facilities and convenient highway access to
             regionally serving commercial and mixed use centers to
             encourage a regional customer base.
LU-6.7       Regulate Sensitive Land Uses Appropriately control the
             location, concentration and number of community
             sensitive land uses such as alcohol sales, tobacco products,
             adult businesses, medical marijuana dispensaries, and
             entertainment venues, and require operational measures to
             prevent adverse impacts to adjoining residences,
             businesses, schools, parks, medical facilities, and religious
             facilities consistent with City, State and Federal laws.
       C I T Y      O   F    H   E  M   E  T     G    E  N E  R   A L    P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                     2-98
 LAND USE
              D OWNT OW N D IST RI CT
              GOAL        Promote the Downtown District as the centerpiece
                          of community identity, activity, culture and
              LU-7        governance.
              POLICIES
              LU-7.1     Vibrant Land Use Mix Encourage the revitalization and
                         development of retail, office, restaurant, entertainment,
                         cultural, civic, and housing uses within the Downtown
                         District that create a pedestrian style living environment
                         and sense of place.
              LU-7.2     Downtown Principles Utilize the Downtown Principles
                         concepts and strategies to create a major activity “hub” in
                         the Downtown District.
              LU-7.3     Civic Focus Support the civic focus of the downtown by
                         keeping the locations of government and public facilities
                         within or near the downtown district.
              LU-7.4     Cultural Facilities Promote the location of community
                         amenities such as libraries, museums, galleries, theatres,
                         entertainment and other cultural activities within the
                         historic downtown core.
              LU-7.5     Nurture Pedestrian Activity Support a vibrant and active
                         downtown core by requiring street level uses to be
                         pedestrian friendly such as bookstores, coffee houses,
                         restaurants, and specialty stores within appropriate lot
                         sizes.
              LU-7.6     Auto-related Uses Require uses such as auto sales, drive-
                         through restaurants, liquor stores, and warehouses to be
                         located outside of the historic downtown core as such uses
                         are automobile oriented and detract from the goal of
                         achieving a vibrant and active downtown.
              LU-7.7     Traditional Grid Design Continue the traditional
                         development pattern, grid street design, and historic design
                         flavor within the Downtown Core.
              LU-7.8     Downtown Neighborhoods Maintain the special
                         character and identity of the Downtown District as a
                         collection of distinct neighborhoods with unique assets,
                         functions and traits, each contributing to the overall image
                         of the community. Support programs that meet each
                         neighborhood’s needs.
              LU-7.9     Metrolink Station Actively support the location of a
                         future Metrolink station and transit-oriented village within
                         the Downtown District.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N  E  R   A L     P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                            2-99

                                                                               LAND USE
LU-7.10      Pedestrian Linkages Create a pedestrian link that
             connects the Metrolink train station to various points of
             interest, activity, and employment in the Downtown
             District and Historic Core.
LU-7.11      Medical Center Encourage and facilitate the expansion of
             professional offices, medical and associated institutional
             uses surrounding the Hemet Valley Medical Center.
LU-7.12      Adaptive Reuse of Buildings Permit the adaptive reuse
             of buildings such as older residential homes converting to
             low intensity office/retail uses, where consistent with the
             General Plan land use designation.
LU-7.13      Centralized Parking Facilities Continue to promote the
             development of centralized parking facilities that can be
             shared by multiple businesses.
LU-7.14      Residential Synergy Encourage the development of new
             residential uses in proximity to supporting uses such as
             medical offices, transit facilities, community centers, parks
             and grocery stores.
LU-7.15      Redevelopment and Revitalization Programs Continue
             redevelopment and other programs for infrastructure and
             property investment, business recruitment, and
             beautification efforts to stimulate the revitalization of the
             Downtown District.
LU-7.16      Special Events Collaborate with local business
             organizations to establish special events that attract
             residents and visitors to the Historic Downtown core.
LU-7.17      Public Safety Enhance street lighting, improve the
             condition of pathways and parking areas, and provide a
             visible presence of law enforcement to foster public safety
             in the Downtown.
LU-7.18      District Identity Create and implement streetscape
             improvement plans that establish distinct identities for
             various Downtown District neighborhoods, including
             entries, signage, paving, lighting, landscaping and public
             art.
       C I T Y     O   F    H   E  M   E   T      G  E  N E  R   A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                    2-100
 LAND USE
              F LORI DA C ORRI DOR
                          Revitalize and enhance the land uses and
              GOAL        appearance of the Florida-Devonshire-Acacia
              LU-8        Corridors to create an integrated mix of commercial,
                          office, hospitality and residential uses.
              POLICIES
              LU-8.1     Desirable Commercial Uses Promote and recruit
                         desirable commercial and office uses within the Florida
                         Avenue Corridor that serve a citywide or regional
                         customer base.
              LU-8.2     Incompatible Land Uses Discourage inappropriate uses
                         such as storage or mobile home parks when they are found
                         to be incompatible with Florida Avenue’s primary function
                         as a regional transportation and commercial corridor.
              LU-8.3     Traffic Diversion Complete planned circulation
                         improvements to Devonshire Avenue and Acacia Avenue
                         and divert through trips to these routes to alleviate traffic
                         congestion on Florida Avenue.
              LU-8.4     Transit Connections Establish transit connections along
                         Florida Avenue, and require incorporation of transit- and
                         pedestrian-friendly design features.
              LU-8.5     Transition Older Mobile Parks Encourage the transition
                         of older and smaller mobile home parks between Acacia
                         Avenue and Devonshire Ave. to newer housing
                         developments or alternative commercial, office or
                         institutional uses.
              LU-8.6     Lot Consolidation Promote the consolidation of small,
                         underutilized lots into larger parcels to support more
                         viable and cohesive development parcels.
              LU-8.7     Unified and Updated Image Coordinate with area
                         businesses to create a unified marketing, image, and design
                         strategy for the Florida Avenue commercial corridor.
              LU-8.8     Revitalization of the Mall Promote the revitalization of
                         the Hemet Valley Mall to become a regional commercial
                         destination.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E   N  E   R  A L     P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                           2-101

                                                                                LAND USE
W EST H EMET
GOAL          Establish a unique sense of place for West Hemet
              and enhance its role in the region.
LU-9
POLICIES
LU-9.1       Community Plan Encourage the preparation of a
             comprehensive Community Plan for West Hemet in
             conjunction with landowners, stakeholders, and local
             agencies; that sets the overall land use, transportation,
             infrastructure and public facilities framework for future
             development in the area.
LU-9.2       Quality Design and District Identity Create a West
             Hemet community comprised of distinctive, high-quality,
             attractive development having its own unique identity in
             the region. Develop a distinct image and physical gateway
             improvements for the West Hemet area.
LU-9.3       State Route 79 Realignment Actively promote at the
             regional level for the prioritization and funding of the State
             Route Highway 79 improvement project, with an
             alignment and street connection pattern consistent with
             the City’s Circulation Element.
LU-9.4       New Metrolink Station Actively promote the
             prioritization and funding of the Hemet segment of the
             Perris Valley Line of the Metrolink System and establish a
             Metrolink station and transit-oriented development in
             West Hemet near the intersection of the proposed
             alignment of Stetson Road with the existing tracks.
LU-9.5       Multi-modal Transportation System Establish a multi-
             modal transportation network to serve West Hemet and
             connect to other destinations within the City. Integrate a
             phased system of master planned, “green streets”, transit
             opportunities, bike paths and pedestrian linkages to
             connect land uses and activity nodes with the area.
LU-9.6       Employment Center Focus Focus the majority of the
             land area within West Hemet to accommodate
             employment based uses including business parks, office,
             clean industrial and high tech, light manufacturing,
             medical, regional and community commercial, hospitality,
             education and professional schools, and other
             employment-generating uses to build a stronger, healthier
             City economy.
LU-9.7       Mixed Use Districts Encourage comprehensive
             development of the mixed use nodes designated for West
             Hemet and incorporate high-quality pedestrian oriented
             design, innovative housing options, community open
       C I T Y     O   F     H   E  M  E   T     G  E   N E  R  A L       P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                   2-102

 LAND USE
                         spaces and public plazas, and retail commercial and visitor
                         serving establishments. Concentrate major retail areas
                         along key interchanges with the future Highway 79 and in
                         conjunction with transit oriented development at the
                         future Metrolink station.
              LU-9.8     Plan for Orderly Development Ensure the orderly
                         development of West Hemet by updating the City’s
                         infrastructure master plans, capital improvement program,
                         and financing mechanisms in anticipation of new
                         development, and coordinate with other public service
                         agencies, adjacent jurisdictions, utilities, resource agencies,
                         and property owners to facilitate a comprehensive
                         approach to new development.
              LU-9.9     Natural Resource Protection and Refinement Require
                         that development in West Hemet occur in a manner that
                         respects and protects natural resources; while encouraging
                         a criteria cell refinement to the MSHCP to enhance habitat
                         value and provide improved land use opportunities and
                         synergy.
              LU-9.10    Rural Residential Preservation Protect the character and
                         function of existing rural neighborhoods by ensuring that
                         new development is adequately buffered, future traffic
                         growth in rural areas is minimized, and transportation
                         routes offer adequate emergency access.
              LU-9.11    Sustainable Infrastructure and Development Require
                         new infrastructure systems and site development to
                         incorporate sustainable design and best practices including
                         the use of recycled water, alternative and energy
                         conserving techniques, and naturalized “conjunctive use”
                         drainage basins to accommodate drainage, recharge the
                         aquifer, promote water quality, and add aesthetic value as a
                         neighborhood amenity.
              LU-9.12    Annexation Work cooperatively with landowners,
                         stakeholders and residents within West Hemet to promote
                         annexation of the unincorporated land area to enhance the
                         City’s edge, entrance, public service delivery, and job base.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E   N   E   R  A L     P  L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                           2-103

                                                                             LAND USE
H EMET -R YA N A IRPO RT
              Ensure that Hemet-Ryan Airport meets the
GOAL          transportation and public safety needs of the
LU-10         community and the region while maintaining
              compatibility with surrounding land uses.
POLICIES
LU-10.1      Airport Influence Area Ensure that legislative land use
             decisions within the airport influence area are consistent
             with the Airport Land Use Plan (ALUP) and General Plan
             policies. All legislative land use proposals and
             Discretionary Uses and Incompatible Uses per Table 2.5
             that are located within the Airport Influence Area shall be
             reviewed by the Riverside County Airport Land Use
             Commission for consistency with the adopted ALUP. All
             non-legislative land use proposals that are subject to
             CEQA review by the City of Hemet and located within the
             Airport Influence Area shall be transmitted to the ALUC
             staff for review and comment.
LU-10.2      Airport Land Use Compatibility As part of the
             development review process, ensure appropriate land use
             compatibility within airport safety zones by utilizing the
             Hemet-Ryan Airport Comprehensive Airport Land Use Plan and
             the latest Department of Aeronautics Handbook developed by
             the State of California, and require an Airport
             Compatibility Study as warranted for projects within the
             Airport Influence zones.
LU-10.3      Cooperation with Other Agencies Work closely with the
             County of Riverside on the proposed Hemet-Ryan Airport
             Master Plan and the Airport Land Use Commission
             regarding proposed updates to the Hemet-Ryan Airport
             Comprehensive Land Use Plan to facilitate workable,
             cooperative plans that are consistent with the City of
             Hemet’s General Plan goals and policies and provide a safe
             and functioning general purpose airport to serve the
             community and the surrounding areas.
LU-10-4      Interim Airport Overlay To insure land use consistency
             for an interim time period while the 1992 Airport Land
             Use Plan is being updated, require consistency review by
             the City and the ALUC for all proposed legislative actions
             and discretionary development projects that are located
             within the Interim Airport Overlay designation as shown
             on Figure 2.6A while the Hemet Ryan Airport Land Use
             Plan is being updated. Any proposed land uses identified
             as Incompatible Uses shall also be reviewed by the ALUC.
             While the 1992 Airport Land Use Plan remains in effect,
             the following land uses are restricted within the Interim
             Airport Overlay:
       C I T Y      O  F    H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N  E  R A L      P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                  2-104

 LAND USE
                              1. Residential densities exceeding one du/2.5 acres
                                  (property in the previously approved PCD-79-83,
                                  Page Ranch, shall be reviewed to encourage a
                                  reduction in density and design orientation that
                                  provides the least risk)
                              2. Critical facilities in Area I
                              3. Hazardous Material Facilities
                              4. Institutional Uses and Schools
                              5. Places of Assembly
              LU-10-5   Residential Density Limitations While the 1992 Airport
                        Land Use Plan remains in effect, new Multifamily
                        residential located in the Transition Area and designated as
                        High Density Residential (18-30 du/ac) shall be limited to
                        a maximum of 20 du/ac unless otherwise found consistent
                        by the ALUC.
              E CO NOMIC D EVELOPM ENT
                         Promote a strong and diversified economic base and
              GOAL       retain and attract new investment, businesses,
              LU-11      industries and employment opportunities to the
                         City.
              POLICIES
              LU-11.1   Attract New Businesses Support existing businesses and
                        seek to attract new business and industries which
                        strengthen and diversify Hemet’s tax revenue base,
                        improve wage and salary levels, increase the variety of job
                        opportunities, and employ the resident labor force.
              LU-11.2   Job Growth Industries Facilitate job growth and business
                        attraction and retention in areas such as green technology,
                        tourism, airport related industry, health care, leisure and
                        hospitality, manufacturing, and related industries,
                        retirement facilities and services, and by promoting the
                        establishment of higher education and technical schools in
                        the City.
              LU-11.3   SR 79 Development Corridor Require development of
                        high quality, attractive development surrounding the new
                        alignment of SR 79 to attract businesses and visitors to
                        Hemet and provide positive economic development
                        outcomes to the City, its residents, and business
                        community.
              LU-11.4   Industrial Development Retain industrial land for
                        businesses that provide jobs for manufacturing and
                        processing of goods, research and design, and other uses
C I T Y O F H  E M  E T G   E   N  E  R  A L       P   L  A  N  2 0 3 0
                          2-105

                                                                                 LAND USE
             that create local revenue sources and employment
             opportunities.
LU-11.5      Sustainable Industries Recruit “green technology”
             entrepreneurs and encourage existing businesses to
             incorporate sustainable business practices in their daily
             operations.
LU-11.6      Skilled Labor Force Encourage a variety of businesses
             and industries to locate in the City, including clean, high-
             technology industries, innovative start-up companies, and
             commercial/professional office uses that provide high-
             skill/high-wage job opportunities.
LU-11.7      Recruit New Business Pro-actively recruit new
             businesses that are currently under-represented in the City,
             and will create synergy in attracting other retailers to locate
             in the City.
LU-11.8      Expansion of Medical Services Encourage and promote
             the future expansion of the Hemet Valley Hospital medical
             campus and other health-related facilities throughout the
             City to continue to establish Hemet as a center for medical
             and health services, training and technology.
LU-11.9      Consider Industrial Use Locations Discourage the
             provision of industrial uses in prime locations that are land
             intensive, generate few job opportunities and contribute
             minimal revenue or benefit to the City.
LU-11.10     Industrial       Development          Standards        Require
             development standards that appropriately control the
             location and operation of industrial uses that use, store,
             transport or generate hazardous materials or unacceptable
             levels of noise and air pollution or other adverse impacts.
LU-11.11     Establish a Secure Local Revenue Base Develop a
             secure, balanced sustainable local revenue base to provide
             the full range of public services and capital improvements
             needed to provide an exceptional quality of life for
             residents, and businesses within the community.
GOAL          Enhance Hemet’s sense of place and local identity
              to attract visitors and expand the tourist tax base.
LU-12
POLICIES
LU-12.1      Sustainable Tourism Maintain and enhance year-round
             opportunities for sustainable tourism based on the area’s
             natural resources, historic heritage, and cultural amenities
             without diminishing the quality of life of current residents.
       C I T Y     O   F    H   E  M   E  T     G   E  N  E   R  A L       P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                  2-106

 LAND USE
              LU-12.2   Hospitality Oriented Encourage the retention and
                        development of hospitality uses such as hotels, dinner
                        house restaurants, entertainment venues, golf courses, and
                        other visitor serving uses.
              LU-12.3   Regional Tourism Coordination Coordinate with other
                        tourism organizations and destinations within the San
                        Jacinto Valley, Riverside County and the larger region to
                        partner on the marketing of events, attractions, and
                        hospitality establishments within the City.
              LU-12.4   Tourism Venues and Events Promote tourism venues
                        including museums, cultural establishments and activities,
                        entertainment, recreational and sporting events, and
                        conventions that attract visitors to Hemet and the Valley.
              LU-12.5   Downtown as a Tourist Destination Support and
                        expand the role of Downtown Hemet in attracting
                        tourism, and continue to improve its economic viability,
                        appearance, function, and mix of retail, dining, and
                        entertainment businesses to foster Downtown as a
                        desirable destination.
              LU-12.6   Recreation Development Support ongoing recreational
                        uses at Diamond Valley Lake by developing the area into
                        regional recreational and cultural destinations including
                        uses such as museums, active recreation, fishing, water
                        park, trails, equestrian, educational facilities, and specialty
                        retail and hospitality uses.
                         Provide a strategic and proactive economic
                         development program in order to attract, retain and
              GOAL       expand businesses, create sustainable jobs for the
              LU-13      local work force, and generate revenue to support
                         municipal functions, services, and reinvestment
                         back into the community.
              POLICIES
              LU-13.1   Regional Economic Development Participate in
                        regional economic development activities and partnerships
                        that address strategic economic development efforts
                        benefiting and promoting Hemet and the surrounding
                        areas.
              LU-13.2   Building, Revitalization and Improvements Prioritize
                        building restoration, property improvements and
                        maintenance, removal of nonconforming signs, abatement
                        of blighted buildings, provision of public and private
                        landscaping, and revitalization of existing businesses as
                        essential elements for economic development.
C I T Y O F H  E M  E T G  E   N  E   R  A L      P  L A   N     2 0 3 0
                          2-107
                                                                               LAND USE
LU-13.3      Redevelopment Continue to use redevelopment as a
             financing tool for City-initiated revitalization and to spark
             private investment.
LU-13.4      Job Creation Promote economic development programs
             that link residents with businesses in the City, such as jobs
             training and development.
LU-13.5      Art and Culture Promote the use of art and culture in the
             City’s economic development efforts of marketing,
             branding, communication, increasing the pool of educated
             and qualified employees, attracting the creative industries,
             and creating an aesthetic environment for tourists and
             potential businesses.
LU-13.6      Business Retention Support the retention and expansion
             of existing businesses and encourage local employment.
LU-13.7      Reuse of Underutilized Properties Encourage the reuse
             of vacant, underutilized, or obsolete commercial and
             industrial buildings with higher value uses that are
             consistent with the General Plan goals and policies.
LU-13.8      Facilitate Reinvestment Coordinate with property
             owners of older, declining, industrial and commercial
             buildings to facilitate reinvestment and adaptive reuse and
             upgrades to comply with current codes, encourage new
             tenants, and contribute to the overall vitality of the
             business district.
LU-13.9      New Business Incentives Facilitate the growth and
             expansion of new businesses and industry by providing
             high quality municipal services, public facilities, and
             economic development assistance.
LU-13.10     Abate Blighted Conditions Continue to monitor and
             evaluate conditions of blight and provide Redevelopment
             Programs that assist in responding to these issues and that
             reflect the community’s needs.
LU-13.11     Educated Labor Force Support educational institutions
             in providing quality academic and skill-based programs
             that provide a qualified workforce able to meet the full
             range of educational attainment and job skills required in
             the future economy.
LU-13.12     Higher Education Institutions Encourage colleges,
             universities and technical schools to locate campuses or
             facilities in Hemet to provide a highly skilled employment
             pool for business, industry, and life-long learning.
       C I T Y      O   F    H   E  M   E  T    G   E  N   E  R  A L     P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                  2-108

 LAND USE
              A NNEXAT IONS
              GOAL       Promote the orderly annexation and development of
                         unincorporated areas within the City of Hemet's
              LU-14      Sphere of Influence and Planning Area.
              POLICIES
              LU-14.1   Consistency with Overall Goals Annexation proposals
                        shall be consistent with the overall goals and policies of
                        the City of Hemet General Plan, and will not adversely
                        impact the City’s existing neighborhoods, infrastructure
                        and services, fiscal viability, environmental resources, and
                        quality of life.
              LU-14.2   Compatibility Annexation proposals shall enable cost-
                        effective service delivery to existing and future residents
                        and businesses, and ensure compatibility with surrounding
                        land uses.
              LU-14.3   Ongoing Fiscal Stability Development within proposed
                        annexation areas shall generate sufficient property tax or
                        other revenue base to support the project area’s demand
                        for city services, or otherwise demonstrate ongoing fiscal
                        viability.
              LU-14.4   Jobs and Housing Balance Development within
                        proposed annexation areas should further the City’s
                        objective of creating a balance between jobs and housing
                        opportunities within the City.
              LU-14.5   Provision of Services Development within proposed
                        annexation areas shall be required to provide the
                        infrastructure, facilities and public services necessary to
                        adequately support the development. The provision of
                        services to the annexation area shall not compromise the
                        existing levels of public services provided within the City.
              LU-14.6   Land Use Compatibility Existing and future land uses in
                        proposed annexation areas shall be compatible with the
                        adjoining land uses and character within the City.
              LU-14.7   Employment Opportunities Promote annexations that
                        increase the City's industrial land base and employment
                        opportunities.
              LU-14.8   Access and Gateways Promote the annexation of territory
                        that increases access to primary transportation corridors and
                        prominent gateways into the City.
              LU-14.9   Requirement for Overall Benefit to the City Annexations
                        shall provide an overall benefit to the City and its residents
                        and fulfill a demonstrated need for additional housing,
                        industrial, commercial or open space uses.
C I T Y O F H  E M  E T G  E   N   E  R  A L      P   L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                          2-109

                                                                                 LAND USE
LU-14.10     Prezoning through Specific Plans Specific plans shall be
             the preferred method to assign prezoning to annexation
             areas in order to allow design flexibility for properties with
             topographic or environmental constraints, permit site-
             specific land uses and development standards, ensure
             compatibility with surrounding areas, create distinctive
             open space and recreational opportunities, promote
             innovative site and architectural design, and identify
             required infrastructure to serve the development.
LU-14.11     Coordination with the County Coordinate with the
             County of Riverside to create consistencies in land use
             designations within the City's Sphere of Influence area,
             and promote effective inter-governmental cooperation to
             insure land use compatibility and minimize development
             and service delivery impacts.
LU-14.12     Coordination with local and regional agencies
             Coordinate with other local and regional agencies and
             landowners as appropriate to create master infrastructure
             plans and public service delivery plans for large scale areas
             subject to potential annexation.
H EALTHY C OMMUNITIES
GOAL          Foster a healthy community through land use and
              urban design practices that support healthy and
LU-15         sustainable lifestyles for all Hemet residents.
POLICIES
LU-15.1      Balance of Land Uses Through the General Plan Land
             Use and Zoning Maps, establish a balance of land use
             opportunities for jobs, housing, and services within the
             community that help achieve the mobility, access, open
             space, and air quality goals and policies of the City.
LU-15.2      Health Care Facilities Encourage and promote a range
             of facilities and service options for preventive, emergency,
             and specialty health care. Ensure that adequate public
             transit and pedestrian access to the health care facilities are
             provided.
LU-15.3      Pedestrian Linkages and Connectivity Encourage a
             built environment that promotes physical activity and
             access to goods and services while reducing driving and
             pollution by directing new commercial growth to existing
             and planned residential areas, incorporating pedestrian
             linkages and connectivity between land uses, and requiring
             development and design standards that create walkable
             streets and neighborhoods.
LU-15.4      Healthy Development Patterns Promote development
             patterns and opportunities that reduce commute times,
       C I T Y     O    F    H   E  M  E   T    G   E  N   E  R  A L       P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                                  2-110
 LAND USE
                         encourage the improvement of vacant properties and
                         reinvestment in neighborhoods, foster safe and attractive
                         environments, encourage civic participation, and provide
                         public spaces for people to congregate and interact
                         socially.
              LU-15.5    Unhealthy Development Patterns Create, update, and
                         enforce regulations and laws pertaining to the location,
                         retailing, and use of unhealthy substances such as tobacco,
                         marijuana and other drugs, and alcohol.
              LU-15.6    Complete Communities Coordinate the development of
                         complete neighborhoods that provide for the basic needs
                         of daily life and for the health, safety, and welfare of
                         residents.
              LU-15.7    Public Spaces Support the creation of public spaces that
                         foster positive human interaction and healthy lifestyles
                         such as public plazas, sidewalk and other outdoor dining
                         opportunities, public art displays, and central gathering and
                         meeting spaces.
              LU-15.8    Rural Residential and Agricultural Areas Promote
                         healthy land use patterns by preserving scenic and open
                         space resources, preventing inappropriate development in
                         agricultural and rural areas, and developing or honoring
                         incentives that preserve the economic value of agricultural
                         and open space lands.
              LU-15.9    Healthy Food Choices Increase access to healthy foods by
                         encouraging a mix of food establishments that offer healthy
                         food choices, supporting neighborhood and community
                         gardens, promoting farmers markets, and reducing barriers
                         to the production and distribution of locally grown food.
              LU-15.10   Equitable Distribution of Healthy Food Choices
                         Encourage the equitable distribution of healthy food
                         retailers and restaurants in appropriate locations throughout
                         residential and employment areas of the City.
              LU-15.11   Equitable Distribution of Community Health Activities
                         and Businesses Encourage the equitable distribution of
                         fitness centers, sports facilities, gyms, dance and yoga
                         studios, art studios, recreational trails, and parks at
                         appropriate locations serving residential and employment
                         areas of the City.
              LU-15.12   Freeway/Highway Adjacent Sensitive Land Uses To
                         protect sensitive land uses from air pollution generated by
                         freeways, highways, and truck routes, establish a buffer-area
                         between the sensitive land uses and freeways, highways and
                         truck routes.
C I T Y O F H  E M  E  T G   E  N   E  R  A L      P   L A  N      2 0 3 0
                           2-111
                                                             LAND USE
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R A L P L A  N 2 0 3 0
                                         2-112
                                       CHAPTER 3                              COMMUNITY DESIGN
The Community Design Element
addresses the physical aspects of
Hemet that contribute to the image
                                       C     ommunity design encompasses many components, including the
                                             functional aspects of buildings and spaces; landscaping, safety and
                                             accessibility; and elements of a more subjective nature. The primary
                                             objective of community design is to achieve beautiful, safe, and
and character of the community’s       successful neighborhoods and business districts. Well-designed, well-built
natural and built environments.        projects that fit within existing neighborhoods are good for the community.
Good design is intended to improve
the physical appearance of the City,   Desired design elements are required of homeowners, business owners,
to promote Hemet as a special place    architects, and developers to achieve superior quality and design within
to visit, to invigorate the local      both new construction and additions to existing buildings in Hemet. In
economy by attracting shoppers and     addition, design elements will be considered in all civic projects and within
visitors, and to improve the quality   the streetscapes throughout the City. In general, good community design:
of life for the community as a
whole.                                     leads to occupant satisfaction and community pride, inspiring ongoing
                                           concern and care for the project or building;
                                           enhances and helps stabilize neighborhoods and districts;
                                           ensures durability and easy maintenance;
                                           appreciates in value; and
                                           provides a safe and harmonious environment for living and conducting
                                           business.
                                       Palm-lined street view of the San Jacinto Mountains
               C   I T Y       O   F H  E  M   E   T     G   E   N   E  R   A L     P   L  A N  2 0 3 0
                                                             3-1

                                                                       COMMUNITY DESIGN
3.1      I SSUES       AND O PPORTU NITIES
Hemet is fortunate to be located in a beautiful area along the major future
growth corridor for Western Riverside County. The City of Hemet’s
community design goals and policies focus on the following issues:
     overall City image enhancement, creating a sense of place;
     enhancement of public spaces, streetscapes and gateway development;
     significant natural features, public viewsheds, and hillsides preservation;
     design excellence for new and rehabilitated development;
     establishment of public gathering spaces; and
     neighborhood/district preservation or enhancement.
Throughout the General Plan terms such as attractive and high-quality are
used to describe the type of development that Hemet will strive to achieve.
These terms are highly subjective, and what is considered attractive or of
high quality can vary from person to person and from time period to time
period. The Community Design Element does not establish specific
guidelines for development design such as color palettes or architectural
styles. The element does outline strategies to protect and encourage the
characteristics that make Hemet a desirable place to live.
For example, instead of specifying exactly how commercial centers should look,
the plan encourages commercial centers that function well financially and
physically by being located in appropriate areas and providing for pedestrian
access that can attract visitors and reduce vehicle trips and greenhouse gasses.
City leaders and residents will use the General Plan as a foundation when
making decisions related to aesthetic value as the goals, objectives, and
policies can help them navigate through ever-changing design trends and
architectural fads.
3.2      R ELAT ED P R OGRAM S , P LANS ,                      AND
         R EGULATI ONS
The City of Hemet has adopted a series of design guidelines that deal with a
variety of land use types and projects.
Citywide Design Guidelines The City Council has adopted citywide
design guidelines for single-family development, multi-family development,
and commercial development. These guidelines provide site planning,
architectural design, and landscape design criteria for future development.
Hub of the Valley/Downtown Design Guidelines Design guidelines for
the downtown area were established by City Council policy through a
General Plan amendment in 1999. The guidelines dealt with building design
and rehabilitation, and sign design within the area generally bounded by Inez
Street on the west, Kimball Street on the south, Buena Vista Avenue on the
east, and properties located on the north side of Devonshire Avenue. The
Hub Plan is being updated in this General Plan to incorporate additional
         C   I  T Y      O    F    H   E  M   E  T      G   E   N E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                            3-2

       COMMUNITY DESIGN
                       guidelines and revised boundaries. The Greater Downtown District, as
                       described in Section 2.6.1 of the Land Use Element and represented
                       graphically in Figure 2.4, replaces the Hub of the Valley downtown area, and
                       the Downtown Guidelines will be revised to incorporate these areas.
                       City of Hemet Zoning Code The City’s Zoning Code is also an important
                       implementation tool for the Community Design Element. The code
                       includes zoning ordinance provisions, subdivision regulations,
                       environmental review procedures and sign code provisions.
                       Specific Plans Project-specific design guidelines have been incorporated
                       into a variety of specific plans that have been adopted by ordinance by the
                       Hemet City Council. The purpose of the specific plans is to provide
                       comprehensive planning of large areas consistent with the General Plan.
                       Many areas as noted in the Land Use Element will have specific plans as a
                       requirement of development.
                       Scenic Highway Setback Manual The Scenic Highway Setback Manual was
                       adopted by the City Council in 1990 and regulates the 25 foot wide landscape
                       setback and public right-of-way established for Sanderson Avenue, West and
                       East Florida Avenue, South State Street, and Warren Road.
                       Hillside Overlay Ordinance Hillside development is regulated through
                       hillside design principles first established in the 1992 General Plan and
                       incorporated in this General Plan and the Hillside Overlay Ordinance
                       adopted in 2000.
                                   3.3 C ITY I MAGE E NHANCEME NT -
                                   C REATING A S ENS E OF P LACE
                                   The Hemet community is unique, shaped by a distinct sense of
                                   history that has been cultivated over the decades by those who
                                   call Hemet home. Yet in some places, housing developments,
                                   shopping centers, streets and roads have transformed the City’s
                                   natural and rural landscape into a pattern of suburban
                                   development with no special character or sense of community to
                                   differentiate it from other cities in the region. Promoting
Gateway signage.                   community design elements can support the creation of
                                   neighborhood focal points that are attractive, functional,
                                   connected, and diverse. These focal points will inspire resident
                       pride, attract visitors and customers to Hemet, and be noticeably different
                       than those in surrounding cities.
                       Hemet’s sense of place will be created through design elements such as
                       those listed below and further described in this element:
                            integrating gateway monuments at entry points and key intersections
                            within the City to portray a distinguished visual identity and mark key
                            entrances and boundaries;
      C   I T Y  O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E   N E   R  A L    P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                             3-3

                                                                   COMMUNITY DESIGN
expanding streetscapes, landscaped corridors, and green streets that
offer visual enhancement and shade as well as stormwater management
and water conservation leadership;
preserving legendary views of the mountains surrounding
Hemet, and managing development in significant hillside
areas to conserve wildlife and habitat resources as well as the
scenic beauty of the ridges and natural landforms;
requiring good site plan designs for new and recycled
developments to reduce pedestrian and vehicular conflicts,
increase functional compatibility between buildings and
facilities, orient buildings to the streets, and include pedestrian
amenities such as plazas and paseos;
establishing signage policies that encourage interesting,
creative, and unique approaches to sign design and location, Historic Harvard Street.
and that incorporate public wayfinding signage to assist
residents and visitors, discourage outdoor advertising that
obstructs scenic vistas and encroaches on neighboring properties, and
promote the integration of signage with their surroundings and in
coordination with the City’s desired street character;
establishing design themes and guidelines for walls and fences to ensure
a safe and aesthetic street level image of projects, neighborhoods, and
districts;
updating the City’s landscape standards to incorporate sustainable
landscaping solutions, encourage the preservation of mature and heritage
trees, and ensure property owner maintenance of landscaped areas;
striving to make Hemet a “walkable community” through
community design features that encourage pedestrian
amenities, create links between neighborhoods, and provide
public gathering spaces;
maintaining and enhancing public open spaces within the City
to provide public gathering spaces for social and recreational
activities;
encouraging mixed-use communities to include human-scaled
design components to facilitate pedestrian interaction,
                                                                      Example of landscaping creating a gateway.
connectivity, and safety; and
incorporating crime-free design principles in development projects to
improve the feeling of personal safety and create safe and stable
neighborhoods.
     C   I   T Y     O   F     H   E  M   E   T    G   E   N E   R  A L   P   L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                       3-4

          COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                 3.4       C OMMUNITY D ESIG N E LEME NTS
                                 3.4.1         GATEWAYS
                                 Community design can also create a sense of place by alerting drivers when
                                 they are entering and exiting Hemet. Gateway markers or monuments that
                                 integrate architectural elements, landscaping, and signs together can portray
                                 a distinguished visual identity for the City, help mark the physical
                                 boundaries of specific neighborhoods, and alert visitors that they have
                                 entered Hemet. Markers may be designed to integrate with adjacent site
                                 landscaping and incorporate creative and artistic features.
                                 The City intends to clearly define its primary and secondary entrances
                                 through the use of landscaping, walls, signage, and appropriate street
                                 furniture. Neighborhoods and other historic districts will also be
                                 distinguished through the use of these design features.
                                 Primary gateways are those located at the major entrances to the City.
                                 Potential locations for primary gateways are shown in Figure 3.1 and include:
                                      future SR 79 and West Florida Avenue,
                                      future SR 79 and West Stetson Avenue,
                                      future SR 79 and Domenigoni Parkway,
                                      future SR 79 and Esplanade Avenue,
                                      western entrance to the City on West Florida Avenue,
                                      eastern entrance to the City on East Florida Avenue,
                                      northern entrance to the City at Sanderson Avenue
                                      northern entrance to the City at State Street,
                                      northern entrance to the City at San Jacinto Street,
                                      southern entrance to the City on State Street,
                                      Warren Road and Domenigoni Parkway, and
                                      Sanderson Avenue and Domenigoni Parkway.
                                 Secondary gateways are located at prominent intersections within the City.
                                 Potential locations for secondary gateways include:
                                      West Florida Avenue and Sanderson Avenue,
                                      South State Street and Stetson Avenue,
                                      South State Street and Domenigoni Parkway, and
                                      Entry points to the Historic Downtown Area.
Streetscape on Florida Avenue.
                                 Figure 3.1 illustrates the potential primary and secondary gateway locations
                                 in the City and the Planning Area.
         C  I  T Y      O  F   H  E   M   E  T     G  E   N   E  R  A L      P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                                      3-5
                                                                    COMMUNITY DESIGN
3.4.2          STREETSCAPES AND SCENIC CORRIDORS
Important components of the overall design framework for the City are the
streetscapes and landscaped corridors along the major roadways. Originally,
these were established with the Scenic Highway Setback program adopted
in 1990. The program required an additional 25 foot-wide landscape
setback with meandering sidewalk and streetscape furniture next to the
public parkway. The Scenic Highway Setback Manuel specified the
landscape palette, wall design, signage, and pavement required for the
setback area for the following roadways:
     West Florida Avenue: West Sanderson Avenue to the west sphere of
     influence line;
     East Florida Avenue: Stanford Street to the east sphere of influence line;
     Sanderson Avenue: Commonwealth Avenue to Simpson Road;
     Warren Road: Commonwealth Avenue to Simpson Road;
     State Street: Thornton Avenue to Newport Road; and
     Simpson Road: west sphere of influence line to State Street.
     (Domenigoni Road has replaced Simpson Road as an east-west
     corridor.)
To increase the number of landscaped corridors in Hemet, the City has expanded
upon the 1990 Scenic Highway Setback Manuel to incorporate more roadways. As
shown in Figure 3.1, roadways designated as landscaped corridors generally include
the north-south roadways of Warren Road, Sanderson Avenue, State Street, San
Jacinto Road, and the future SR 79; and east-west roadways of Esplanade Avenue,
Florida Avenue, Stetson Avenue, Simpson Road, and Domenigoni Parkway. With
additional rights-of-way and a consistent landscape treatment, the newer areas of
the City will be linked into the urban design fabric of the City. These important
components link various activity nodes such as commercial centers, civic, cultural
and recreational uses. The enhanced scale of the streetscapes will allow for the
establishment of pedestrian and bicycle pathways.
The designated landscaped corridors shown in Figure 3.1 are to be designed to
correspond to the City’s Roadway Circulation Master Plan, discussed in
Chapter 4, Circulation. A brief description of each of the corridors with the
referenced cross-section view is listed below:
Warren Road (north-south): This rural road will develop into a major north-
south transportation route and has been designated as a scenic highway
corridor. The roadway will have major gateway elements as well as meandering
sidewalks and streetscape furniture (Figure 3.2).
Sanderson Avenue (north-south): Presently one of the most heavily traveled
corridors in the City. Sanderson Avenue divides several of the City’s
neighborhoods and districts. Sanderson Avenue has been designated as a scenic
highway corridor and has largely been developed with the Scenic Highway
Elements (Figure 3.2).
Florida Avenue (east-west): Florida Avenue is the prime east-west corridor
in the City. It’s eastern and westernmost reaches have been designated as scenic
highway corridors. The central portion will need special treatment due to
constrained rights-of-way. Installation of landscape medians will serve to
beautify and unify the corridor as well as provide traffic calming (Figure 3.3).
         C   I  T Y      O  F    H   E  M  E  T     G   E   N  E  R  A L       P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        3-6

                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                               Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Jacinto
                                                                                                        Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                River
                                                                                                                                                                               Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                 California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                 Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ee
                                                                                                              Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                         Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ian
                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ve
                                                                                                                                                             Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                               Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                   Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                     ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                     Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kirby St
                                                                                                                                          ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Y
                                                                                                                                                                  HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                        ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                   AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                               SF
                                                                                                                                        A qu
                                                           Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                     AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                   ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                  San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                   Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                        Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                              ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                                 Warren Rd
                                                                                                                          Ste
                                                                                                                                                              Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 go
                                                                                                                                                             ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pk
                                                                                                                                                           iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                      on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                               ni
                                                                                                                                                  g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                           e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                                    Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                               Diamond Valley Lake
                                                        DIAMOND VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                              State St
                                                             WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cactus Valley Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Note: Corridors shown in Figure 3.1 shall be developed consistent with General Plan
X06268298.11 090 01/24/2012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figures 3.2 through 3.6 and the City's Scenic Highway Setback Manual.
                                                                                                                                                                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                    Gateways                                                                                                        Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                    Type                                                                                                            Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                       Primary Gateway                                                                                 Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                      Secondary Gateway                                                                               Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F i g u r e     3 . 1
                     1       0.5   0                                 1       2                                                                                                      Corridors                                                                                       River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GATEWAYS AND MAJOR
                                                                                 Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LANDSCAPED CORRIDORS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                            COMMUNITY DESIGN
Back of 3.1
        C   I T Y O F H E M E T G E   N E R  A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                  3-8
       Warren Rd.
                           Perimeter Fence                                                                                                                          Perimeter Fence
                                 25’                    14’         8’       12’      12’    12’     14’-24’     12’    12’       12’        8’          14’                   25’
         SF Homes        Landscape Setback       Ped. / Parkway Bicycle     Lane     Lane   Lane   Bio Swale    Lane   Lane      Lane     Bicycle Ped. / Parkway       Landscape Setback     SF Homes
                                                                                                    130’-140’
                            Lettered Lot                                                          Right of Way                                                            Lettered Lot
         Sanderson Ave.
               Perimeter Fence                                                                                                                                 Perimeter Fence
                                             25’                  10’-15’        8’     12’  12’      14’        12’  12’      8’      10’-15’                  25’
                SF Homes             Landscape Setback         Ped. /Parkway Bicycle   Lane Lane Landscaped     Lane Lane   Bicycle Ped. / Parkway      Landscape Setback           SF Homes
                                                                                                    Median
                                                                                                   98’-108’
                                        Lettered Lot                                             Right of Way                                                Lettered Lot
G 06268298.09 004 1/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                                 F i g u r e          3 . 2
                                                                                                               Warren Road & Sanderson Avenue Cross Sections
                            Source: BMLA 2011                                                                                                   H e m e t               G e n e r a l               P l a n

                                     Florida Ave.
                                                                                                                                                    Tree Well
                                                    5’      10’ Min.     5’       12’    12’      12’       12’     12’         5’      10’ Min.    5’
                              Commercial /                Commercial Bicycle     Lane   Lane  Landscaped   Lane    Lane      Bicycle Commercial                Commercial /
                                 Parking                   Parkway                              Median                                  Parkway                  Parking
                                                                                                  90’
                                                                                             Right of Way
                                                                                                                     City of San Jacinto
          Esplanade Ave.
     Perimeter Wall                                                                                                                                                             Perimeter Wall
                             25’                      12’            5’      12’       12’        12’          12’       12’           5’          12’                25’
                    Landscape Setback          Ped. / Parkway    Bicycle    Lane      Lane    Landscaped      Lane      Lane        Bicycle Ped. / Parkway    Landscape Setback
                                                                                                Median
                                                                                                 94’
                         Lettered Lot                                                        Right of Way                                                       Lettered Lot
G 06268298.09 005 1/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                          F i g u r e            3 . 3
                                                                                                      Florida Avenue and Esplanade Avenue Cross Sections
                            Source: BMLA 2011                                                                                                    H e m e t       G e n e r a l                 P l a n

           COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                                Esplanade Avenue (east-west): Esplanade Avenue forms the
                                                northern boundary of the City. Opportunities exist along its entire
                                                route to demarcate it as a major gateway to the City. Its location
                                                along Hemet’s city limit for 3.5 miles establishes a clear boundary
                                                for the City. Any road or streetscape improvements on Esplanade
                                                Avenue need to be coordinated with the City of San Jacinto to
                                                ensure consistency. Future streetscape improvement should respect
                                                the rural heritage of the area (Figure 3.3).
                                                State Street (north-south): Historically State Street functioned as the
Bridle trail in the scenic highway setback at   major north-south transportation route in the City. The southern
the McSweeny Farms subdivision.                 portion of the street (south of Thornton Avenue to Newport Road)
                                                has been designated as a scenic highway corridor. The Scenic Highway
                                      setback along the McSweeny Farms project has incorporated a bridle trail in its
                                      design. North of Thornton Avenue, the State Street corridor will need special
                                      consideration in that it is largely developed, has a high level of traffic volume
                                      and has a constrained right-of-way. Improvement will be in the form of
                                      landscaping of the existing parkways, development of a landscaped median
                                      where appropriate, and selection of specialized streetscape furniture
                                      (Figure 3.4).
                                      Stetson Avenue (east west): Stetson Avenue is anticipated to become a
                                      major east-west corridor once it is realigned in the west to make important
                                      regional arterial connections. Special treatments are necessary due to
                                      constrained rights-of-way and existing development patterns along the
                                      eastern portion. The western portion of Stetson Avenue west of Cawston
                                      Avenue will be realigned per the Circulation System master plan. Stetson
                                      Avenue can be developed as a proto-typical green and complete street for a
                                      major thoroughfare in the City. Landscape improvements will include
                                      center medians with bioswales, landscaped parkways with bioswales,
                                      meandering sidewalks and appropriate streetscape furniture (Figure 3.5)
                                      Domenigoni Parkway (east-west): Domenigoni Parkway forms the
                                      southernmost east-west corridor in the City. Its exceptional width allows for
                                      a special category of landscape treatment and is designated as a scenic
                                      highway corridor. The roadway will serve as a primary gateway to the City
                                      from the southwest. The Parkway should not be developed as a commercial
                                      corridor with businesses fronting directly onto the road. This limited access
                                      roadway offers opportunities for pedestrian/bicycle trails and equestrian
                                      trails along Salt Creek (Figure 3.5).
                                      San Jacinto Street (north-south): San Jacinto Street has been designed as
                                      SR 79 north of Florida Avenue. The corridor has been developed as a
                                      commercial district north of Florida up to the City limit at Menlo Avenue.
                                      Improvement of the commercial corridor north of Florida Avenue will
                                      involve improvement of the parkway and the addition of appropriate
                                      streetscape furniture. South of Florida Avenue, San Jacinto Street is largely
                                      residential and involves individual residential properties fronting directly
                                      onto the street (Figure 3.4).
         C    I  T Y       O  F     H  E   M   E   T    G   E   N  E   R  A L      P  L  A   N  2 0 3 0
                                                           3-11

       State Street (South of Thorton)
                                               25’                    15’              14’       12’       12’       12’    14’               15’                  25’
                   SF Homes            Landscape Setback       Ped. / Parkway         Lane      Lane   Landscaped   Lane   Lane        Ped. / Parkway     Landscape Setback           SF Homes
                             Perimeter                                                                   Median                                                              Perimeter
                                Wall                                                                                                                                           Wall
                                                                                                           94’
                                         Lettered Lot                                                  Right of Way                                            Lettered Lot
       State Street (North of Thorton)
                                                    25’                10’       5’         12’    12’      12’      12’  12’      5’         10’              25’
                             SF Homes       Front Yard Setback       Ped. /   Bicycle      Lane   Lane  Landscaped  Lane Lane   Bicycle    Ped. /      Front Yard Setback     SF Homes
                                                                   Parkway                                Median                          Parkway
                                                                                                            90’
                                                                                                       Right of Way
G 06268298.09 006 1/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                                   F i g u r e   3 . 4
                                                                                                                                                          State Street Cross Sections
                            Source: BMLA 2011                                                                                                        H e m e t              G e n e r a l      P l a n

      Stetson Ave. (West of Sanderson)
       Perimeter Wall
                                                                                                                                                                                              Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                 R.O.W
                                25’              12’     5’    12’            12’   12’      14’           12’         12’      12’          5’     12’                    25’
                       Landscape Setback       Ped. / Bicycle Lane           Lane  Lane  Bio Swale        Lane        Lane     Lane      Bicycle  Ped. /           Landscape Setback
                          with Bio Swale     Parkway                                       Median                                                Parkway             wtih Bio Swale
                                                                                            124’
                             Lettered Lot                                               Right of Way                                                                 Lettered Lot
      Domenigoni Parkway
                         14’           12’   12’        12’             24’        12’   12’          12’         14’                                         660’                           10’
        Park      Ped. / Parkway      Lane  Lane       Lane        Landscaped     Lane  Lane         Lane      Parkway     Equestrian Trail/            Salt Creek Wash             Ped. / Bicycle Path
                                                                 Bio Swale Median                                           Service Road
                                                                       124’
                                                                   Right of Way
G 06268298.09 007 1/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                            F i g u r e                 3 . 5
                                                                                         Stetson Avenue & Domenigoni Parkway Cross Sections
                             Source: BMLA 2011                                                                                            H e m e t                G e n e r a l                    P l a n

                                                                    COMMUNITY DESIGN
Future SR 79 Corridor (north-south): The future development of the SR
79 roadway through western Hemet will serve as a major entry point to the
City in multiple places. Future development along the corridor should be
planned so as not to merely back onto the roadway. Perimeter walls in the
form of sound attenuation walls, retaining walls, view fencing and the like
should be developed specifically with a theme unique to Hemet (Figure 3.6).
3.4.3         GREEN STREETS
The “green street” concept is derived from a movement to make our streets
and thoroughfares more than merely a conveyance for motorized traffic.
Green streets are designed with landscaping, including street trees, to offer
shade and visual enhancement, but also to serve in storm water
management, and water conservation efforts. Green streets are designed to
utilize landscaping elements in the form of trees, shrubbery, porous
pavement, bioswales to control heat, stormwater drainage, and pollution
control. New and updated design of the City’s landscaped corridors is
called for in an effort to both develop streets that are “complete” streets
and whenever possible “green” streets. Complete streets serve all segments
of the community, i.e. vehicular, pedestrian, and bicyclists. Smaller local and
collector streets may also use these techniques where appropriate. The
following photographs are examples of green street design concepts.
 Bioswale located in parkway adjacent to parking area.        Bioswale in a parking area.
 Bioswale located in an urban parkway.                        Bioswale functioning as decorative landscaping.
         C  I  T Y     O  F     H   E  M   E  T    G   E   N   E  R  A L      P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                                      3-14

            SR79
                      15’         Varies 20’ Min.   10’     12’  12’   10’        66’        10’     12’  12’   10’     Varies 20’ Min.     15’
                 Landscape                        Shoulder Lane Lane Shoulder   Median     Shoulder Lane Lane Shoulder                   Landscape
                    Buffer                                                                                                                 Buffer
                                                                                224’ Min.
                                                                              Right of Way
G 06268298.09 008 1/24/2012
                                                                                                                                        F i g u r e   3 . 6
                                                                                                                                   SR 79 Cross Section
                            Source: BMLA 2011/RCTC 2012                                                          H e m e t         G e n e r a l    P l a n

                                                                   COMMUNITY DESIGN
3.4.4          COMMUNITY SIGNAGE
Cities have long used signs to call attention to civic uses and focal points.
Hemet’s diversity and history offer opportunities to highlight
neighborhoods, cultural and historical places of significance and civic uses.
Signs can make these locations more visible, enable visitors and local
residents to find destinations more quickly, and inform visitors where they
can park or find transit service.
The City’s signage policies encourage interesting, creative, and unique
approaches to sign design and location that incorporates public wayfinding
signage to assist residents and visitors; discourages outdoor advertising that
obstructs scenic vistas and visually encroaches on neighboring properties; and
promotes the integration of signage with their surroundings and in               Example of Public Wayfinding
coordination with the City’s desired street character.                           Signage.
3.4.5          PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
Public open space is generally defined as a social space such as a
town square that is open and accessible to all, regardless of
gender, race, ethnicity, age or socio-economic level. According
to the Project for Public Places (PPS), great public spaces are
where celebrations are held, social and economic exchanges take
place, friends run into each other, and cultures mix. They are the
“front porches” of our public institutions – libraries, field
houses, neighborhood schools – where we interact with each
other and government. When the spaces work well, they serve as
a stage for our public lives.
PPS has found that successful public spaces have four key
qualities: they are accessible; people are engaged in activities The lake at Willow Walk provides an open space
there; the space is comfortable and has a good image; and amenity for residents in the community.
finally, it is a sociable place: one where people meet each
other and take people when they come to visit. The City has
incorporated goals and policies into this General Plan to
facilitate the construction, enhancement, and maintenance
of public open space in Hemet as a means of transforming
its public spaces into vital places that highlight local assets,
spur rejuvenation and serve common needs.
3.5       P RESERVING V IEWSHEDS                    AND
          H ILLSIDES
Hemet is blessed with an abundance of natural beauty and
stunning views of the area’s mountains and hills. While this Florida Avenue viewshed at Kirby Street.
scenery is important to the overall quality of life in Hemet,
scenic vistas and viewsheds are often destroyed during
periods of rapid change. Identifying and protecting these
assets is an important part of creating and maintaining a
visually attractive community. Scenic areas endow
communities with substantial benefits, such as higher
property values and increased tourism revenue. Protecting
scenic vistas and viewsheds from the effects of haphazard
development will allow Hemet to preserve its unique charm, build civic pride,
          C I T Y         O F     H E M E T           G E N E R A L          P L A N        2 0 3 0
                                                        3-16

             COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                                 and attract positive growth to the area. Figure 3.7 shows the major
                                                 hillside areas in the City and Planning Area.
                                                 Viewsheds
                                                 In some cases, commercial signs can degrade the value of viewsheds
                                                 along public rights-of-way. Balancing the needs of businesses with
                                                 the importance of preserving scenic views will be an ongoing
                                                 process for the City. Along Florida Avenue, the General Plan aims
                                                 to limit building heights to one- or two-stories to maximize views
                                                 toward Idyllwild, the San Jacinto Mountains, and other scenic
                                                 resources. Policy CD 4.2 limits building height on both sides of
                                                 Florida Avenue from Gilbert Street to Buena Vista Street, to
Integrating hillside vegetation and natural      preserve the mountain viewshed.
forms and managing vegetation to reduce
wildfire risks will preserve Hemet’s hillsides   Hillsides
as a scenic resource. View of Idyllwild from     Hillside areas are used as landmarks and offer a sense of direction or
Simpson Park.
                                                 orientation. Hillsides also create edges that define Hemet’s sense of
                                                 place and offer opportunities for both recreation and habitat
                                                 preservation. Significant hillside areas are located both in the
                                                 northwest and along the southern portions of the Planning Area,
                                                 extending from Diamond Valley Lake to the southeast, and up into
                                                 the eastern end of the Planning Area. Scenic qualities offered by
                                                 Hemet’s hillside areas include prominent ridgelines, scenic corridors
                                                 and canyons, view corridors, and vista points.
                                                 Land use and development decisions should make the most of the
                                                 natural assets of a particular location. Preserving the prominent
                                                 hillsides and ridge lines in and around the City is important. Many of
                                                 the Planning Area’s hillside areas are characterized by slopes steeper
                                                 than 25 percent. Hillside vegetation is composed principally of
An example of hillside preservation with         chaparral, mixed with Riversidean sage scrub, which is considered
recreational amenity at the Four Seasons Golf    sensitive habitat under the Riverside County Multiple Species
Course in west Hemet.
                                                 Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP.) In addition, the Planning
                                                 Area’s hillsides are rated as extreme fire hazard areas by the
                                                 California Department of Forestry and Fire Prevention. Piecemeal
                                                  changes of wilderness areas to urban uses, including areas in and
                                                  around Hemet, can increase the overall risk of property damage and
                                                  loss of life from fires and seismic-related ground failure in the
                                                  Planning Area, will reduce habitat for sensitive species, and may
                                                  sever connections between large habitat resources and reserves.
                                                  As demand for housing in the community increases, the search for
                                                  upscale housing locations will lead many new residents to the area’s
                                                  beautiful hillside locations. Unfortunately in some cases, a
                                                  homebuilder’s desire for isolation and scenic views can run counter
                                                  to the City’s desire to protect hillsides from development that
 Hemet area hillsides.
                                                  would dominate the hillside landscape, break up natural landforms
                                                  and ridges, endanger residents, and degrade habitat resources.
                                                  Hillside development can negatively affect the look of the Valley’s
                                                  signature ridgelines and hillsides. Oftentimes, houses dominate
                                                  hillside views rather than blending in with the natural landscape.
                                                  During development, the outer surface layer of soil is disturbed and
                                                  the lighter subsurface soil is exposed. The resulting visual contrast
           C   I  T Y       O  F     H    E  M E   T      G   E  N   E  R   A L     P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                             3-17

                                                                       COMMUNITY DESIGN
can create an eyesore. Excessive disturbance of existing landforms along
major ridgelines and hillsides also eliminates existing vegetation and creates
new runoff and erosion problems.
The City recognizes hillside areas as an important aesthetic resource.
General Plan policies reflect a balance between the community’s desire to
preserve hillsides and property rights. Hemet’s hillside areas will remain a
rural, low density environment, where impacts from landslides and wildfires
are minimized, wildlife and habitat resources are conserved, and the scenic
beauty of the ridges and natural landforms in the area is maintained.
Hillside areas are designated either Open Space or Hillside Residential on
the Land Use Map (Figure 2.1). Goals and policies for hillside development
provide a framework to define the desired future use of the hillsides,
including housing, agriculture, resource protection, or recreation purposes.
Hillside area development should follow the development character
guidelines contained in Table 3.1.
                                                            Table 3.1
                                   Desired Hillside Area Development Character
              Percent                                    Development Characteristic/Intensity
               Slope
            Less than              Generally considered to be minimum slope areas, and as such may be mass graded
            10%                    for development. Significant environmental features may be required to be
                                   preserved.
            10% to                 Mass grading may occur, but grading should utilize contour grading techniques.
            15%                    Significant environmental features may be required to be preserved.
            15% to                 All grading should be contoured and sensitive to significant environmental features.
            25%                    Mass grading is not appropriate. The amount of grading should be what is
                                   minimally required to establish custom building pads and entry access. Custom
                                   architectural designs which enable the reduction of building pad areas are
                                   encouraged.
            25% and                Grading and development within this slope category is generally discouraged
            above                  except where the following findings can be made:
                                   Linkage/Access: The area in excess of 25 percent slope is minimal and represents
                                   the only means of access or linkage to another area of less than 25 percent slope
                                   which otherwise could not be developed.
                                   Custom Home Sites: Dwellings have been designed to fit the terrain so that there
                                   are no significant external signs of grading through the use of stepped foundations,
                                   small retaining walls, post and beam construction, or similar custom design
                                   features.
                                   Driveway Access: Access to the site is designed to blend with the natural terrain as
                                   much as possible while maintaining a less than 15 percent grade.
                                   Aesthetics: Visual impacts are not found to be significant.
                                   Safety: No adverse impacts to the public health, safety, and welfare are present.
         C  I  T Y     O   F     H  E   M   E   T     G   E  N    E  R   A L      P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                         3-18

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                  ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                               HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                     ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                        iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                               g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 082 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                 Slope                                                                                         Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                 0 - 10%                                                                       Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                 10 - 15%                                                                      Street
                     Sources:
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                                 15 - 25%                                                                      Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F i g u r e     3 . 7
                                                                                                                                                                                 25% +
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                                    River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HILLSIDE AREAS
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                             COMMUNITY DESIGN
Back of Figure 3.7
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R  A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   3-20
 COMMUNITY DESIGN
              Viewshed preservation and hillside development will be guided through
              implementation of General Plan goals and related policies and programs,
              which are applicable to portions of the Planning Area featuring slopes in
              excess of 10 percent.
              Illustrated examples of appropriate hillside development are shown below.
              Acceptable: Development is stepped       Unacceptable: Profile of building
              to match profile of the original         not in concept with line of slope or
              ridgelines and incorporates              ridgeline.
              landscaping to soften building
              profiles.
              Acceptable: Edges of cut slopes are      Unacceptable: Typical standard cut
              contoured to match existing hillside     slope has manufactured appearance.
              backdrop.
              Acceptable: Lots use                     Unacceptable: Daylight line, lot
              “shallow/wide” format to work with       depth and size, and slope gradient
              natural contours.                        have harsh manufactured appearance.
C I T Y O F H   E  M    E T     G   E   N   E  R  A L   P   L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                   3-21

                                                                COMMUNITY DESIGN
Manufactured slopes in excess of 4 feet in vertical height shall be
landscaped. Manufactured slopes in excess of 15 feet should be provided
with landform planting pursuant to the guidelines below and Diagram 3.1.
    Landform planting consists of a planting design that reinforces or
    recreates the visual appearance of a natural feature.
    Within landform planting concepts, plants are grouped within swale
    areas to more closely reflect natural conditions.
    In plan view, plant materials are grouped to create the appearance of
    “shelf” configurations.
Diagram 3.1
        C   I  T Y     O   F    H   E  M   E T     G   E  N E R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                      3-22

         COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                               3.6     S ITE D ESI GN
                                               Site planning considerations include building locations, parking
                                               areas, pedestrian walkways, driveways, trash enclosures, loading
                                               docks, and service access, in addition to other physical
                                               characteristics. Good site plan designs incorporate all the physical
                                               characteristics of a large commercial, industrial or office center into
                                               a logical design that reduces pedestrian and vehicular conflicts,
                                               increases functional compatibility between buildings and facilities,
                                               orients buildings to the street, and includes pedestrian amenities,
                                               such as plazas or paseos. Site planning also accounts for pedestrian
                                               and automobile circulation. Both are necessary for the success of
 A row of palm trees establishes a visual
 corridor within this commercial center.       large commercial centers.
 The corridor is visually attractive and
 helps distinguish entrances and exits for     Good site design can also minimize the proliferation of commercial
 motorists.                                    strip malls prevalent in many older communities. Strip malls face
                                               major traffic routes, feature few pedestrian connections to
                                        surrounding neighborhoods, and support use of the automobile over
                                        alternative transportation modes.
                                        The City encourages the use of shared parking and joint parking facilities
                                        to minimize the number of required parking spaces where adjacent uses
                                        create staggered parking demand. Surface parking areas should be
                                        oriented internal to the development rather than on the perimeter.
                                        Establishing and maintaining individual parking areas for separate
                                        businesses is inefficient. Shoppers visiting more than one business must
                                        drive to each one, creating additional traffic hazards, especially when
                                        driveways are located very close to intersections. Furthermore, when
                                        individual businesses must provide their own parking, they cannot share
Commercial design should place
buildings near the street right-of-     overflow with their neighbors during peak hours, resulting either in excess
way.                                    street parking, lost of business, or the creation of parking lots much larger
                                                             than necessary to serve typical levels of business.
                                                             On larger properties, anchor buildings should be sited
                                                             toward the rear of the property, with ample parking
                                                             located directly in front of the building. Pedestrian
                                                             access such as walkways or paved routes should be
                                                             created between all buildings. Smaller building pads
                                                             should be oriented toward the street, but should not
                                                             hinder visibility of the anchor store and parking areas.
                                                             Encouraging this type of site design can minimize the
                                                             visual effect of wide expanses of parking lots, typical of
                                                             many of Hemet’s existing shopping centers.
                                                             Diagram 3.2 shows examples of development patterns
Walkways and landscaping in retail centers should be         that the City discourages along the Florida-Devonshire-
used to minimize the visual effect of parking areas          Acacia Commercial Corridors. In the example on the
while preserving visibility for anchor stores.               left, properties are built in isolation from one another.
                                                             Placement of structures within lots is inconsistent, and
                                                             unsightly block walls or chain-link fences often separate
                                                             adjacent parcels. The shopping center shown on the
       C    I T Y       O    F     H   E   M    E  T    G    E  N   E  R  A L      P   L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                            3-23

                                                                      COMMUNITY DESIGN
right demonstrates a situation where buildings are constructed as a cohesive
unit, but the long, straight frontage creates an unattractive monotony. Instead
of many small parking lots, one large sea of parking faces the street. Such
development presents an unattractive image of Hemet to travelers along
Florida Avenue and parallel east-west routes.
  Diagram 3.2 Undesirable Commercial Development Patterns for the Florida-Devonshire-Acacia Corridors
Diagram 3.3 Desired Commercial Activity Centers for the Florida-Devonshire-Acacia Corridors
Diagram 3.3 provides examples of activity centers that the City desires for
new commercial development within the Florida Commercial District. The
design of the two centers shown here emphasizes a more unified,
landscaped design that adds value to the businesses and enhances the
appearance of the property from the roadway. Buildings on each site are
arranged to create enclosed spaces, establishing places for people to gather
or dine outdoors. Structures are also placed to present drivers on Florida
Avenue with a more interesting view than the sea of parking offered in
Diagram 3.1.
The two sample parking arrangements shown in Diagram 3.3 wrap around
and behind the businesses they serve instead of standing between the
businesses and the street. The number of driveways is lower and driveways
are placed further from intersections, reducing potential traffic conflict
points. Sharing parking spaces is important because peak hours for different
types of businesses are different. A bank and a move theater, for example,
have little overlap in operating hours and can thus use the same parking
         C   I  T Y      O   F    H   E  M   E  T     G   E   N  E  R  A L      P  L   A  N   2 0 3 0
                                                         3-24
           COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                       spaces at different times of day, reducing the need for both businesses to
                                       maintain their own, separate parking.
                                       3.6.1         SIGNAGE
                                       Signs are an important identification element for any City. Signs influence
                                       the overall character and appearance of Hemet’s cityscape, and should be
                                       given as much consideration as architectural styles or building sites. Signs
                                       must be an integral part of overall project design of a project, not an
Example of a high quality wall sign.   afterthought. Signs should serve the City's interests in maintaining and
                                       enhancing Hemet’s visual appeal for residents, tourists and other visitors.
                                       Good design and placement of signs prevents the degradation of visual
                                       quality which can result from poor design, location, or maintenance.
                                       The City recognizes that signs are important to the economic well-being of
                                       businesses. As tenants install signs, they must comply with all applicable
                                       sign regulations and fit with the architectural character, proportions, and
                                       details of the development.
                                       Due to Hemet’s growth and the continued expansion of development into
                                       once rural and agricultural areas, commercial advertising may create
                                       conflicts between businesses and residents. The City will use rural sign
                                       standards and streetscape elements to create a sense of place while
                                       respecting the rural character of outlying portions of the Planning Area.
Example of a projecting sign.
                                       The City intends to update and expand the current sign code to limit the
                                       proliferation of oversized signs and ensure high quality sign design.
                                       3.6.2         WALLS AND FENCES
                                       A component of Hemet's street-level image is portrayed in the fences and
                                       walls on the perimeter of residential subdivisions and commercial
                                       developments that are visible from the City’s major corridors. The specific
                                       design of the wall or fence sets a strong design theme for the individual
                                       project and the neighborhood or district where it is located. Perimeter fencing
                                                                  should be constructed out of durable decorative
                                                                  materials that correlate to the architectural design
                                                                  theme of the project, neighborhood or district.
                                                                  Although the installation of solid walls is
                                                                  discouraged along major roadways, it is sometimes
                                                                  necessary for screening, safety, or sound
                                                                  attenuation purposes. Where walls or fences are
                                                                  necessary, the following should be considered:
 Project Theme Wall Example.
          C  I  T Y       O  F       H  E   M  E   T    G   E  N   E  R  A L      P   L A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                           3-25

                                                                COMMUNITY DESIGN
Wrought Iron Fencing. Incorporation of wrought iron fencing into
the solid wall designs can break up the linear stretches of blank surface.    SUSTA INAB LE           LA NDSCAP ING
                                                                                             SOLU TIO NS
This technique, in combination with climbing vines and other
landscaping, creates the illusion of the wall or fence being an integral     Some of the sol u ti ons bei ng
                                                                             d e v e l o pe d a r e :
component of the landscape design.
                                                                                      Reduction of stormwater run-
Multi-family Development. New multi-family developments should                        off through the use of bio-
                                                                                      swales, rain gardens and green
consider rear façades which front public rights-of-way as the primary                 roofs and walls.
elevation in the design of the project. Street façades which are designed
to include landscaped berms and tree planting are recommended over                    Reduction of water use in
                                                                                      landscapes through design of
solid walls or fences.                                                                water-wise garden techniques
Bermed landscaping is encouraged to be used as an alternative to                      Bio-filtering of wastes through
                                                                                      constructed wetlands [
development of walls and fences.
                                                                                      Landscape irrigation using water
Rural Fencing. Solid walls and fences should be avoided in rural                      from showers and sinks, known
residential areas except around courtyards, patios, or pool areas where               as gray water
privacy is needed. Open fencing types should be the rule in rural areas               Integrated Pest Management
to maintain a feeling of openness and space. Use wall and fence                       techniques for pest control
materials consistent with the established theme of the area. Avoid high,              Creating and enhancing wildlife
solid fencing in favor of low walls, low split rail, range, or other types            habitat in urban environments
of open fencing.
                                                                                      Energy-efficient landscape
                                                                                      design in the form of proper
Infill Development. Where they are needed, fences or walls should                     placement and selection of
relate to both the site being developed and surrounding developments,                 shade trees and creation of wind
open spaces and surrounding developments, streets, and pedestrian                     breaks
ways, and should respect existing view corridors to the greatest extent               Permeable paving materials to
possible.                                                                             reduce stormwater run-off and
                                                                                      allow rain water to infiltrate into
Theme walls. Where provision of a wall or fence cannot be avoided,                    the ground and replenish
                                                                                      groundwater rather than run
the establishment of theme walls or fences is encouraged. However,                    into surface water
such walls should be coordinated with perimeter landscape design and
provide aesthetic enhancement to the project without creating a “walled               Use of sustainably harvested
                                                                                      wood, composite wood
in” appearance. The use of any fencing or walls should also be                        products for decking and other
consistent with the overall design theme of the development or                        landscape projects, as well as
adjoining existing developments.                                                      use of plastic lumber
                                                                                      Recycling of products, such as
Landscape buffering. Where construction of a solid wall which will                    glass, rubber from tires and
be visible along a public street is necessary, provide landscaping such as            other materials to create
trees, shrubs, or vines to soften the appearance of the wall, and to                  landscape products such as
reduce undue glare, heat, and reflection. Ensure that fencing is                      paving stones, mulch and other
                                                                                      materials[
constructed of durable materials which will resist the damaging effect
of wind, rain, and irrigation.                                                        Soil management techniques,
                                                                                      including composting kitchen
Maintenance. When fences or walls are developed along a streetscape,                  and yard wastes, to maintain
                                                                                      and enhance healthy soil that
whether solid or with wrought iron openings, it should be recognized                  supports a diversity of soil life
that the adjacent homeowner or business is not likely to maintain
landscaping outside of the wall or fence within the public right-of-way.              Integration and adoption of
                                                                                      renewable energy, including
Therefore, whenever fences or walls are to be developed along a                       solar-powered landscape
streetscape, provisions should be made as part of the responsible project             lighting
to identify maintenance responsibilities and the method proposed to
ensure perpetual care for landscaped areas within public rights-of-way.
     C  I  T Y      O  F     H   E  M   E  T     G  E   N  E  R  A L     P L   A     N        2 0 3 0
                                                   3-26

             COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                             3.6.3         LANDSCAPING
                                             Landscaping plays a critical role in determining the overall image that
                                             Hemet conveys. Additionally, good landscaping adds to the quality of
                                             life of both residents and visitors. Hemet’s dry climate provides a
                                             challenge to establish and maintain a high standard of landscape
                                             environment. City landscape guidelines require developers and
                                             residents to incorporate native drought-resistant vegetation and
                                             mature shade trees into landscape designs to conserve water, improve
                                             comfort, augment neighborhood aesthetics, reduce energy use from
                                             operation of buildings, and maximize carbon capture and storage.
 Project entries are typically formed with   Sustainable landscaping solutions are encouraged such as using
 walls, signage and landscaping such as      landscape areas for stormwater management and treatment.
 this one at the entry of the Del Webb
 community.                                  Although some of Hemet’s streets lack consistent street tree themes,
                                             the City has been named a Tree City USA annually since 1987
                                             showing that the City values its trees for their beauty, grace, and
                                             positive investment in a healthy future environment. General Plan
                                             policies establish a master plan of street landscaping to ensure the
                                             identification of appropriate street trees for individual streets, while
                                             encouraging a diversity of trees in Hemet’s urban forest. Policies in
                                             the Open Space and Conservation Element (Chapter 7) encourage the
                                             preservation of mature and heritage trees and use of California-
                                             friendly and shade trees.
                                             The City intends to continually update the landscape standards in the
Landscaped setback on Mustang Way.           City’s codes for residential, commercial and industrial development to
                                             conform to evolving state and federal legislation regarding
                                             sustainability. These updates will consider ways to increase the amount
                                             of required landscaping while conserving water resources and using
                                             appropriate drought-tolerant plant materials, and require property
                                             owner maintenance of all landscaped areas.
                                             3.6.4         CREATING WALKABLE COMMUNITIES
                                             Good community design featuring pedestrian access and amenities
                                             offers a pleasurable walking environment, and can help create
Drought tolerant streetscape on Searl        successful shopping centers and residential areas. Walkable
Parkway.                                        communities generally strive to include:
                                                     A town center that offers shopping, public spaces, community
                                                     services, and entertainment;
                                                     Mixed-use neighborhoods with businesses and residences
                                                     located near each other. Compact development, as opposed to
                                                     sprawl. People can walk to work, shops, and schools;
                                                     Public space with parks and other places where people can
                                                     gather and play;
Streetscapes with pedestrian amenities
create walkable environments and                     Street and parking lot designs that encourage walking with
pedestrian linkages between communities,             sidewalks, shade trees, benches, appropriate ramps, medians,
such as this one on Sanderson Avenue.
           C   I  T Y       O    F    H   E M   E  T     G   E   N  E  R   A L    P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                            3-27

                                                                    COMMUNITY DESIGN
     and other basic amenities that make walking feasible and
     enjoyable for everyone;
     Streets and trails that are speed-controlled, well-linked, and
     designed to encourage fewer and shorter vehicle trips;
     Public transportation that is readily accessible and
     extensive; and
                                                                     Trails within the Willow Walk community
     Residential neighborhoods that are interconnected and provide opportunities for walking and exercise.
     designed at a scale that encourages alternatives to the
     automobile.
Given the demands of automobile travel in urban areas, it is
difficult to make adequate provisions for pedestrians. However,
encouraging pedestrian amenities can be beneficial, especially in
retail commercial areas of the City. While many residents make
one-stop shopping trips, improved walkability encourages
shoppers and visitors to venture on foot beyond their intended
destinations, reducing automobile trips.
                                                                     Mixed-use centers should incorporate parking
In residential areas, creating walkable environments and within the site to maintain a pedestrian-
pedestrian links to commercial or public uses will encourage oriented street environment.
residents to consider alternatives to the automobile, and will
also create a stronger sense of community that can positively
affect quality of life. Various aspects of creating and expanding
walkable opportunities including the health, environmental and
economic benefits are further discussed in the Land Use
Element, the Circulation Element, and the Recreation and Trails
Element.
3.6.5          MIXED-USE DESIGN
The General Plan encourages mixed-uses in appropriate areas.
Mixed-use development combines commercial, office, and Mixed-use development and well-designed
residential uses within a single building or on a single site. The streetscapes and street furniture provide
success of mixed-use derives from the idea of creating human-scaled developments.
complementary and supportive services and activities. An
important benefit of mixed-use is that it encourages activity
throughout the day. Residential uses can support both existing
and new retail tenants by creating opportunities for activity in
the area after business hours. If designed correctly, mixed-use
areas can become destinations for living, eating, shopping,
working, and socializing.
Successful mixed-use communities include design components
like pedestrian interaction and connectivity, signs, lighting, and
parking. Encouraging human activity at the street level is vital to
the success of the commercial component of a mixed-use
building. Good mixed-use development design clearly
differentiates between the commercial, residential, and/or office Vertical land use mixes may include live-work
uses within a project or area.                                       units and residential and office uses above
                                                                     retail.
         C   I  T Y      O  F     H  E  M  E   T    G    E  N  E  R  A L       P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                        3-28
          COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                                     In most cases, development of mixed use areas will require
                                                     specific plans that outline the urban design features of the
                                                     area. High quality, well-integrated design will be a minimum
                                                     requirement for project approval.
                                                     The City’s mixed-use development policies incorporate a
                                                     variety of the following design concepts:
                                                           Include a variety of land uses blended together either
                                                           vertically or horizontally, such as having commercial
                                                           space on the first floor and residential uses on the
                                                           higher floors;
Rural street setback in northwest Hemet.                   The scale of mixed-use buildings may go beyond two
                                                           stories. By increasing the scale and height of buildings,
                                         a larger area on the ground is made available for open space, plazas,
                                         and increased pedestrian uses. This allows for more innovation in
                                         architectural and landscape design;
                                         Increasing the height of buildings in mixed-use areas allows potential
                                         increases in both commercial and residential development. The
                                         allowable height increases should be designed to avoid adversely
                                         affecting surrounding low density residential uses. If mixed-uses abut
                                         single-family residential areas the new development should be stepped
                                         back and reduced in height to be sensitive to the scale of the residential
                                         neighborhood; and
                                         Parking design should not be the dominant visual element of a mixed
                                         use project. Large expanses of parking in front of buildings is not
                                         appropriate for successful mixed-use development. Where possible,
                                         joint parking facilities and subterranean parking are encouraged. Surface
                                         parking should be placed in internal locations on mixed-use projects.
                                         Where possible, residential parking should be separated from
                                         commercial parking.
                                    3.6.6 SAFESCAPE - DEFENSIBLE SPACE DESIGN
                                    The quality of life one feels in a community is often associated with a
                                    feeling of personal safety. Stable neighborhoods have high levels of
                                    personal and community safety. Improvement of the physical environment
                                    is one element in creating safe and stable neighborhoods and commercial
                                    districts. Crime-free design principles in new development will improve the
                                    community image and thereby improve the quality of life for the entire
                                    community. Components of establishing safe environments and defensible
                                    space include:
                                         building design;
                                         site design/neighborhood layout;
                                         landscaping;
                                         lighting;
                                         maintenance and code enforcement;
         C   I  T Y      O   F    H   E  M   E  T    G    E   N   E  R  A L     P   L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                                         3-29

                                                                    COMMUNITY DESIGN
     land use compatibility; and
     Neighborhood Watch programs.
3.6.7          DESIGN GUIDELINES
The City of Hemet has adopted a series of design guidelines that
address single-family residential design, multi-family residential
design and commercial design. These guidelines are used to guide
and direct new development or redevelopment.
Design guidelines are also found in various specific plans adopted
by the City. Typically these guidelines are associated with Example of traditional single-family
individual development projects or community plans. All of the residential architecture.
above referenced guidelines are found in the individual specific
plans or separate documents which have been adopted by
ordinance or City Council resolution.
3.7      N EIG HBORH OOD C OMPATIBILITY
Neighborhood compatibility refers to the proper balance that must be
achieved when new development occurs in an existing neighborhood. The
intent of the General Plan is to ensure that growth and modernization is
done in a manner that recognizes and respects the unique features and
characteristics of established neighborhoods and land uses, thereby
ensuring continued enjoyment of the City’s quality of life for all residents.
3.7.1          PRESERVING RURAL DEVELOPMENT CHARACTER
While Hemet has experienced rapid growth in recent years, there remain
areas that have retained their rural residential character. The Land Use
Element establishes maximum density ranges to preserve the desired rural
character of these areas. Other design factors can be incorporated into the
City’s zoning and subdivision codes to enhance the rural residential
environment, as follows:
    reduce the minimum width of roadways and improvement
    requirements and          establish a separate street lighting
    requirement;
    modify the road design standards to eliminate vertical curbing,
    paved gutters, and sidewalks. (Alternative drainage techniques
    may be considered if adequate drainage conditions are
    provided.); and
    provide open space and recreation buffers, increased setbacks,
    and landscape screening to minimize the intrusion of light and
    glare from more intense development.
                                                                         Streetscape buffering between agriculture
Diagram 3.4 shows an appropriate site plan for buffering existing and rural residential development in
agricultural uses from adjacent new single family residential units.     northwest Hemet.
         C   I  T Y    O   F      H   E M E  T     G   E  N   E   R  A L      P   L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                      3-30

 COMMUNITY DESIGN
              Diagram 3.4 Single-Family Residential Buffer with Agriculture.
              Diagram 3.5 shows an appropriate site plan for buffering existing
              agriculture uses from new residences being constructed on the opposite
              side of a shared roadway.
              Diagram 3.5 Single-Family Residential and Agriculture Buffer with Roadway.
              3.7.2         COMPATIBLE INFILL DEVELOPMENT
              As development and redevelopment activity continues to increase in the
              Planning Area, land use conflicts are more likely to occur. Land use
              conflicts affect existing neighborhoods or districts through traffic, parking,
              noise, and school enrollment rates. The General Plan and the zoning code
              establish building and development standards for every property in the City.
              If a property owner complies with these standards, they have an inherent
              right to use, develop, or redevelop land. The General Plan sets a foundation
              for the future vision of the City. This gives City staff the tools necessary to
              work with property owners and communicate the vision for a
              neighborhood at the outset of the development process. The General Plan
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E   T    G    E  N  E  R  A L      P   L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   3-31
                                                                  COMMUNITY DESIGN
advocates new development in the future growth area west of Hemet and
infill development that is compatible, both physically and functionally, with
its surroundings.
Diagram 3.6 Residential Infill.
In areas where new development interfaces with older, rural development,
noise, traffic, and animal-keeping issues may arise. There are two key areas
where rural community character preservation is most important. These
areas include the western portion of the Planning Area, north of Florida
Avenue in the Northwest District; and rural neighborhoods south of
Esplanade Avenue between Lyon and Palm Avenues in the Central Hemet
District.
To preserve rural communities located west of the current City limits and
north of Florida Avenue, the land use plan requires development in areas
designated Rural Residential and Hillside Residential north of Devonshire
Avenue to maintain a minimum lot size of 5 or 10 acres, depending on
location. These minimum lot size provisions are identified on the Land Use
Map (Figure 2.1).
In areas where low intensity development interfaces with higher intensity
development, transition zones are needed to provide appropriate buffers.
Maintenance of transition areas will protect established land uses and
establish gradual steps to more intense development. Transitions will be
based on lot size as well as factors such as character, road standards,
streetscapes, compatible architecture, setbacks, and building heights. For
example, transition areas include rural neighborhoods south of Esplanade
Avenue between Lyon and Palm Avenues, and the northern portions of the
mixed-use area located near the corner of Devonshire and California
Avenues.
Other City land use policies will minimize land use conflicts as they arise.
For example, higher density residential uses will form buffers between
commercial areas and lower density residential neighborhoods; and site
design and landscaping will provide appropriate transitions between
industrial and commercial uses.
          C  I  T Y     O   F   H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                      3-32
          COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                              3.7.3         REVITALIZING AND PRESERVING
                                              NEIGHBORHOODS
                                              As Hemet continues to grow, the City will emphasize preservation
                                              of the rural character, where appropriate, while also attracting new,
                                              high-quality development. Additional emphasis will be placed on
                                              maintaining and enhancing the City’s older residential
                                              neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas. As new
                                              development occurs, private investment in these older areas is
                                              often overlooked. These areas still serve an important function in
                                              Hemet, providing housing opportunities for residents and offering
New Development in Older Downtown Area.       commercial services and employment opportunities. A critical
                                              component in the City’s vision is the preservation and
                                   enhancement of its network of neighborhoods. Residents take more pride
                                   when their see their neighborhoods improving. Thus, a comprehensive
                                   approach to property maintenance and improvement will ensure that these
                                   areas do not become obsolete or undesirable. The City has instituted the
                                   Hemet Restoring Our Community Strategy (ROCS), a comprehensive
                                   property maintenance and code enforcement program that will focus
                                   attention on this issue.
                                   Hemet contains many vacant and underutilized lots that can accommodate
                                   infill development. By absorbing growth into existing communities, this
                                   infill relieves growth pressures on rural areas and can improve quality of life
                                   within older areas of the City. Infill development benefits Hemet by
                                   revitalizing older areas of the City, preserving open space and other natural
                                   areas, and minimizing the high cost of building infrastructure to support
                                   development that has spread far from the traditional City center.
                                   3.8        D OWNT OW N D E SIGN E LEMENTS
                                   Older downtowns throughout the country have experienced difficulty in
                                   maintaining their prominence and viability in comparison to newer
                                   suburban commercial development. Hemet’s downtown is no different.
                                   Faced with constraints of space, lot configuration, and aging infrastructure,
                                   development of a vibrant downtown requires a comprehensive
                                   development plan and involvement of all segments of the community, both
                                   public and private
                                   3.8.1           DOWNTOWN HEMET DISTRICT
                                                The 1992 General Plan was amended in 1999 to establish the
                                                Hub of the Valley Plan to create a major activity “hub” in the
                                                center of the San Jacinto Valley. It is being updated in this
                                                General Plan to incorporate additional guidelines and revised
                                                boundaries. The Greater Downtown District, as described in
                                                Section 2.7.1 of the Land Use Element and represented
                                                graphically in Figure 2.4, replaces the Hub of the Valley Plan.
                                                However, the goals of the Hub of the Valley Plan are still
                                                applicable:
 Hemet Historic Depot Building and Museum.          create a reason for people to visit downtown Hemet;
        C   I  T Y     O   F     H  E   M    E   T    G   E  N   E R   A L     P  L   A   N   2 0 3 0
                                                         3-33

                                                                  COMMUNITY DESIGN
     increase property values;
     attract private investment;
     create an environment for people to gather day, or night,
     where it is safe and desirable;
     increase retail sales;
     link major land uses with a pedestrian network between San
     Jacinto Avenue and State Street to enhance pedestrian
     circulation, and enhance vehicular circulation; and               Hemet Valley Hospital.
      attract new land uses, combined with new public uses which will
     enhance activity levels.
3.8.2          DOWNTOWN DESIGN GUIDELINES
The design guidelines established in 1999 for the Hub of the Valley are
being expanded and readopted as the “Downtown Design Guidelines” to
reflect the concepts and policies in the General Plan.
The updated polices and guidelines for the Downtown District reflect a
continued commitment to preserving Hemet’s historic resources, a strong
belief in the viability of a revitalized Downtown, and recognition that
sustainable development and design is a vital component of community
growth and change. Like many older cities, Hemet has a distinct greater
downtown area characterized by a traditional street grid system, older
homes and buildings, and a varied land use pattern.
To create a “Walkable Downtown”, the following key areas and land uses
will be linked with pedestrian circulation routes, vehicular circulation, and
common design elements:
     Santa Fe Depot/Museum
     Historic Harvard Street District;
     downtown commercial area;
     civic center complex (including City Hall, the James Simpson
     Neighborhood/Senior Center, public library, Fire Station #1, City
     Council Chambers, and the police station);
     Hemet Valley Hospital and related medical offices;
     Weston Park; and
     the proposed Metrolink station/mixed use transit village.
3.8.3          CIVIC CENTER MASTER PLAN
A conceptual master plan for a civic center was developed when the plans
for the library were being formulated and included here as Diagram 3.7.
          C  I  T Y      O  F    H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N E  R  A L      P L   A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                       3-34

            COMMUNITY DESIGN
                           The master plan shows future public building potential that would enhance
                           the civic center’s prominence as an activity node in the Downtown District.
                           Diagram 3.7 Civic Center Master Plan.
                           The master plan shows the relationship of the civic center to the downtown
                           commercial core, establishing pedestrian linkages to the Florida Avenue
                           corridor to the south. The railroad right-of-way alignment is shown as a
                           location for such a linkage. Key entry nodes are also shown in the master
                           plans. The master plan should remain flexible so that it can retain its
                                    relevance in the future years.
                                    3.8.4          TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT
                                    Downtown Hemet is shown on the Metrolink master plan as a
                                    terminus station location for its Riverside County line. Future
                                    development in the area surrounding the station will attract a variety
                                    of mixed uses and intensification of uses is encouraged through
                                    transit-oriented development (TOD). The TOD area will seek to
                                    increase the connectivity and maximize the synergy between the
                                    Metrolink station and the Downtown District. Creating a transit
                                    village within the City can help foster the distinction of the station
Metrolink Station.                  as an employment gateway and become a catalyst for downtown
                                    revitalization.
          C    I T Y O F H  E  M   E    T    G    E  N E  R   A L     P  L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                 3-35

                                                   COMMUNITY DESIGN
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R  A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                         3-36
 COMMUNITY DESIGN
             G OALS AND P OLICIES
             C OMMUNITY D ESIGN
              GOAL     Enhance Hemet’s sense of place and local identity
                       to develop community pride and expand tourism
              CD-1     and investment.
             POLICIES
             CD-1.1   Unique Sense of Place Require quality site, architectural,
                      and landscape designs that incorporate those qualities and
                      characteristics that make Hemet a desirable place to live
                      and work including: walkable blocks, distinctive parks and
                      open space, tree-lined streets, and varied architectural
                      styles.
             CD-1.2   Hemet’s visual image Reinforce and boost Hemet’s
                      visual image regionally by protecting its legendary views of
                      the surrounding mountains.
             CD-1.3   Focal Points Target visually prominent areas of the
                      community, such as the downtown, gateways, and major
                      activity centers, as focal points that receive particular care
                      and civic attention.
             CD-1.4   Sustainable Tourism Maintain and enhance year-round
                      opportunities for sustainable tourism based on the area's
                      natural resources, historic heritage, and cultural amenities
                      without diminishing the quality of life of current residents
             CD-1.5   Design Excellence Require design excellence and
                      compatibility in site planning, architecture, landscape
                      design and signage.
             CD-1.6   Sustainable Design Require new developments to
                      incorporate sustainable design amenities and features
                      including using landscape areas for stormwater
                      management and treatment.
             CD-1.7   Public Art Promote the use of public art at key
                      intersections and public plazas to enhance the appearance
                      and identity of the community.
             CD-1.8   Public Art Establish a program to encourage and oversee
                      the placement of art in public and community places.
             CD-1.9   Iconic Buildings Encourage the development of iconic
                      public and private buildings in key locations to create new
                      landmarks and focal features that contribute to the City’s
                      design form and identity.
             CD-1.10  Neighborhood Street Trees Encourage the strategic
                      selection of street tree species to enhance neighborhood
C I T Y O F H E M E T G E N E R A L             P L A N        2 0 3 0
                         3-37

                                                                COMMUNITY DESIGN
             character and identity and preserve the health and diversity
             of the urban forest.
GOAL          Use gateway markers, monuments, community
              signage, and landscaping to portray a positive visual
CD-2          entry into the City and to key locations.
POLICIES
CD-2.1       Gateways Develop a system of gateways and entrances to
             the City that include landscaping, walls, signage, and
             appropriate street furniture. Potential locations are shown
             in Figure 3.1 of the Community Design Element.
CD-2.2       Neighborhood Identification Entry nodes should be
             established in neighborhoods to provide neighborhood
             identity and pride of community.
CD-2.3       Community Landscape Require developers of residential
             subdivisions and commercial or industrial centers to
             submit a streetscape plan that defines a program of trees
             and plantings that uniquely identifies streets, principal
             entries and intersections, and activity centers such as parks
             and community centers within the development
              Develop a streetscape system that provides cohesive
GOAL          design, enhances community image, incorporates
CD-3          green street concepts, and develops an attractive
              identity for the various City districts.
POLICIES
CD-3.1       Public Streetscapes Provide public streetscapes that
             unify the City of Hemet and contribute to the unique
             identity of its neighborhoods, districts, open space
             corridors, and public places.
CD-3.2       Residential Subdivisions Require residential subdivisions
             to provide a 15-foot wide landscape setback adjacent to
             the public right-of-way when perimeter walls or fences are
             constructed and access to residential units is interior to the
             subdivision. Landscaped setbacks shall be a separate
             lettered lot and maintained by a property owners
             association or maintenance district.
CD-3.3       Streetscape Master Plan. Establish a comprehensive
             streetscape program for major streets in the City, including
             a unified landscaping, light, pavement and other public
             improvements, such as landscape medians.
CD-3.4       Enhanced Pedestrian Environment Promote the
             transformation      of    existing    automobile-dominated
       C I T Y      O  F    H   E   M E   T     G   E  N  E   R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   3-38
 COMMUNITY DESIGN
                        corridors into boulevards that are attractive, comfortable,
                        and safe for pedestrians by incorporating the following:
                             wide sidewalks,
                             few curb cuts and driveways,
                             enhanced pedestrian street crossings,
                             building entrances oriented to the street,
                             transparent ground floor frontages,
                             street trees,
                             streetscape furnishings, and
                             pedestrian-scaled lighting and signage.
              CD-3.5    Variety of Streetcape Design Encourage a variety of
                        designs in sidewalks and trails, with respect to alignment
                        and surface materials, separating sidewalks from the curb
                        along arterial streets to provide for a convenient and safe
                        path of travel for pedestrians and bicyclists.
              CD-3.6    Landscaped Parkways Require where appropriate the
                        provision of landscaped parkways and street trees between
                        roadways and sidewalks to create safe and attractive streets
                        for pedestrians and motorists.
              CD-3.7    Drought Tolerant Landscaping Encourage the use of
                        drought tolerant landscape materials in streetscapes that
                        are easy to maintain and that are compliant with the
                        California Friendly Landscape Palette.
              CD-3.8    Arterial Landscaped Medians Provide for landscaped
                        medians along Florida Avenue and other identified arterial
                        corridors that are uniform in design and unique to each,
                        and which would incorporate items such a public art,
                        drought resistant landscaping and wayfinding signs, as
                        appropriate.
              CD-3.9    State Route 79 Corridor Development along the future
                        State Route 79 corridor shall incorporate complete
                        architecture on all building façades. Perimeter walls and
                        fencing should be designed to reflect a theme unique to
                        Hemet.
              CD-3.10   Scenic Highway Landscaping Require implementation
                        of the scenic highway setbacks and landscaping pursuant
                        to the Community Design Element and the City’s adopted
                        Scenic Highway Setback Manual.
              CD-3.11   Street Trees Select species of trees for parkways and
                        medians that create an attractive visual framework, are
C I T Y O F H  E M  E T G  E   N   E   R  A L     P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                          3-39

                                                                COMMUNITY DESIGN
             large enough to provide shade and identity, are water
             conserving, and are relatively low maintenance.
CD-3.12      Replacement Trees Replace any mature tree removed
             from private property or the public right-of-way with
             California-friendly or shade tree of similar size and shape,
             as reasonably feasible, and locate so as not to be a hazard
             or conflict with other utilities or public improvements.
GOAL          Protect and preserve hillside areas as an important
              aesthetic and community resource.
CD-4
POLICIES
CD-4.1       Hillside Design Guidelines Require development in
             hillside areas to comply with the General Plan hillside
             policies and the City’s adopted Hillside Design Guidelines and
             Ordinance.
CD-4.2        View Corridors New development should consider the
              preservation of significant view corridors of the
              surrounding hillsides in the design of new projects.
              Building heights along the Florida Avenue corridor
              (Gilbert Street to Buena Vista Street) shall be limited to a
              two story maximum height in order to maximize views
              toward Idyllwild and the San Jacinto Mountains
CD-4.3       Limit Grading Reduce the amount of grading for
             development by using natural terrain to determine
             development design.
CD-4.4       Cluster Development Encourage clustering of
             development to preserve the maximum amount of natural
             terrain as possible.
CD-4.5       Ridgeline Preservation New construction should not
             protrude above prominent ridgelines or ridge silhouettes as
             viewed from the valley floor. The prominent ridgelines
             within the General Plan study area should be preserved in
             their natural condition. In situations where compliance
             with the above guidelines would preclude reasonable use
             of the property, development should be stepped to match
             the profile of the original ridgelines, and should be
             softened with landscaping
CD-4.6       Native Plant Material Require the use of native plant
             material when revegetating open space areas or hillside
             areas disturbed with new development.
CD-4.7       Graded Slopes Hillside grading designs shall incorporate
             contour grading concepts which reduce the appearance of
             disruption of the natural hillside to the extent feasible.
       C I T Y      O  F    H   E  M   E   T     G   E   N E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    3-40

 COMMUNITY DESIGN
                         a.     Building form and siting should respond to the
                                topography and should be consistent with significant
                                landforms.
                         b.     When building on a hillside, the architectural form
                                of the structure or structures should reflect the
                                underlying topographic form and retain the integrity
                                of the natural slope.
                         c.     Require revegetation and maintenance of graded
                                slope areas to prevent erosion and visual scarring.
              CD-4.8    Fencing Fencing of lots within natural hillside areas
                        should be minimized except directly adjacent to the
                        building pad.
              CD-4.9    Setback Variation Variations in setbacks may be
                        warranted in situations where adherence to nominal
                        zoning requirements would otherwise prevent achievement
                        of hillside design objectives.
              CD-4.10   Natural Land Features Natural land features should be
                        recognized and integrated into the site plan where feasible.
                        Stream beds, hillsides, rock formations, unique vegetation,
                        and similar natural features should be incorporated into
                        the overall development concept.
              CD-4.11   Slope Gradient Adhere to the Hillside Area Development
                        Character guidelines in the General Plan regarding the
                        relationship of grading intensity to degree of natural slope.
              CD-4.12   Residential Variety Require that development in hillside
                        areas include a range of styles and a naturalized and rural
                        residential appearance.
              CD-4.13   Natural Setting Require all development projects and
                        roadways to display sensitivity to the area’s natural setting,
                        be designed to minimize visual impacts, and to use natural
                        topography as a guide.
              CD-4.14   Passive Recreational Resources Where possible,
                        enhance and promote the use of hillside areas as prime
                        scenic and passive recreational resources.
              CD-4.15   Landform Planting Manufactured slopes in excess of 4
                        feet in vertical height shall be landscaped. Manufactured
                        slopes in excess of 15 feet should be provided with
                        landform planting pursuant to the Community Design
                        Element.
C I T Y O F H  E M  E T G    E  N   E  R  A L      P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                            3-41

                                                               COMMUNITY DESIGN
GOAL          Promote attractive community design to make
              Hemet a more desirable place to live.
CD-5
POLICIES
CD-5.1       Complete and Well-Structured Neighborhoods The
             City shall promote the design of complete and well-
             structured neighborhoods whose physical layout and land
             use mix promote walking to services, biking, and transit
             use, foster community pride, enhance neighborhood
             identity; ensure public safety, and address the needs of all
             ages and abilities.
CD-5.2       Scale and Character of Development New development
             should reflect the scale and character of the community as
             a whole, individual neighborhoods, street, site and
             surrounding buildings.
CD-5.3       Scale of Development Require new development to
             follow site planning and architectural design principles that
             maintain the historic character, scale and integrity of the
             City’s neighborhoods and districts, where applicable.
CD-5.4       Public Space Design Encourage design that improves
             public spaces, encourages pedestrian activity, and enhances
             sense of place within neighborhoods and commercial
             districts.
CD-5.5       Specific Plans Require specific plans to promote cohesive
             and integrated patterns of development for large
             undeveloped areas, especially areas designated for mixed
             use.
CD-5.6       Development Standards Continue to provide and update
             development standards to ensure higher quality building
             and site design.
CD-5.7       Design Standards and Guidelines Establish and
             consistently apply design standards and guidelines for
             residential, commercial, industrial and public facilities
             development.
CD-5.8       Lighting Aesthetics Reduce light pollution by requiring
             new developments to install suitable new fixtures and
             existing fixtures to be upgraded upon repair and
             maintenance, as appropriate.
CD-5.9       Flexible Design Standards Promote flexible design
             standards for commercial development that enhances
             special identity and visual character.
       C I T Y      O   F    H   E M   E  T     G    E  N E  R  A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    3-42

 COMMUNITY DESIGN
              CD-5.10    Residential Variety Encourage a variety of residential
                         development types which display attractive design features
                         and amenities, and are physically and functionally
                         compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.
              CD-5.11    Buffers Require the provision of adequate buffers along
                         the edges between industrial/commercial and residential
                         areas, between professional office uses and single-family
                         area and between multi-family and single-family areas and
                         single-family areas of varying densities.
              CD-5.12    Strip Commercial Centers Discourage the construction
                         of new strip commercial uses, and rehabilitate existing strip
                         commercial centers to be more attractive and functional.
              CD-5.13    Driveway Access Points Minimize driveway access
                         points to commercial centers along major roadways by
                         obtaining reciprocal access agreements with adjacent
                         properties.
              CD-5.14    Buildings that Front Streets Encourage buildings to be
                         oriented to and actively focus on the public streetscape
                         incorporating such features as building orientation,
                         setbacks, façade articulation, ground-floor transparency,
                         and location of parking.
              CD-5.15    Screening of Off-Street Parking Reduce the visual
                         prominence of parking by requiring off-street parking to
                         be located behind structures or landscape features.
              CD-5.16    Industrial Design Ensure that future industrial
                         development follows adopted Industrial Design
                         Guidelines, and provides a clean and attractive appearance.
              GOAL        Ensure well designed public signage that identifies
                          key City districts, development projects, businesses,
              CD-6        and public facilities, and facilitates wayfinding.
              POLICIES
              CD-6.1     Sign Design Encourage interesting, creative, and unique
                         approaches to sign design with the following:
                          a.    Signs should be architecturally integrated with their
                                surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture,
                                and lighting so that they are complementary to the
                                overall design of the building.
                          b.    Signs and monuments should complement a
                                building’s style and materials, and coordinate with the
                                City’s desired street character.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G    E  N   E  R   A L      P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                             3-43

                                                                COMMUNITY DESIGN
              c.   Signs within the Downtown District should promote
                   retail and street activity and enhance the pedestrian
                   experience.
              d.   Sign fonts should be clear and legible to pedestrians
                   and motorists, and be consistent in style and color.
              e.   Signs and sign monuments should be enhanced with
                   the use of landscaping at their base.
CD-6.2       Sign Location Ensure that site plans for buildings and
             development projects identify locations and sizes for
             future signs.
CD-6.3       Sign Programs Require the submission of signage
             programs for all commercial and multi-tenant
             development.
CD-6.4       Public Wayfinding Establish a comprehensive public
             signage plan for public wayfinding that identifies the
             following:
                  city entries,
                  street names,
                  public/community facilities,
                  parks, trails and other recreational amenities,
                  key districts such as downtown,
                  public transit stations and stops,
                  directional (wayfinding) information, and
                  traffic control and parking.
GOAL          Enhance the visual image of the City through
              landscaping and perimeter walls and fencing.
CD-7
POLICIES
CD-7.1       Comprehensive Landscape Plan Improve the
             appearance of the City’s districts, edges and corridors
             through a comprehensive landscape plan, provision of
             open space buffers and a pedestrian and bike trail system.
CD-7.2       Walls and Fences Installation of solid walls along area
             roadways should be avoided unless needed for a specific
             screening, safety, or sound attenuation purpose. Where
             walls or fences are necessary, the following should be
             considered:
       C I T Y      O   F    H   E  M   E  T     G   E  N E   R   A L   P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    3-44

 COMMUNITY DESIGN
                       a.     Wrought Iron Fencing. Incorporation of wrought
                              iron fencing into the solid wall designs can break up
                              the linear stretches of blank surface. This technique,
                              in combination with climbing vines and other
                              landscaping, creates the illusion of the wall or fence
                              being an integral component of the landscape
                              design.
                       b.     Multi-family Development. New multi-family
                              developments should consider rear façades which
                              front public rights-of-way as the primary elevation in
                              the design of the project. Street façades which are
                              designed to include landscaped berms and tree
                              planting are recommended over solid walls or
                              fences.
                       c.     Bermed landscaping is encouraged to be used as
                              an alternative to development of walls and fences.
                       d.     Rural Fencing. Solid walls and fences should be
                              avoided in rural residential areas except around
                              courtyards, patios, or pool areas where privacy is
                              needed. Open fencing types should be the rule in
                              rural areas to maintain a feeling of openness and
                              space. Use wall and fence materials consistent with
                              the established theme of the area. Avoid high, solid
                              fencing in favor of low walls, low split rail, range, or
                              other types of open fencing.
                       e.     Infill Development. Where they are needed, fences
                              or walls should relate to both the site being
                              developed and surrounding developments, open
                              spaces and surrounding developments, open space,
                              streets, and pedestrian ways, and should respect
                              existing view corridors to the greatest extent
                              possible.
                       f.     Theme walls. Where provision of a wall or fence
                              cannot be avoided, the establishment of theme walls
                              or fences is encouraged. However, such walls should
                              be coordinated with perimeter landscape design and
                              provide aesthetic enhancement to the project
                              without creating a “walled in” appearance. The use
                              of any fencing or walls should also be consistent
                              with the overall design theme of the development or
                              adjoining existing developments.
                       g.     Landscape buffering. Where construction of a
                              solid wall which will be visible along a public street is
                              necessary, provide landscaping such as trees, shrubs,
                              or vines to soften the appearance of the wall, and to
                              reduce undue glare, heat, and reflection. Ensure that
C I T Y O F H E M E T G    E  N   E  R  A L      P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                          3-45

                                                              COMMUNITY DESIGN
                   fencing is constructed of durable materials which
                   will resist the damaging effect of wind, rain, and
                   irrigation.
              h.   Maintenance. When fences or walls are developed
                   along a streetscape, whether solid or with wrought
                   iron openings, it should be recognized that the
                   adjacent homeowner or business is not likely to
                   maintain landscaping outside of the wall or fence
                   within the public right-of-way. Therefore, whenever
                   fences or walls are to be developed along a
                   streetscape, provisions should be made as part of the
                   responsible project to identify maintenance
                   responsibilities and the method proposed to ensure
                   perpetual care for landscaped areas within public
                   rights-of-way.
CD-7.3       Landscape Design Encourage the use of creative
             landscape design to enhance visual interest, reduce
             conflicts between different land uses, accommodate
             stormwater drainage and treatment, and incorporate
             drought tolerant landscape materials.
CD-7.4       Public Landscaping Improve the appearance of
             neighborhood areas through public landscaping, location
             of open space buffers, and special landscape features.
              Facilitate good community design featuring
GOAL          pedestrian access and amenities that offer a
CD-8          pleasurable walking environment, and encourages
              residents to consider alternatives to the automobile.
POLICIES
CD-8.1       Outdoor Plazas Promote the establishment of outdoor
             plazas and courtyards in commercial centers, office
             complexes, at public buildings and in the Downtown
             District.
CD-8.2       Residential Pedestrian Connections Require the
             provision of safe, walk-able connections between
             residential developments, schools and park sites.
CD-8.3       Commercial Pedestrian Linkages Encourage the
             provision of pedestrian linkages to and within large
             commercial sites, where appropriate to the location, scale
             of the development, and proximity to residential
             neighborhoods.
CD-8.4       Increase Walkability Require new development to create
             walkable, pedestrian scaled blocks, publicly accessible mid-
             block paseos, and pedestrian routes where appropriate,
       C I T Y     O   F    H   E  M  E  T    G    E  N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                  3-46
 COMMUNITY DESIGN
                        with sidewalks appropriately scaled for anticipated
                        pedestrian use. Walkability can be enhanced by:
                         a.     Discouraging wide expanses of parking lots.
                         b.     Minimizing pedestrian-auto conflicts and ensuring a
                                high-level of safety for pedestrians.
                         c.     Providing pedestrian linkages between uses and
                                buildings.
                         d.     Creating an appealing street scene through the use of
                                attractive street furniture and landscaping.
                         e.     Designing commercial projects to feature a central
                                plaza or main visual focus oriented toward
                                pedestrian and transit connections.
                         f.     Designing commercial projects with building façades
                                that are interesting and in scale with the pedestrian.
                                Ground floor elevations should avoid long bland
                                walls. Windows and entrances should be located at
                                frequent intervals.
                         g.     Integrating features such as awnings and verandas
                                that shield visitors from the elements.
                         h.     Discourage projects that face inward, are surrounded
                                by walls, or have no connection to neighboring uses.
              CD-8.5    Neighborhood Amenities Encourage appropriately
                        scaled neighborhood–supportive facilities and services to
                        enhance neighborhood identity and provide convenient
                        access within walking and biking distance of city residents.
              CD-8.6    Connections to Open SpaceEnsure that new residential
                        neighborhoods contain a diverse mix of parks and open
                        spaces that are connected by trails, bikeways, and other
                        open space networks and are within easy walking distance
                        of residents.
              CD-8.7    Walkable Streets Require design and development of
                        neighborhoods that are pedestrian friendly and include
                        features such as short blocks, broad and well-appointed
                        sidewalks (e.g., lighting, landscaping), tree-shaded streets,
                        buildings that define and are oriented to adjacent streets
                        and public spaces, limited driveways curb cuts, paseos and
                        pedestrian lanes, alleys, traffic-calming features, convenient
                        pedestrian street crossings, and access to transit.
C I T Y O F H  E M  E T G    E  N   E  R   A L      P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                            3-47

                                                             COMMUNITY DESIGN
GOAL          Maintain and create public spaces for people to
              gather within the City.
CD-9
POLICIES
CD-9.1       Site Furniture Provide site furniture in areas with high
             pedestrian activity and provide for shade trees in
             pedestrian and plaza areas.
CD-9.2       Pedestrian-Orientation        Ensure     that    pedestrian
             orientation is considered in development of the City’s
             public spaces.
CD-9.3       Operating Costs Assure that operating and maintenance
             costs are adequately provided for publicly owned gathering
             places.
CD-9.4       Public Plazas Encourage public spaces and plazas within
             commercial developments that can accommodate cultural
             and social events and function as community gathering
             places. These gathering areas can include plazas and
             sidewalk cafes that need to be located adjacent to
             businesses whose patrons would use the spaces.
CD-9.5       Multi-purpose Commercial Uses Encourage multi-
             purpose facilities within commercial developments that
             may be provided for a variety of public and private events.
CD-9.6       Day and Evening Activities Encourage a range of uses
             within the Downtown District and community-level
             commercial centers that provide for both day and evening
             activities.
CD-9.7       Common Space in Residential Areas Encourage
             common areas and facilities within residential
             developments to provide gathering areas for social and
             recreational activities.
CD-9.8       Public Wayfinding Include the development of public
             wayfinding programs when designing public open space.
       C I T Y     O    F   H    E  M E  T    G   E  N   E R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                 3-48

 COMMUNITY DESIGN
              GOAL        Establish mixed-use development standards that
                          facilitate design excellence and compatibility with
              CD-10       neighboring uses.
              POLICIES
              CD-10.1    Mixed Use Development. Mixed use development
                         should:
                         a.     Encourage pedestrian activity by providing sidewalks
                                with ample width, encourage on-street parking,
                                include street furniture sited adjacent to the curb as a
                                barrier to auto traffic, and encourage commercial
                                spaces featuring frequent sidewalk entrances.
                         b.     Create a credible residential environment by making
                                commercial uses visually distinct from residential
                                spaces. Dwelling units should exhibit a residential
                                character, and residential entrances should read
                                differently from entrances to commercial businesses.
                         c.     Include public plazas that attract visitors to the
                                public portions of the development, and offer
                                private open space areas that limit intrusion by
                                nonresidents.
                         d.     Encourage the use of outdoor dining and gathering
                                areas to provide street activity.
                         e.     Incorporate transit systems and amenity within or
                                serving the project, such as local jitney services,
                                shuttle loops, or nonmotorized vehicular trails
                                within the project area.
                         f.     Inclusion of special landscape design improvements
                                such as: streetscape design in the public right-of-way,
                                pedestrian plazas, courtyards, sidewalk cafes and
                                overall landscape design of project open space.
                         g.     Provision of public park facilities, pedestrian
                                connections and easements, bicycle routs that link
                                activity centers and other mixed use areas.
              CD-10.2   Commercial Orientation Require that commercial uses be
                        located along the street frontage where sites are developed
                        for mixed-use projects, with housing or offices on the
                        upper levels or to the rear of the commercial uses.
C I T Y O F H  E M  E T G    E  N   E  R   A L     P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                            3-49
                                                               COMMUNITY DESIGN
GOAL          Utilize the principles of safescape and defensible
              space to improve community image and personal
CD-11         safety.
POLICIES
CD-11.1      Alleyways Alleyways should be designed so that adequate
             lighting and visibility is maintained.
CD-11.2      Corridors Narrow exterior corridors should be avoided.
             Site design should consider visibility and lighting. Dead-
             end corridors should be avoided.
CD-11.3      Building Design Structures should be designed to have
             doorways, windows and porches opening toward the
             public rights-of-way to provide visibility and surveillance.
CD-11.4      Fences and Walls Walls and fences should be designed
             and placed where adequate visibility of the public rights-
             of-way can be maintained. Gates serve not only as access
             control but also as visual access points to public rights-of-
             way.
CD-11.5      Security Fencing Security fencing should be designed to
             be attractive to promote positive neighborhood identity
             and facilitate emergency access.
CD-11.6      Security Grilles Security grilles are discouraged in all new
             and existing development. In instances where the City
             determines security grilles are necessary they shall be
             designed and placed in the manor that respects the
             building architecture and conveys a positive image for the
             area.
CD11.7       Landscaping Landscaping should be places in areas that
             will not block visibility. Landscaping should be well
             maintained to avoid overgrowth. Low level plant materials
             should be used in areas where increased visibility is
             desired.
CD-11.8      Lighting Lighting plays a significant role in maintaining a
             safe environment. Adequate lighting shall be provided
             along      the    streets/alleys,     parking    lot     areas,
             pathways/sidewalks, public and private outdoor areas.
             Avoid potentially dark or shadowy areas.
CD-11.9      Parking Provide adequate parking for resident and guest
             vehicles so that front yards and streets are not overly
             congested with parked vehicles. Parking lots and garages
             should be designed to have adequate visibility and lighting
             from the public right-of-way.
       C I T Y     O   F     H  E    M  E  T     G   E  N  E R    A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    3-50
 COMMUNITY DESIGN
              CD-11.10   Stairways and Stairwells Stairways provide visual accent
                         on building exteriors. Stairways and stairwells should be
                         located in prominent locations that are well lit and in safe
                         locations. Dark, narrow stairwells should be avoided.
              CD-11.12   Private Space Private open space should be well
                         delineated and separated from the public realm.
              CD-11.13   Public Activity Areas Common public activity areas
                         should be centrally located, well lit and highly visible from
                         surrounding areas.
              CD-11.14   Tunnels and Bridges Pedestrian areas that create
                         enclosure, such as tunnels and bridges, should be designed
                         to prove high visibility for the pedestrian as will as visibility
                         for motorists and others nearby.
              CD-11.15   Property Maintenance Proper levels of property
                         maintenance, graffiti abatement, and trash disposal need to
                         be encouraged and enforced through notification,
                         education, and code compliance efforts.
              GOAL        Preserve and enhance the character of existing
                          neighborhoods and districts while incorporating
              CD-12       infill development and revitalization.
              POLICIES
              CD-12.1    Building       Rehabilitation        Encourage         building
                         rehabilitation and maintenance, façade improvements, and
                         building reconstruction, to revitalize Hemet’s older
                         neighborhoods and districts.
              CD-12.2    Multi-family Transitional Development Use multi-
                         family development as a transition between commercial to
                         single-family uses where appropriate.
              CD-12.3    Residential Infill Development Integrate new residential
                         projects into existing neighborhoods so that they are
                         compatible with adjacent structures with respect to
                         transition of scale of buildings, neighborhood architectural
                         character, color, lot size and setbacks.
              CD-12.4    Neighborhood Character Ensure that the distinct
                         character of each neighborhood/district is respected and
                         reflected in all new development, especially infill
                         development.
              CD-12.5    Rural Residential Buffers Ensure the provision of
                         adequate buffers and transitions between suburban and
                         rural/agricultural lands uses.
C I T Y O F H  E M  E  T G   E   N E  R  A L       P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                            3-51

                                                               COMMUNITY DESIGN
CD-12.6      New Development New development adjacent to
             historic structures or neighborhoods should respect the
             existing fabric and provide a transition between the old
             and the new.
GOAL          Enhance the vitality and appearance of the
              Downtown District through Community Design.
CD-13
POLICIES
CD-13.1      Downtown District Require compliance with the
             development standards and design guidelines for the
             Downtown District.
CD-13.2      Public Buildings Public buildings should be sited in a
             manner which emphasizes their prominence through
             placement at the terminus of public streets or other visual
             corridors.
CD-13.3      Vertical Element The northeast corner of Harvard Street
             and Latham Avenue should have a major vertical
             architectural element which identifies the downtown and
             which can be seen from State Street, Florida Avenue,
             Harvard Street, and areas to the east. The vertical element
             can be part of a building or a free-standing structures.
CD-13.4      Area Identification Entry monument signs and landscape
             features should be combined to focus visual attention of
             the public on the major entries to the Downtown District
             and the civic center. Suggested locations for District
             identification are:
                  eastside of State Street at Latham Avenue,
                  eastside of State Street at Devonshire Avenue,
                  eastside of San Jacinto Avenue at Latham Avenue, and
                  northside of Florida Avenue at Buena Vista Street.
                  northside of Florida Avenue at Juanita Avenue,
                  northwest corner of Latham Avenue and Buena Vista
                  Street, and
                  southwest corner of Devonshire Street and Buena
                  Vista Street.
CD-13.5      Public Gathering Space Public open space should be
             created in the Downtown District and the civic center to
             provide for formal and informal gatherings and events
       C I T Y     O   F     H   E  M   E  T     G  E  N  E  R  A L    P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   3-52
 COMMUNITY DESIGN
                         which will further enhance the pedestrian nature of the
                         Downtown District.
              CD-13.6    Building Design Enhance the appearance of buildings by
                         providing soft-edged materials which complement the
                         architectural features of the building, create shadows,
                         provide color, and relief from hard-edged street
                         improvements and building materials.
              CD-13.7    Landscaping Landscaping within the Downtown District
                         should be utilized to:
                              define public spaces;
                              create color and interest through varying heights of
                              landscape materials used to define areas or “step up”
                              to architectural features or by creating linear plantings
                              of trees and groundcover to create strong visual
                              corridors;
                              provide shade for people and vehicles; and
                              provide visual relief, color, and interest to pedestrians
                              and persons in vehicles.
              CD-13.8    Water Features Where possible, water features should be
                         utilized to create focal points relating to the buildings and
                         public open spaces. Seating and landscaping should be
                         placed at varying distances from water features to provide
                         additional interest. Water features shall incorporate energy
                         and water conservation measures.
              CD-13.9    Linear Greenbelt Establish a linear greenbelt(s)
                         connecting the public and quasi-public uses in the
                         Downtown District and link with public gathering spaces.
                         The greenbelt should incorporate a meandering sidewalk
                         with trees shrubs and ground cover which create shaded
                         paths visual interest and color. Seating areas should be
                         spaced at reasonable intervals.
              CD-13.10   Architectural Style The architectural style of the
                         Downtown District shall enhance the existing architectural
                         elements in the downtown core. New buildings should
                         incorporate the architectural features which are generally
                         present in the structures within the area. Architectural
                         features may include the following design elements:
                              cornices,
                              façade sign area,
                              canopies,
                              display windows,
C I T Y O F H  E M  E  T G  E   N  E   R  A L      P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                           3-53

                                                               COMMUNITY DESIGN
                 masonry accents, and
                 columns and molding.
CD-13.11     Horizontal Rhythm Horizontal rhythm in the buildings
             in the Downtown District should be reinforced by
             elements of buildings including, but not limited to:
                 canopies,
                 full-size awnings,
                 windows,
                 window sills,
                 façade heights,
                 relief detailing on façades,
                 well-designed signs, and
                 clerestory and transom windows.
             The installation of new features or materials on a building
             should not interrupt the general continuity established by
             the horizontal rhythm of architectural features on adjacent
             buildings.
CD-13.12     Colors Colors of buildings should be derived from the
             natural colors of the primary building finish materials such
             as brick, stucco, and clay tile. Bright, neon, and stark
             primary colors are discouraged. The following guidelines
             should be utilized when selecting colors for buildings in
             the Downtown District:
              a.  Large areas of intense white color should be avoided.
                  Subdued colors work best as a dominant overall color,
                  a brighter trim color can be appropriate.
              b.  The color palette chosen for new structures should be
                  compatible with the colors of adjacent structures and
                  the architectural style of the proposed structure. An
                  exception is where the colors of adjacent structures
                  strongly diverge from these guidelines.
              c.  Wherever possible, minimize the number of colors
                  appearing on the structure’s exterior. No more than
                  three colors should be utilized on small structures.
              d.  Bold or accent colors should only be used for
                  accentuating architectural elements such as doors,
                  window frames, and architectural details.
       C I T Y     O   F    H    E  M  E  T    G   E  N  E   R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                  3-54

 COMMUNITY DESIGN
                          e.    Architectural detailing should be painted in colors
                                which complement the façade and tie-in with adjacent
                                structures.
              CD-13.13   Awnings Awning and canopies are a major existing
                         architectural element in the Downtown District. They
                         provide shade for pedestrians and storefront windows, and
                         protection from rain. The use of awnings and canopies
                         along rows of contiguous buildings should be restricted to
                         awnings/canopies of the same design and location. The
                         color of the awnings/canopies should be consistent and
                         there shall be a minimum of 8 feet of vertical clearance
                         from the sidewalk.
              CD-13.14   Signs All signs shall be compatible with the building
                         design, colors and materials and shall be placed in
                         locations typical of those used on adjacent conforming
                         buildings. Provisions for sign placement, sign scale in
                         relationship to the building and sign readability shall be
                         considered in the Downtown project review process.
              CD-13.15   Building Illumination Lighting shall be designed to
                         complement architectural features of the building which it
                         attached. All lighting shall be designed to not have glare or
                         harsh reflected light impacting public rights-of-way with
                         automobile traffic.
              CD-13.16   Rear Entrances Rear entrances are encouraged where the
                         use accesses parking areas and are convenient to
                         pedestrians. The architectural style of the rear entrances
                         should follow the guidelines established for the front
                         façade.
              CD-13.17   Crosswalk Design Crosswalks incorporating colored
                         stamped concrete, or pavers should be installed on Florida
                         Avenue, Latham Avenue, and Devonshire Street to
                         delineate a clear pedestrian path which will encourage
                         pedestrian traffic between the south side of Florida
                         Avenue, the Harvard Business District, the transportation
                         center and the civic center.
              CD-13.18   Civic Center Continue efforts to develop and expand the
                         civic center complex, as funding allows.
              CD-13-19   Public Building Design Ensure that existing and future
                         buildings in the civic center complex follow design and
                         sustainability guidelines.
C I T Y O F H  E M  E  T G    E   N  E  R   A L    P   L A  N     2 0 3 0
                             3-55

                                                                COMMUNITY DESIGN
GOAL          Develop the future metrolink station area as a mixed
              use transit village.
CD-14
POLICIES
CD-14.1      Mixed Use Hub Transform the area surrounding the
             future metrolink station area as a mixed use transit village.
CD-14.2      Pedestrian Design Concepts Incorporate pedestrian-
             friendly design concepts in new development surrounding
             the transit village. Establish a pedestrian/bicycle trail to
             link activity nodes in the area.
CD-14.3      Higher Density Housing Promote higher density
             housing and live-work housing in the transit village area.
CD-14.4      Mixed Land Uses Promote new neighborhood retail,
             parks and structured parking in the transit village area.
       C I T Y     O   F     H  E   M  E   T   G   E  N   E   R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                  3-56
                   CHAPTER 4                                                           CIRCULATION
                                     Aerial View of Hemet (2008)
Hemet recognizes the benefit
that its traditional grid street
network provides in furthering
                                     T      he Circulation Element establishes standards for the movement of
                                            people, goods, and services throughout the planning area and
                                            proposes concepts, strategies, and implementation measures necessary
                                            to support development of the land uses described in the Land Use
modern environmental “Smart          Element. This element also focuses on new and innovative transportation
Growth” and “Complete                concepts that balance the need for both efficiency and cost effectiveness in
Streets” efforts and values the      the development of local and regional circulation systems. The Circulation
walkable residential character       Element describes how Hemet residents and local employees move through
provided by that grid. Hemet         the planning area and beyond using automobiles, public transit, bicycles,
desires to meet environmental        and pedestrian facilities..
and access challenges of the
future through expanded
opportunities and innovations        4.1 S CO PE       AND C ONTEXT
in mobility choices.                 Hemet has an extensive network of transportation facilities and mobility
                                     options to convey people and goods safely and efficiently. The City seeks to
                                     reduce traffic congestion and improve roadway safety, to provide enhanced
                                     travel alternatives to the automobile, and to provide better connections to
                                     regional travel routes. Accomplishing these objectives requires effective
                                     land use planning, roadway improvements, transportation system and
                                     demand management, and regional coordination. Hemet’s transportation
                                     planning policies acknowledge that roadway construction alone cannot
                                     solve circulation problems; that is, the City cannot build its way out of
                                     traffic congestion. The policies and programs in this element emphasize the
                                     need to improve existing roadways to their full capacity, reconfigure
                                     existing access options, and increase transit and alternative transportation
                                     modes of travel in addition to pursuing construction of new roads.
           C   I  T Y       O    F H  E   M   E  T    G   E   N  E  R  A L      P L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                          4-1

                                                                                CIRCULATION
The City aims to create corridors of higher intensity land uses to support
the future development and use of public transit, including extension of the
Metrolink rail system to Hemet. Toward this end, the Circulation and Land
Use Elements attempt to organize planned land uses and transportation
modes in a manner that integrates residential and commercial land uses to
reduce both the number and length of vehicle trips.
The State of California General Plan Guidelines require that the Circulation
Element fulfill the following objectives:
     Ensure that anticipated growth and changes to land use dictated by the
     Land Use Element are supported by the transportation and circulation
     planning in this element.
     Address relevant issues relating to the adequacy of “major
     thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public
     utilities and facilities.”
     Identify circulation problems related to these facilities in the early
     stages and resolve them in local goals and policies without costly delays.
     Furthermore, Assembly Bill (AB) 1358 (2007) requires that the
     Circulation Element provide accommodations for “complete streets”
     that promote usability of streets for all persons rather than just
     motorists.
The state also recommends that the Circulation Element:
     consider the “preservation of transportation corridors for future system
     improvements” and
     address consistency among state, regional, and local transportation
     plans to better resolve circulation issues.
This element provides the context from which to enhance the multiuse
trails and bikeway system, offering both recreational and commuting
opportunities to City residents. These enhancements also relate to the Land
Use and Open Space and Conservation Elements because the trail system
supporting walking and bicycling, both of which reduce demands placed on
the automobile transportation system, improve air quality and provide
alternative connections between land uses.
According to state planning law, each element of the General Plan must be
internally and externally consistent. All elements of the General Plan are
interrelated to a degree, and certain goals and policies of each element may
also address issues that are the primary subjects of other elements. The
integration of overlapping issues throughout the General Plan elements
provides a strong basis for implementation of plans and programs and
achievement of community goals. The Circulation Element relates most
closely to the Community Infrastructure and Services, Land Use, Open
Space and Conservation, Recreation and Trails, and Art and Culture
Elements.
          C   I  T Y       O   F H    E  M   E   T G    E  N  E  R  A L      P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       4-2

 CIRCULATION
              The Land Use and Community Design Elements address land use patterns
              for existing and undeveloped areas, along with alternative methods to
              increase mobility based on land use patterns. The uses identified on the
              Land Use Map provide the basis for determining future circulation needs.
              The Open Space and Conservation Element addresses energy conservation
              and efficiency. The Community Services and Infrastructure Element
              addresses infrastructure, including energy transmission lines, water, sewage,
              and storm drainage. Some policies in this element address trails and
              pathways, which are closely related to the provision of parks and open
              space addressed in the Recreation and Trails Element. Air quality (a topic
              also found within the Open Space and Conservation Element) is integrally
              associated with transportation and circulation patterns. The goals and
              policies within the Open Space and Conservation Element rely on
              supporting policies and plans found within this element. Housing and other
              land uses rely on the circulation system. Roads, transit, and other
              transportation systems are essential for business, recreation, and daily life.
              4.2 I SSUES          AND O PPORTU NITIES
                             The results of the Circulation Element Update Transportation
                             Study in conjunction with community input during the General
                             Plan preparation process identified existing challenges and
                             future opportunities regarding circulation and mobility within
                             the City and Planning Area. These issues and opportunities are
                             identified below.
                             4.2.1 TRADITIONAL GRID ROADWAY SYSTEM
                             Hemet’s downtown district and surrounding residential areas
                             developed around a traditional grid system of streets. Now
                             called a “Neo-traditional” grid pattern, Hemet has what many
                             cities desire: a circulation system that not only accommodates
                             cars but facilitates pedestrian movement and links
                             neighborhoods with nearby shopping, consistent with the
                             concepts embodied under the state’s “complete streets
                             program”. A primary issue however, is the fact that recent
                             development trends favor cul-de-sacs and curvilinear street
              designs, which minimizes through traffic on residential streets. To address
              this issue, the circulation system continues to provide for the City’s
              traditional grid system and pedestrian connectivity where practical, with
              deviations typically occurring only where there are physical constraints.
              4.2.2 IMPROVED                  ACCESS          TO       THE       REGIONAL
                        TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
              Hemet is currently served by an older highway system developed for an
              agricultural community. This is shown on Figure 1.1, the “Regional Context
              Map.” Newer and faster systems have been developed to the west and
              north of the City but as of 2010, there is a deficit of regional transportation
              facilities directly serving the City and integrating Hemet with the greater
              Riverside County area. This connection to regional transportation systems,
              both vehicular and rail, is critical to Hemet’s economic future and its ability
              to provide an expanded employment base for its citizens. Both City officials
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T       G  E   N   E  R  A L      P  L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                     4-3

                                                                              CIRCULATION
and regional agencies have recognized this issue and have focused on
bringing regional transportation facilities to Hemet, which will include:
    Realigned State Route 79 The City of Hemet is an active partner with
    the Project Design Team (PDT) for the realignment of State Route
    (SR) 79. The PDT includes partners from the Riverside County
    Transportation Commission (RCTC), California Department of
    Transportation (Caltrans), the Federal Highway Administration, and
    Riverside County. As of 2010, the PDT has developed a series of
    alternatives (one of which is the City’s preferred alternative shown in
    this General Plan) and expects review and approval by the Federal
    Highway Administration in 2012. SR 79 will provide critical
    north/south connectivity to Interstate 10 (I-10) to the north and the
    Murrieta, Temecula and French Valley areas to the south.
    Mid-County Parkway The Mid-County Parkway (MCP) is a proposed
    16-mile transportation corridor that will relieve traffic congestion for
    east-west travel in western Riverside County between the San Jacinto
    Valley and Perris areas and help address future transportation needs
    through 2035. While not directly within City limits, the MCP will
    provide critical east-west circulation capacity and serves as an integral
    link to SR 79, Sanderson Avenue, and Ramona Expressway. The
    construction of the MCP will also serve to off-load some of the existing
    conjestion on Florida Avenue (Hwy 74), which is the primary east-west
    corridor in Hemet.
    Future Metrolink Stations Currently, the RCTC owns the right-of-
    way along the railroad spur coming into Hemet from Perris and
    Riverside for a future Metrolink route. The City’s General Plan shows
    two Metrolink stations, one for the future West Hemet Business
    Park/Mixed Use area and one in downtown Hemet. The City has
    recognized the critical role Metrolink plays for the region and has
    incorporated numerous goals and policies throughout the General Plan
    encouraging development of the stations and development of transit-
    oriented design near the future stations. The City will need to
    aggressively pursue funding for these facilities in conjunction with
    RCTC, recognizing that funding resources will become increasingly
    competitive in the future.
    Completion of Regional Roads to and through Hemet Two major
    east-west roads run to and through Hemet (Domenigoni Parkway and
    Florida Avenue). Major north-south streets include Warren Road,
    Sanderson Avenue, State Street, and San Jacinto Street. These roads are
    only partially completed and/or require additional rights-of-way. This
    General Plan anticipates completion of the major roads to and through
    Hemet and recognizes that interagency coordination with Riverside
    County and the City of San Jacinto will be critical to ensure timely
    completion of the regional road network.
4.2.3         ROADWAY CONNECTIVITY CONSTRAINTS
Hemet’s roadway system is well developed; however, some connectivity
gaps and design issues result in unnecessary traffic delays. For example,
         C  I  T Y     O   F    H   E   M   E  T   G   E   N E    R  A L   P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       4-4

 CIRCULATION
              Devonshire Avenue is an important east-west street providing an intracity
              function. However, Devonshire Avenue does not connect State Street to
              San Jacinto Street because an existing public school campus is blocking
              through access, resulting in indirect access to the hospital from the west.
              Additionally, in many areas, right-of-way is not readily available to widen
              streets to accommodate additional traffic volume. The lack of established
              turning mechanisms, such as striping, traffic signals, and turn lanes, at
              critical intersections also results in traffic delays. However, these issues are
              not insurmountable. The City of Hemet has been working with the Hemet
              Unified School District to study the feasibility of moving the school to
              permit the extension of Devonshire. Streets and intersections can be
              widened as part of an ongoing capital improvement program (CIP).
              Furthermore, the Circulation Element provides clear goals, policies, and
              implementation programs pertaining to this issue resulting in a functional
              circulation system.
              4.2.4      EXPANSION         OF     ALTERNATIVE          TRANSPORTATION
                         OPTIONS
              The City already has in place an extensive alternative transportation
              network, including the existing rail line, bike paths, and the airport.
              Opportunities exist in the future to expand these facilities and enhance their
              utilization. For example, the railroad line is projected to accommodate the
              future Metrolink line connecting Hemet with the Cities of Perris, Riverside,
              and Los Angeles. Bike paths will be added to the network already in place
              and the existing street system can either be directly used or retrofitted to
              use neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs).
              4.2.5 TRAFFIC CONGESTION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
              For most arterials, Hemet’s circulation network experiences an acceptable
              level of traffic flow. However, Florida Ave. experiences congestion at key
              intersections such as at Sanderson Avenue, State Street and San Jacinto
              Street. Adding to the traffic delays are the number of signalized
              intersections along Florida Avenue. Enhanced intersection geometrics such
              as adding turn lanes, and upgraded and synchronized signal phasing will
              improve overall traffic flow. The City will need to implement new
              technologies and employ creative solutions to ensure that the roadway
              system is efficient, safe, and improves mobility for all users including
              vehicles, transit, pedestrians, and bicyclists.
              4.2.6 CAL-TRANS CONTROLLED STATE HIGHWAYS
              The California Department of Transportation, or Cal-Trans, has jurisdiction
              over the two state highways that transect Hemet: Hwy 74 (Florida Avenue)
              and Hwy 79 (various roadways). The future realignment of Hwy 79 will
              essentially mitigate the current circulation issues associated with this
              roadway. However, there are no plans to realign Hwy 74 to another route
              and as such, any modifications to the right of way for this roadway,
              including driveway access, signals, medians, and signage needs to be
              approved by Cal-Trans. Some cities within the region have taken over the
              maintenance responsibility – and thus gained local control- for portions of
              state highways. This has allowed greater flexibility and a less time-
              consuming process in implementing right of way improvements. The City
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G   E   N  E  R   A L      P  L   A  N   2 0 3 0
                                    4-5

                                                                             CIRCULATION
of Hemet may also consider discussing with Cal-trans the opportunities for
taking over jurisdiction of portions of Hwy 74.
4.2.7         HEMET-RYAN AIRPORT
The Hemet-Ryan Airport has provided aviation services for over half a
century. As aviation needs change, however, so will the need for
improvements to Hemet-Ryan Airport. The existing Hemet-Ryan Airport
Master Plan adopted in 2004 is currently being updated and a proposed new
plan is anticipated to be adopted by the County of Riverside in 2012. The
new Master Plan does not propose a specific runway extension at this time,
although alternatives for expansion to either the east, west, or both are
presented. As is the case in many cities where expansion of airports is
contemplated, the obligation to protect residents from airport expansion
issues, such as noise, must be factored into the discussion. The City of
Hemet has traditionally supported the Hemet-Ryan Airport and this
General Plan provides goals and policies continuing that support, but
tempered with the realization that airport expansions are a complex and
dynamic issue and that airport expansion should not be detrimental to the
existing community and the necessary provision of surrounding circulation
and infrastructure systems.
4.3       R ELAT ED P R OGRAM S , P LANS ,                AND
          R EGULATI ONS
Transportation planning and management requires cooperation and
coordination among many state, county, and regional agencies. Relevant
agencies include Caltrans, Riverside County, the Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG), Western Riverside County Council
of Governments (WRCOG), and the South Coast Air Quality Management
District (SCAQMD). These agencies have federal and state mandates to
adopt transportation-related programs that affect Hemet (and other
jurisdictions throughout the area). Working together, agencies can address
the physical infrastructure needed to support regional demands and ensure
that convenient alternative transportation modes provide for an integrated,
multi-modal approach to addressing traffic problems. The following plans
affect the coordination of transportation planning efforts in the City of
Hemet:
Regional Transportation Plan The Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) is a
component of the Regional Comprehensive Plan and Guide prepared by SCAG
to address regional congestion and transportation issues. The RTP has been
developed with active participation from local agencies throughout the
region, elected officials, the business community, community groups,
private institutions, and citizens. It is a multi-modal, long-range planning
document prepared in coordination with federal, state, and other regional,
subregional, and local agencies throughout southern California. The RTP
includes programs and policies for congestion management, transit, bicycles
and pedestrians, roadways, freight, and transportation finance. The RTP is
prepared every 3 years, and reflects the future horizon based on a 20-year
projection of needs. The RTP's primary use is as a regional, long-range plan
for federally funded transportation projects. It also serves as a
comprehensive, coordinated transportation plan for all jurisdictions within
         C  I  T Y      O  F     H  E   M   E T    G  E   N  E  R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                      4-6
 CIRCULATION
              the region. Each agency responsible for transportation, such as local cities,
              the County, and Caltrans, has different transportation implementation
              responsibilities under the RTP. The RTP relies on the plans and policies
              governing circulation and transportation in each County and City to identify
              the region's future multi-modal transportation system.
              Riverside County Integrated Project/Community and Environmental
              Transportation Acceptability Process Western Riverside County is
              projected to grow from a current population of about 1.2 million to 2
              million in 2020. In an effort to improve the quality of life for current and
              future residents, Riverside County, RCTC, and SCAG embarked on a
              planning process to determine future placement of buildings, roads and
              open spaces within the County. This process was named the Riverside
              County Integrated Project and resulted in three interrelated plans: a General
              Plan for land use and housing, a multiple-species habitat conservation plan
              to determine open spaces and conservation areas, and the Community and
              Environmental Transportation Acceptability Process (CETAP), which
              identifies improvements for highways and transit systems. The integration
              of these distinct planning efforts will improve their ultimate effectiveness.
              The main goals of CETAP are to: (1) identify and set aside areas for major
              transportation facilities; (2) ensure that transportation infrastructure will be
              in place to foster the economic development of Riverside County; and (3)
              provide access to schools, jobs, shopping and other daily activities. One
              major component of the CETAP was to identify a location for the SR 79
              realignment through the communities of Hemet and San Jacinto. Other
              goals include providing expanded rail service and express bus service
              throughout Riverside County. Decisions reached through the CETAP will
              affect transportation facilities and opportunities within Hemet.
              Riverside County and City of San Jacinto Circulation Elements The
              Riverside County Circulation Element forms part of the County’s general
              plan. This element identifies the system of regional arterials and bikeways in
              the community of Winchester and other unincorporated portions of the
              Planning Area. The San Jacinto Circulation Element identifies arterial
              roadways and bikeways in areas adjoining the north side of the City of
              Hemet.
              In developing the Circulation Plan, the City coordinated with both
              Riverside County and the City of San Jacinto to ensure connectivity with
              the adjoining circulation networks as shown in their respective general
              plans.
              Riverside County Congestion Management Plan Urbanized areas such
              as Riverside County are required to adopt a congestion management
              program (CMP). The Riverside County CMP is updated every 2years,
              pursuant to Proposition 111 (1990). The goals of the CMP are to reduce
              traffic congestion, to improve air quality, and to provide a coordination
              mechanism between land development and transportation improvement
              decisions. The CMP is administered by RCTC. In compliance with the
              CMP, the City is required to maintain minimum level of service (LOS)
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T    G   E   N   E  R  A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   4-7

                                                                                     CIRCULATION
thresholds identified in the General Plan and require traffic impact
assessments or studies on development projects.
Measure A Measure A, Riverside County's half-cent sales tax for
transportation, was adopted by voters in 1988 and extended in 2002. It will
continue to fund transportation improvements through 2039. Measure A
funds a wide variety of transportation projects and services throughout the
county. RCTC is responsible for administering the program. Measure A
dollars are spent in accordance with a voter-approved expenditure plan that
was adopted as part of the 1988 election. Among the programmed projects
for Measure A is the realignment of SR 79.
City of Hemet Measure C On June 7, 1988, Hemet voters approved a
measure to require updating the City’s General Plan to incorporate
performance measures related to traffic, drainage facilities, water storage
and distribution facilities, park and recreational facilities, police services, fire
services, and sanitary sewers. These performance standards were
incorporated into the 1992 General Plan as a component of the Public
Services and Facilities Element. They are incorporated into the various
goals, policies, and implementation measures within General Plan 2030 and
are attached as Appendix G.
Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee When voters approved the
extension of Measure A in 2002, they also approved the Transportation
Uniform Mitigation Fee (TUMF) program. Under the TUMF, developers in
western Riverside County pay a fee to fund transportation projects. A
network of TUMF projects has been developed and includes projects in the
City of Hemet. The Western Riverside Council of Governments (WRCOG)
was designated as program administrator for the TUMF program. As
administrator, WRCOG receives all fees generated from the TUMF that are
collected by local jurisdictions. WRCOG invests, accounts for, and spends
the fee in accordance with the TUMF ordinance, the administrative plan,
and applicable state laws. Local jurisdictions implement the projects
approved as part of the TUMF.
State Route 79 Realignment Project SR 79 is a regional roadway that
currently follows a circuitous north-south route through the central areas of
Temecula, Murrieta, Winchester, Hemet, and San Jacinto. SR 79 has
historically formed the backbone of development in Hemet and provides
the City with valuable regional connections. The current SR 79 alignment
within Hemet extends from Domenigoni Parkway to Gilman Springs Road,
a distance of approximately 18 miles. Several factors have contributed to
circulation deficiencies on SR 79 between Domenigoni Parkway and
Gilman Springs Road. The current alignment is ineffective because it does
not provide a direct regional north-south route; rather, it directs traffic
through downtown Hemet and across numerous access points, resulting in
traffic delay. Also, SR 79 does not meet commercial large-truck roadway
requirements, forcing such trucks onto local roads, creating congestion in
Hemet. The many businesses, residences, and other facilities located in
downtown Hemet generate many vehicle trips. As a result, east-west and
north-south through traffic is mixed with local traffic attempting to access
the numerous businesses in Hemet, resulting in traffic congestion.
         C   I T Y       O   F    H  E   M  E  T     G     E   N  E  R   A L       P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                          4-8

 CIRCULATION
              Consequently, to avoid these through-town delays, regional traffic is
              avoiding SR 79 and using parallel arterials, such as Sanderson Avenue and
              Warren Road.
              The existing SR 79 alignment has inadequate capacity to accommodate the
              regional and local travel demand associated with projected growth in
              western Riverside County. Hemet needs a more effective connection to
              improve roadway efficiency, safety, and vehicle capacity. The proposed SR
              79 realignment would run diagonally between Domenigoni Parkway at
              Winchester Road and Gilman Springs Road. In the Planning Area, the route
              would run diagonally from Warren Road at Esplanade Avenue toward
              Domenigoni Parkway. It would separate local and regional traffic by
              transforming SR 79 into a regional highway that redirects heavy regional
              traffic off of local and residential roads. It would provide regional motorists
              a direct, north-south route and improve mobility and safety on Hemet's
              local streets. The General Plan Roadway Circulation Master Plan includes
              the proposed realignment of Hwy 79, shown at the City of Hemet’s
              preferred alignment location. However, Cal Trans and RCTC are evaluating
              several alignment and design options for the roadway as part of the project
              proposal and EIR/EIS for the realignment. In the event that an alternative
              alignment or design option is ultimately selected, the City will need to
              amend the General Plan to indicate the selected roadway configuration.
              Capital Improvement Program The CIP is a planning tool used to
              coordinate the financing and scheduling of major City projects, including
              transportation improvements. Not all projects included in the CIP have
              budget approval. The City’s CIP is revised on an annual basis to meet
              changing needs, priorities, and financial conditions. Major funding sources
              in Hemet include the General Fund, Redevelopment Funds, and Enterprise
              Funds. Sales tax is the largest single revenue source in the General Fund.
              Other funding sources include development fees, property taxes, sales tax,
              and the gas tax.
              Vehicle Trip Reduction Program for Employment The City’s Trip
              Reduction Program is applicable to new employment-generating
              developments that could employ 100 or more persons. Smaller employers
              may participate. New developments must incorporate facilities and/or
              programs in their development plans sufficient to reduce work-related trips
              by 12 percent from the ordinarily expected number of trips related to the
              project, based on methodologies and standards established by the Institute
              of Traffic Engineers, SCAG, and/or SCAQMD. The Trip Reduction
              Program implements the Model Mobile Source Reduction Program and
              allows the City to receive revenues from state vehicle registration fees to
              administer programs to reduce air pollution.
              Western Riverside Council of Governments Non-Motorized
              Transportation Plan The Western Riverside Council of Governments Non-
              Motorized Transportation Plan provides a system of regional bicycling and
              walking routes throughout the County, typically shown as regional routes
              between subregional networks within cities and as the portions of those
              subregional networks that serve as regional routes. This is a necessary tool
              to ensure that Hemet’s network connects to the larger regional network and
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E   N  E  R  A L      P   L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    4-9

                                                                                CIRCULATION
to ensure that the portions of Hemet’s network that serve a regional
function are consistent in capacity and design to the larger, regional
network. The nonmotorized transportation plan for the Hemet area is
discussed in section 4.7.1.
Hemet-Ryan Airport Master Plan The Hemet-Ryan Airport is located in
the City of Hemet. It is owned by Riverside County and operated by the
Riverside County Economic Development Agency. The Hemet-Ryan
Airport Master Plan was adopted in 2004 and a new master plan has
recently been prepared, and is anticipated to be adopted by the County of
Riverside in 2012. The Master Plan reflects anticipated development of the
airport, including runways, taxiways, and associated land areas for both the
improvements and safety zones, along with improvements in airport
facilities, hangar and tie-down areas, and public access.
California AB 1358: The Complete Streets Act (2008)
AB 1358, the Complete Streets Act, requires cities and counties to identify
how the jurisdiction will provide for the routine accommodation of all users
of the roadway, including motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, individuals with
disabilities, seniors, and users of public transportation. Complete streets
help facilitate a variety of important community benefits. Section 4.4.7 of
this element identifies these benefits and how Hemet’s network meets the
requirements of the Act.
California Bicycle Transportation Act
The intent of the California Bicycle Transportation Act is to design and
develop a transportation system that achieves the functional commuting
needs of the employee, student, business person, and shopper; ensures the
physical safety of the bicyclist and bicyclists’ property; and accommodates
bicyclists of all ages and skills. The California Streets and Highways Code
spells out required components of bicycle plans each jurisdiction must
include to be eligible for Caltrans Bicycle Transportation Account (BTA)
funds. Local governments seeking these funds must have their plan
approved by the regional funding agency.
The City of Hemet General Plan Traffic Study specifically addresses a
number of the requirements of the California Bicycle Transportation Act in
Chapter 5 of this report. Key routes are developed to meet the needs of the
users outlined in the Bicycle Transportation Act: employees, students,
business people and shoppers. The plan also focuses on the safety of
bicyclists by providing design classifications and best practices related to
street network configurations. The use of on- and off-street facilities
provides a variety of route configurations that may accommodate bicyclists
of all different ages and skills at different locations throughout the City. As
the City continues planning for the future, it is recommended that
additional components of a complete bicycle plan be developed in order to
be eligible for BTA funds.
California AB 32: The Global Warming Solutions Act (2006)
AB 32, the Global Warming Solutions Act, establishes the first-in-the-world
comprehensive program of regulatory and market mechanisms to achieve
real, quantifiable, cost-effective reductions in greenhouse gasses (GHG).
          C   I T Y      O  F     H    E  M  E   T    G    E  N E  R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                          4-10

 CIRCULATION
              AB 32 makes the California Air Resources Board (CARB) responsible for
              monitoring and reducing GHG emissions and continues the existing
              Climate Action Team to coordinate statewide efforts. This landmark
              legislation calls for a reduction of the state’s greenhouse gas emissions to
              1990 levels by 2020 and will require the state to cut emissions by 30 percent
              over projected levels. Reduction measures proposed to meet the 2020
              target levels are to be adopted by the start of 2011.
              The Circulation Plan defines a network of bicycle routes, transit,
              neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) and pedestrian accommodations that
              encourages Hemet residents to utilize modes of transportation other than
              the automobile. The Plan provides a network to connect to regional bicycle
              and pedestrian trails from the Western Riverside County Non-Motorized
              Transportation Plan (Urban Crossroads, Inc., June 2010). The Non-
              Motorized Transportation Plan evaluates demand for such facilities. The
              Circulation Element also describes public transit, and NEV connectivity to
              major employment and activity centers to facilitate access to these
              destinations without the use of an automobile.
              California SB 375 (2008)
              SB 375 requires the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to set regional
              targets for years 2020 and 2035 to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
              passenger vehicles. The targets apply to regions in the state covered by the
              18 metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs)––SCAG is the MPO that
              represents the City of Hemet and other parts of western Riverside County.
              SB 375 provides emissions-reducing goals regions can plan for, integrates
              planning activities, and provides incentives for local governments and
              developers to follow new, conscientiously planned growth patterns.
              Reducing the number of vehicle miles traveled (VMT) is one strategy
              MPOs can employ to achieve these targets.
              The intent of SB 375 is to reduce VMT by reshaping the face of California’s
              communities into more sustainable, walkable environments with alternative
              transportation options and increased quality of life. SB 375 provides
              incentives for creating attractive, walkable, sustainable communities and
              revitalized existing ones. It also encourages the development of more
              alternative transportation options, including well-planned and -maintained
              pedestrian and bicycle routes.
              The Circulation Plan provides a framework for key routes and alternative
              transportation facilities that will enhance connectivity within the City of
              Hemet and between nearby jurisdictions. The proposed plan enables travel
              by various modes to major activity areas and large employment centers. It
              also serves existing and future planned transit facilities, including potential
              future Metrolink stations.
              4.4       R OADWAY C IRCULATION
              4.4.1         MEASURING TRAFFIC FLOW
              Roadway networks must be regularly evaluated to ensure they are moving
              vehicles efficiently and maintaining adequate capacity to support future
              growth. Evaluating the ability of the circulation system to serve residents
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L      P  L   A N     2 0 3 0
                                   4-11

                                                                                                     CIRCULATION
and businesses in Hemet requires establishing performance criteria.
Performance criteria have a policy component that establishes a desired
Level of Service (LOS), and a technical component that specifies how
traffic forecast data can be used to measure criteria achievement. Within the
Circulation Element, Volume-to-capacity (V/C) ratios are used to establish
LOS categories describing the performance of roadways and access points
throughout the community.
Volume-to-Capacity Ratio This ratio (i.e., a ratio between traffic volume
and theoretical capacity of the roadway) is used to measure the performance
of roadway facilities. Volume is established either by a traffic count (in the
case of current volumes) or by a forecast for a future point in time. Capacity
refers to the vehicle carrying ability of a roadway at free-flow speed and is a
critical component of roadway design. For example, a roadway that carries
16,000 vehicles per day, with the capacity to accommodate 20,000 vehicles
per day at free-flow speed, has a V/C of 0.80.
Level of Service LOS describes the efficiency and quality of traffic
operations. LOS is a tool used to describe the operating characteristics of
the street system in terms of the level of congestion or delay experienced by
vehicles. Service levels range from A through F, with each level defined by a
range of V/C ratios, as shown in Table 4.1. LOS A, B, and C are
considered good operating conditions, with only minor delays being
experienced by motorists. LOS D represents operating conditions where
drivers occasionally have to wait through more than one signal cycle to
proceed through the intersection. LOS E is considered a near-capacity
condition, and LOS F represents an oversaturated condition with long
delays.
                                                                   Table 4.1
                                       Level of Service Definitions for Intersections
                 Volume-to-
  Level of
                  Capacity                                                         Description
  Service
                     Ratio
      A            0.00-0.60        Free Flow/Insignificant Delays: No approach phase is fully utilized by traffic and no
                                    vehicle waits longer than one red indication.
      B            0.61-0.70        Stable Operation/Minimal Delays: An occasional approach phase is fully utilized. Many
                                    drivers feel somewhat restricted within platoons of vehicles.
      C            0.71-0.80        Stable Operation/Acceptable Delays: Major approach phases fully utilized. Most drivers
                                    feel somewhat restricted.
      D            0.81-0.90        Approaching Unstable/Tolerable Delays: Drivers may have to wait through more than one
                                    red signal indication. Queues may develop but dissipate rapidly, without excessive delays.
      E            0.91-1.00        Unstable Operation/Significant Delays: Volumes at or near capacity. Vehicles may wait
                                    through several signal cycles. Long queues form upstream from intersection.
      F              N/A            Forced Flow/Excessive Delays: Represents jammed conditions. Intersection operates
                                    below capacity with low volumes. Queues may block upstream intersections.
 Source: Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board, Special Report No. 209, Washington DC, 2000.
           C   I  T Y         O    F      H    E   M    E  T       G     E  N    E   R   A L       P  L   A   N 2 0 3 0
                                                                       4-12
 CIRCULATION
              Level of Service Standards Various LOS policy standards have been
              established to evaluate observed traffic conditions, future development
              plans, and circulation system modifications. At the local level, the City of
              Hemet has established LOS D as the lowest acceptable LOS for peak-hour
              intersection movements and LOS C as the lowest acceptable LOS for roadway
              segment operations. The City has not adopted an LOS standard for
              unsignalized intersections. Performance of unsignalized intersections is
              evaluated on a case-by-case basis. At the regional planning level, Riverside
              County’s congestion management plan (CMP) specifies LOS E as the
              operating standard for roadways and intersections on the CMP highway
              system.
              The City has also established additional thresholds for project impacts that
              go beyond acceptable operational LOS to address direct project impacts on
              roadway capacity. For purposes of compliance with the California
              Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), projects that increase V/C by .01 or
              more on affected roadway segments at intersections already experiencing or
              projected to experience LOS E or F conditions are considered to create
              potentially significant impacts, and a traffic analysis report and mitigation
              measures are required. This requirement is designed to reduce the
              occurrence of both roadway congestion and underfunded improvements.
              The City accepts a Level of Service below “D” for roadways and
              intersections at Florida and Sanderson Avenues, and at Devonshire and
              Sanderson Avenues, where Level of Service is affected by delays at Florida
              and Sanderson Avenues. The City has recognized that certain segments and
              intersections would exceed Level of Service “D” as early as 1992 during a
              comprehensive General Plan update. These segments included portions of
              Florida Avenue, Stetson Avenue, and Sanderson Avenue. Measure C
              incorporated these problematic roads in the measure language, and portions
              of Florida, Sanderson and Stetson do not need to comply with Measure C’s
              standard. The land uses and circulation system in this General Plan have
              resolved the service level problems identified for Stetson Avenue; however,
              Florida Avenue and Sanderson Avenue would still operate below Level of
              Service “D” with implementation of the General Plan.
              The primary reasons for exceeding level of service “D” in the vicinity of
              Florida Avenue and Sanderson Avenue include closely-spaced traffic signals
              along Florida Avenue, through-traffic slowed by left turns into commercial
              driveways on Florida Avenue, and a lack of available right-of-way to widen
              streets. Over the years, businesses have been built along Florida Avenue,
              limiting the possibility for roadway widening. Widening could only occur if
              those businesses are acquired through imminent domain and demolished.
              The City believes that the costs of imminent domain and demolition of
              existing business exceeds the benefits of slightly better capacity at these few
              select intersections.
              4.4.2 IMPROVEMENTS TO TRAFFIC FLOW
              To maximize the efficiency of its circulation system, the City has
              determined where physical improvements to the circulation infrastructure
              can be made to expand capacity and increase traffic flow. There are three
              basic methods to reduce traffic congestion: reduce traffic demand, increase
C I T Y O F H   E  M    E  T    G    E  N E   R A L     P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    4-13

                                                                               CIRCULATION
roadway capacity and efficiency, or spread demand to off-peak hours. All
methods are used to improve transportation planning as a component of
the Circulation Element and in the recommended implementation
programs. Reducing demand involves encouraging divers to use alternative
modes of transportation such as transit, bicycling, walking for nearby trips
or participating in carpools/vanpools. Increasing capacity involves adding
more lanes, roadways, and increasing intersection turning movements and
efficiency. Spreading demand includes the use of alternative work
schedules, and locating commercial, employment, educational and
recreational facilities in close proximity to residential areas.
To maximize the overall efficiency of the roadway system, the City will
support the following measures:
         coordinate traffic signal timing and spacing,
         optimize intersection capacity and turning movements;
         discourage on-street parking along most secondary, major, and
         arterial streets, and expressways In newly developing areas, parking
         will generally not be accommodated on any master planned street
         or road. The exception is for streets designated as Divided
         Secondary, where project designs may include on-street parking in
         conjunction with parks or similar amenities.
         explore ways to reduce the demand for vehicular transportation,
         specifically through the provision and maintenance of bike lanes,
         bikeways, trails, and pedestrian routes;
         promote the extension of the Metrolink commuter rail line to
         Downtown and West Hemet, and explore additional opportunities
         for light rail, trolley systems, bus rapid transit, and local transit
         routes;
         accommodate Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEVs) where
         practical and encourage additional regional transit services and
         support facilities;
         implement the City’s Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
         ordinance (Chapter 30, Article 3 of the City of Hemet Municipal
         Code) which specifies a variety of techniques available to
         employers with 100 or more employees to advance the goals of
         efficiently utilizing the existing and planned transportation system
         and reducing vehicle emissions. TDM strategies are designed to
         encourage individuals to use alternatives to the single-occupant
         automobile. Some examples of TDM strategies are carpools and
         vanpools, public transit, nonmotorized modes, congestion pricing,
         and providing the public with reliable and timely traveler
         information.
         C   I  T Y       O  F     H  E   M  E  T     G    E  N  E R A L    P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                          4-14

 CIRCULATION
                         encourage and implement designated Mixed-use districts to provide
                         an integrated mix of residential, commercial, office, and
                         recreational/cultural land uses to reduce vehicle miles and promote
                         walkability.
              Trip Reduction Strategies Table 4.2 below summarizes the potential
              benefit of the various trip reduction strategies outlined with the Circulation
              Element, and the percentage of vehicle miles that are projected to be
              reduced with the implementation of each strategy.
                                                      Table 4.2
                                           Trip Reduction Strategies
                        Measure                      Applicability         VMT Reduction Range
                                                Designated mixed use
                                                    areas in the City
              Mixed Use Areas                   anticipated to include            9 – 30%
                                                residential, office, and
                                                       retail uses
              Providing Pedestrian                      Citywide
                                                                                   0 – 2%
              Facilities
              Implement                                 Citywide
              Neighborhood Electric                                             0.5 – 12.7%
              Vehicle (NEV) Network
              Incorporate Bike Lanes /                  Citywide
                                                                               0.05 – 0.14%
              Increase Density
              Increase Transit                          Citywide
                                                                                0.5 – 24.6%
              Accessibility
              VMT = Vehicle Miles Traveled
               4.4.3         REGIONAL ROAD CIRCULATION
              Mobility in Hemet is directly related to the regional transportation network,
              because the City lies at the confluence of SR 74 and SR 79. Interstate 215
              (I-215) and Interstate 15 (I-15) are located west of Hemet, and. SR 60 and
              I-10 are located to the north. In addition to these freeways, other
              connections to the region include the Burlington Northern Santa Fe
              Railway (BNSF Railway) line, which is a freight line used for goods
              transportation. Hemet is also connected to the region via the RTA bus
              system. The Metrolink commuter rail system provides public transit access
              within nearby cities and counties. There is currently no Metrolink service in
              Hemet; however, future station locations have been identified for
              downtown Hemet and to serve the west Hemet area. Figure 1.1 shows
              Hemet’s regional transportation context.
              The City has made substantial efforts in recent years to improve traffic
              conditions on local roadways and to encourage multi-modal travel options.
              However, Hemet needs better roadway circulation between residential areas
              and regional employment and commercial centers and better access to
              regional transportation systems.
              The high levels of pass-through traffic associated with regional
              development and securing funding sources for circulation improvements
              are also key concerns. One of the most pertinent regional transportation
C I T Y O F H  E   M    E  T     G    E    N  E   R   A L       P   L  A N   2 0 3 0
                                     4-15

                                                                               CIRCULATION
issue in Hemet is accommodating regional through-traffic originating in
nearby communities. Specifically, growth in unincorporated Riverside
County could lower the LOS on Hemet’s roadways, and therefore lead to
restriction of development within Hemet in order to meet LOS
performance criteria. In the past, unchecked regional growth has resulted in
unexpected and unplanned traffic congestion on City streets. This regional
traffic also includes commercial truck traffic. Hemet needs a circulation
system that routes truck and commercial traffic away from residential
streets toward larger expressways and larger arterials.
State Route 79 Another source of regional traffic is SR 79, which is
currently routed from Temecula to Beaumont via Winchester Road, Florida
Avenue, San Jacinto Avenue, North State Street and Gilman Springs Road,
and Lamb Canyon. Florida Avenue is also the route of SR 74. SR 79 is
proposed to be realigned to include an expressway that diverts from
Winchester Road near Domenigoni Parkway, running north-northeast to
rejoin existing SR 79 south of Lamb Canyon. Currently, motorists bypass
the existing SR 79 by using Domenigoni Parkway to join either Warren
Road or Sanderson Avenue, which leads directly to Lamb Canyon, avoiding
Florida Avenue and San Jacinto Avenue. The proposed realignment of SR
79 is one component of improving regional transportation in Hemet.
Many of Hemet's regional and local circulation issues center on existing SR
79’s design, capacity, and alignment deficiencies. Many issues will be
resolved with the proposed realignment of SR 79 to a new expressway in
the western portion of the planning area, including the provision of a
significant opportunity to attract new industries and jobs to the city. The
timely construction of this expressway is of critical importance to the City,
and needs to be pursued diligently with RCTC and CalTrans.
SR 79 is designed to ultimately be a six lane expressway, although the initial
construction is planned to be four lanes within an approximate 230 foot
right of way. Approval of the environmental clearance and the ultimate
alignment and design configuration is slated for 2012. The expressway is
projected to be constructed in phases, with construction to commence in
2014, dependent upon available funding. The City of Hemet identified and
adopted a resolution in 2008 recommending a Locally Preferred Alternative
alignment for the roadway. This alignment is shown on the general plan
Land Use Map (Figure 2.1) and on the Roadway Circulation Master Plan
(Figure 4.1). Grade separated intersections in Hemet are planned for
Florida Ave., Stetson Ave., Domenigoni Parkway and Esplanade Ave. In
the event that an alternative alignment or design option is ultimately
selected by Cal Trans and RCTC, the City will need to amend the General
Plan to indicate the selected roadway configuration.
State Route 74 (Florida Avenue) serves as the only route to the mountain
resort areas to the east. With the completion of Domenigoni Parkway, some
traffic was diverted in the area west of State Street. However, Florida
Avenue serves as the primary arterial street traversing the City from west to
east. Further to the north, north of the City of San Jacinto, the Ramona
          C  I T Y      O  F     H   E M   E  T    G     E  N E  R  A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        4-16

                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of                                                                                                                                                    County                                                               Pop p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San Jacinto
                                                                                                        Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   River
                                                                                                                                                                                Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ee
                                                                                                              Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lyon Ave             Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                         Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ian
                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                             Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                    Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                             Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                                 Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                   Myers St                                                                                                                          Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ave                                             Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                      ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                    Florida Ave                                                                                             Flo                                     Acacia Ave                                                                                                                             Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Kirby St
                                                                                                                                          ct
                                                                                                                                        e du                      HEMET-RYAN                              LW   AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                   AIRPORT                           R AI                                                      Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                SF
                                                                                                                                        A qu
                                                          Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                      AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                   ie go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                  San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                    Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                        Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                              ts   on                                                                                                                          Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                          Ste
                                                                                                                                                              Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                       RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nig                          State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       on
                                                                                                                                                              y                                                                                                   iP
                                                                                                                                                            Pk                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                                                       ni                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   o                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                ig                                                                                                                                                                                                        bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                           en                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gib
                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                                    Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tista
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Girard St
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                       DIAMOND VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                                  State St
                                                            WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Riverside
                                       Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 086 1/24/2012
                                                                                                                        LEGEND
                                                                                                                        Circulation System                                                                                                    Secondary 4U                                                                                          Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Note: The ultimate design and alignment
                                                                                                                                           Expressway 6D                                                                                      Express Collector 3U                                                                                  Planning Area                                                  of the proposed Hwy 79 has not yet been
                     Sources:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    River/Lake                                                     adopted and will be determined upon
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                           Arterial 6D                                                                                        Collector 2U                                                                                                                                                         approval of the project by Caltrans and the
                     Urban Crossroads 2011                                                                                                 Major 4D-6D                                                                                                                                                                                              Creek/Canal                                                    Riverside County Transportation Commission.                                                                                 F i g u r e     4 . 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rural-A 2U                                                                                                                                                           The adopted design alternative may result in
                     ESRI 2010
                                                                                                                                           Divided Secondary-A 4D                                                                             Rural-B 2U                                                                                            Street                                                         changes to the circulation network shown on                                                                       ROADWAY CIRCULATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   this Figure, including existing and proposed
                     1       0.5   0                                 1      2                                                              Divided Secondary-B 4D                                                                             Ramp                                                                                                  Railroad                                                       roadway connections in the vicinity of the                                                                               MASTER PLAN
                                                                                Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              proposed Hwy 79, and may or may not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   include the Tres Cerritos Avenue offramp.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                   CIRCULATION
Back of Figure 4.1
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   4-18
 CIRCULATION
              Expressway provides both an east-west route between I-215 and the
              easternmost portion of Florida Avenue and a northwest route: Gilman
              Springs Road connects the Ramona Expressway with SR 60.
              Thus, only three thoroughfares provide a through, east-west travel route
              across Hemet and San Jacinto. A future thoroughfare—the Mid-County
              Parkway—will parallel the Ramona Expressway and add east-west capacity.
              Mid-County Parkway The Mid-County Parkway (MCP) is a 16-mile east-
              west expressway planned to connect I-215 and SR-79. Although the
              expressway is located north of Hemet, it will provide connections to
              Warren Road, Sanderson Avenue and Hwy 79. As a major east-west
              corridor into the San Jacinto Valley, it will also provide for regional
              connectivity and help reduce future traffic volumes on Florida Ave. The
              final alignment design and approval of the MCP is estimated to be
              completed in 2012, with right of way acquisition and construction projected
              to commence in 2014.
              Stetson Avenue This arterial currently runs east-west through the
              developed portions of Hemet and the southeast Hemet unincorporated area
              of the County. Stetson Avenue has been designated as a four-lane route in
              both the previous City of Hemet and current Riverside County general
              plans, but is built as a two-lane road in the unincorporated southeast area.
              This element designates Stetson Avenue as a six-lane arterial route west of
              Sanderson Avenue to follow the BNSF Railway line and proposes a future
              Metrolink station near the interchange between future Stetson Avenue and
              future SR 79. The new West Stetson Avenue is proposed to continue
              westerly through Menifee and ultimately connect with I-215 at the McCall
              Boulevard interchange, serving as an additional regional access.
              In developing a regional transportation network, Hemet must also consider
              the relationship between vehicle miles traveled and greenhouse gas (GHG)
              emissions. On September 30, 2008, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger
              signed Senate Bill 375 into law, requiring Metropolitan Planning
              Organizations, including SCAG, to develop a Sustainable Communities
              Strategy (SCS) as part of the RTP. As an option, the law authorizes
              WRCOG and other SCAG subregional agencies to prepare a subregional
              SCS. The SCS is intended to provide a path to reach the goals of AB 32, the
              Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, which requires the state to reduce
              GHG emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2020. The SCS is generally
              defined as a development pattern that meets the state target for reducing
              GHG emissions, while considering the region's housing needs,
              transportation demands, and protection of resource lands. In concert with
              developing regional transportation options, Hemet has placed land uses in a
              manner that reduces the number of home-to-work trips during peak travel
              hours and implemented TDM programs, which increase average vehicle
              ridership and shift a portion of such trips to nonpeak hours. There is a
              particular need to encourage industrial uses and employment opportunities
              within the City in order to reduce traffic on major roads. Building shopping
              and employment centers within Hemet’s planning area would reduce the
              distance that City residents drive to regional shopping and employment
              centers and would aid the local economy.
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E  T     G    E  N E   R  A L      P L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                   4-19

                                                                                CIRCULATION
 4.4.4         LOCAL ROAD CIRCULATION
Hemet’s roadway system is well developed; however some connectivity
gaps and design issues result in unnecessary traffic delays. In many areas,
right-of-way is not available to widen streets to accommodate additional
traffic volume. The provision of expanded turning mechanisms, such as
striping, traffic signals, and turn lanes, at critical intersections would
alleviate a majority of the traffic delays. Many of Hemet’s local collector
streets were developed before the current standards for collector roadways,
which creates traffic delay and safety hazards when high-volume traffic
comes into contact with residential driveways. Also, minimizing the number
of direct access points on Hemet’s major roadway corridors, such as SR 79,
would improve traffic delay and safety issues.
Transportation System Management (TSM) and TDM strategies can
improve the mobility and efficiency of a circulation system. TSM involves
physical improvements to the circulation infrastructure to expand capacity
and increase traffic flow, while TDM involves reducing the demand for
vehicular transportation. TSM and TDM strategies provide relief from
increasing demands for more improvements to transportation facilities.
Examples of TSM include synchronizing traffic signals, removing on-street
parking on certain roads, and changing intersection geometries. Priority
should be given to TSM strategies that improve LOS, especially in areas
that are fully developed, before more costs and capacity-increasing
strategies are employed. Examples of TDM include making better use of
existing roads, reducing auto use in congested areas or peak-hour traffic
times, and increasing public transit ridership. The City coordinates TSM
and TDM efforts with Riverside County’s CMP.
The local street system serves the community’s primary needs for mobility
and access. The City’s arterial/collector roadway network generally
corresponds to a one-quarter-mile grid pattern. This system emphasizes
carrying traffic on a relatively large number of collector streets, rather than
concentrating traffic on a small number of high-volume arterials. SR 74 and
SR 79 serve local and regional through traffic.
 4.4.5         CIRCULATION MASTER PLAN
The City’s existing circulation network consists primarily of roadways.
However, transit services, multi-use trails and bikeways, and air traffic at
Hemet-Ryan Airport are also used by City residents, but to a lesser extent
because of a current lack of multi-modal connections. As shown on Figure
4.1, the updated Circulation Element provides a framework for a
comprehensive multi-modal transportation network and the integration of
complete streets.
The Circulation Element goals and policies emphasize:
     regional access, particularly a realigned and expanded SR 79;
     continuation of the City’s traditional grid street system to provide
     greater connectivity within the City;
         C   I  T Y     O   F     H   E   M  E  T    G   E  N E   R   A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        4-20

 CIRCULATION
                   a balance between the provision of street infrastructure and the
                   maintenance of the residential character of neighborhoods;
                   a recognition of the potential effect of development on the capacity of
                   streets and the need to reduce impacts by promoting alternative
                   development patterns and modes of transportation; and
                   the value of providing commuter rail, bus, bicycle, pedestrian, and
                   equestrian pathways as alternate modes of travel for current and future
                   residents.
              The planning horizon for Hemet’s roadway system is 2030. The City’s
              Roadway Circulation Master Plan (Figure 4.1) has been developed to
              accommodate anticipated vehicle traffic volumes in 2030. This plan has
              been developed in close coordination with land use policies to ensure that
              traffic generated by new development will not compromise the City’s goal
              to ensure that intersections and roadway segments operate efficiently.
              The map identifies existing and proposed components of the City’s
              roadway circulation system. The primary enhancement is the realignment of
              portions of SR 79. SR 79 currently runs east-west along Florida Avenue
              concurrent with SR 74 from the west end of the City to San Jacinto Street,
              where SR 79 turns north. Details describing the SR 79 realignment are
              provided in the regional circulation discussion.
              Although most of central Hemet is already developed, most remaining
              developable land is located in the western part of the City, and within the
              Planning Area. New development in west Hemet will require construction
              of new roads to provide circulation for future residents and businesses.
              Land Use Element policies enabling reuse and redevelopment within
              established portions of the City, particularly within key roadway corridors,
              may also necessitate roadway widening and intersection enhancements.
              The traffic impact analysis prepared for the General Plan Update (Urban
              Crossroads, 2011) determined that the proposed circulation plan and
              roadway network would accommodate the future traffic demands of the
              land use plan at build out (2030). Intersections are also projected to operate
              at acceptable levels of service with the exception of two existing
              intersections that already are impacted: Florida Ave. and Sanderson Ave.,
              and Devonshire and Sanderson Ave. Improvements to these intersections
              are constrained by existing development on either side of the roadway.
              The Roadway Circulation Master Plan (Figure 4.1) generally conforms to
              previously adopted 1992 circulation master plan, except that some new
              streets are added or reclassified, and lane configurations or intersection
              geometrics have been modified for selected street segments. A comparison
              of the identified changes to the roadway network is provided in Appendix
              D of the General Plan.
              Sustainable Transportation Network Sustainable transportation
              networks are designed to improve the balance between environmental
              concerns, community objectives, and performance (mobility and safety).
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T    G   E  N  E   R  A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                  4-21

                                                                               CIRCULATION
Within Hemet, progress toward a su stainable transportation system can be
advanced by focusing on the following objectives, as stated in the General
Plan traffic analysis by Urban Crossroads (2011):
     Network Connectivity (more than one route between land uses and a
     mixture of low speed and high speed road connections wherever
     possible)
     Operational Balance (flexibility to achieve community objectives and
     place making without sacrificing safety and mobility)
     Emissions Reduction / Energy Efficiency (prioritize designs which
     minimize idling times and vehicle miles traveled, help conserve
     resources and minimize waste)
     Pedestrian and Bicycle Accommodations (walkways and bikeways
     fully integrated)
     Transit Readiness (access to transit stops and effective interface of
     modes
     Neighborhood Electric Vehicle Facilities (system of NEV
     provisions: paths, lanes, charging stations, etc.)
     Quality Public Space (roadways spatially defined with structures and
     landscaping).
4.4.6 R OADWAY C LASSI FI CA T I ONS
Circulation plan roadways in Hemet are defined using a hierarchical
classification system. Each type of roadway is described by size, function,
and capacity. The circulation plan establishes eight types of roadways,
ranging from six-lane highways to two-lane roadways. The circulation plan
does not describe SR 79 (which will be a Caltrans facility) or local streets.
Although there are numerous local streets serving individual
neighborhoods, and these streets feed into the larger roadway network, they
are not considered master-planned streets that are part of the circulation
network. The design of the local streets is still subject to the City’s
engineering and subdivision Street Standards. The realigned SR 79, west of
Warren Road, is being designed to expressway standards. Design is
undertaken by Caltrans, with primary overview by RCTC. SR 79 is
anticipated to be constructed in phases, with the first phase to include fewer
lanes and at-grade crossings, with additional lanes, interchanges, and
overpasses added later.
City roadways consist of both divided and undivided roadways. Divided
roadways generally contain a physical barrier or buffer, such as a curbed
median or a continuous two-way left-turn lane, between each direction of
travel. Divided roadways remove vehicles making a left turn from the travel
lanes to keep slowing vehicles from impeding through traffic and
constricting roadway capacity. Undivided roadways do not contain a buffer
between each direction of travel and, therefore, left-turning traffic can
          C   I T Y     O  F     H  E  M   E   T     G   E  N E   R  A L    P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        4-22

 CIRCULATION
              impede through traffic. Undivided roadways may widen to provide turn
              movement pockets at intersections.
              The standard roadway classifications are listed in Table 4.3 and described in
              the paragraphs that follow. The descriptions relate to segment design, and
              illustrate the configuration at midblock. Typical nonintersection cross-
              sections are illustrated in Figure 4.2.
              Additional rights-of-way (beyond the standard width) may be required at
              higher volume intersections to provide for safe turning movements. The
              standard roadway classifications are described in the table and paragraphs
              below.
                                                  Table 4.3
                                         Roadway Classifications
                                            # of      Raised    ROW Width Curb-to-Curb
                    Classification
                                           Lanes      Median        (ft.)       Width (ft.)
               Arterial                      6         Yes        130–140         102–112
               Major                         4         Yes         98–108            78
               Divided Secondary—A           4         Yes           94              70
               Divided Secondary—B           4         Yes           94              64
               Secondary                     4         No            94              64
               Express Collector             3         No            66              44
               Collector                     2         No          66–74             44
               Rural Collector               2         No            44              32
               Local Rural                   2         No            44              24
              Arterial—An Arterial is a six-lane road with a median and is intended to
              have a somewhat limited amount of access. Typically, Arterials have at-
              grade intersections with other roads, with separations of at least one-quarter
              mile between intersection crossings and very limited driveway access points.
              Intersections are at grade, with signalization of crossings. Some
              intersections may only permit right-turn access. On-street parking is not
              permitted. Medians are raised, with landscaping and/or hardscaping (e.g.,
              decorative paving or features). Median widths vary between 14 and 24 feet
              and account for variable rights-of-way and curb-to-curb widths. Two
              existing or planned roads, Domenigoni Parkway and the Ramona
              Expressway, have unique designs that include greater median widths and
              parkways, and greater separations between access points.
              Major—A Major street is a four-lane street with a landscaped median.
              Under unique circumstances related to neighborhood traffic needs, painted
              medians can be considered by decision makers. On-street parking is not
              permitted. Major streets are intended to have design speeds based on
              greater sight distance, curves that are less acute, restricted access, and
C I T Y O F H   E  M    E T     G   E  N   E  R  A L    P   L A  N      2 0 3 0
                                   4-23

G 06268298.09 009 1/24/2012
                                                                        F i g u r e   4 . 2
                            Source:               Roadway Classification Cross-Sections
                            Urban Crossroads 2010       H e m e t   G e n e r a l   P l a n
 CIRCULATION
              greater distance between intersection crossings. At intersections, the street
              can be altered to allow acceleration, deceleration, and turn lanes. Parkways
              will vary between 10 and 15 feet wide, and right-of-way widths will vary
              accordingly. It is assumed that areas with extensive existing development
              will have the narrower rights-of-way, while newly developing areas will have
              the wider rights-of-way.
              Divided Secondary A—A Divided Secondary street is a four-lane street,
              but differs from Secondary Streets in that they have a landscaped median.
              Under unique circumstances related to community design issues, painted
              medians can be considered by decision makers. Divided Secondary streets
              are likely to have speeds that accommodate roadway constraints and
              community design issues. Bike lanes are accommodated, which results in
              narrower Parkways than those on Divided Secondary B streets.
              Divided Secondary B—A Divided Secondary B street is similar to the
              Divided Secondary A street described above; however, the Divided
              Secondary B street does not provide for bike lanes, resulting in a smaller
              curb-to-curb footprint than the Divided Secondary A street.
              Secondary—A Secondary street is a four-lane street with a painted
              centerline and no median. Parking is not accommodated but bike lanes may
              be accommodated. Intersection designs may allow special turning
              opportunities.
              Express Collector—Express Collectors accommodate heavier traffic flow
              in one direction, providing additional capacity to guide traffic toward
              signalized intersections with appropriate capacity and turning movement
              facilities. Between intersections, the Express Collector cross-section
              includes two lanes in one direction and one lane in the opposite direction.
              A single bicycle lane is accommodated between the single opposing lane
              and the curb. Parking is not accommodated. At signal-controlled
              intersections, the right-of-way is intended to be widened to allow left-
              turning lanes.
              Collector—A Collector is a two-lane roadway with full shoulders within a
              66-foot right-of-way within already developed areas and within a 74-foot
              right-of-way in newly developing areas. The additional right-of-way
              provides for additional parkway improvements and fence or wall setbacks.
              Collectors provide access from local streets to the highway system.
              Collectors are intended to serve intensive residential land uses and multiple-
              family dwellings or to convey traffic through an area to roads of equal or
              similar classification or higher. In newly developing areas, residences will
              not be permitted to have individual driveways onto the street, and parking
              may not be accommodated to allow space for bicycles, NEV lanes, or other
              improvements.
              Rural Collector—A Rural Collector is a two-lane road that serves very low
              volumes of traffic in areas with little or no development, or very low density
              development. These roads typically occur in very rural or hillside areas, such
              as Avery Canyon or where Sage Road is located. Curbs and gutters are not
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N E   R  A L       P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                   4-25

                                                                                 CIRCULATION
generally used and shoulders are typically unimproved (dirt). Bike lanes are
provided on Rural Collectors.
Local Rural—Similar to the Rural Collector, a local rural street serves a
small area of homes or businesses in a rural or mountainous setting.
Pavement width is smaller than a Rural Collector because bike lanes are not
provided.
Additional design considerations based on specific projects may also be
approved at the discretion of the public works director when based on
specific design constraints or modified roadway sections in specific plans.
 4.4.7         COMPLETE STREETS
AB 1358, the Complete Streets Act, requires cities and counties to identify
how the jurisdiction will provide for the routine accommodation of all users
of the roadway. Planning and implementing “complete streets” is one way
cities and counties can meet this requirement.
A complete street is a transportation facility that is planned, designed,
operated, and maintained to enable safe access for all roadway users.
Pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, and transit riders of all ages and abilities
must be able to safely move along and across a complete street. Complete
streets help facilitate a variety of important community benefits. Some of
these benefits are described in the following list:
     Complete streets provide safe travel choices and give people the option
     to avoid traffic jams while increasing the overall capacity of the
     transportation network.
     Complete streets encourage healthy physical activity. Public health
     experts promote walking and bicycling to combat obesity, especially in
     children.
     Planning for complete streets cuts costs. Integrating sidewalks, bike
     lanes, transit amenities, and safe crossings into the initial design of a
     project is more cost-effective than making retrofits later.
     Complete streets can lead to economic revitalization by reducing
     transportation costs and travel time while increasing property values
     and job growth in communities.
     Thoughtful design and accommodations for bicyclists and pedestrians
     reduces the incidence of crashes and improves safety for all
     transportation users.
     Complete streets foster strong communities where all people feel safe
     and welcome on the roadways and where walking and bicycling are an
     essential part of improving public transportation and creating friendly,
     walkable neighborhoods.
Identifying opportunities for select roadways to become complete streets
that include such elements as pedestrian travel, canopy shade trees, activity
         C   I  T Y      O  F     H  E  M  E  T     G   E  N   E  R  A L       P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       4-26

 CIRCULATION
              nodes, NEV lanes, and pervious pavement or bioswales, will add to the
              street's value and multi-purpose use. While not all streets need be
              developed as complete streets, determining key locations and accompanying
              design standards are recommended implementation programs to foster
              complete streets within the City.
              The General Plan meets the goals and policies of the Complete Streets Act
              in several ways. First, the General Plan fundamentally increases the range of
              transportation options for circulation within the City of Hemet and to
              adjacent western Riverside County jurisdictions by identifying a backbone
              network of bicycle and pedestrian routes. This on- and off-street network
              of routes improves safety for pedestrians and cyclists by providing
              dedicated facilities apart from vehicles. The General Plan also addresses
              ancillary facilities that are necessary to make a complete street work: the
              General Plan establishes preferred or “typical” design standards for route
              classifications and discusses the need for bicycle accommodations. Lastly,
              the General Plan specifically includes facilities consistent with the recently
              completed Western Riverside County Non-Motorized Transportation Plan.
              4.5       N EIG HBORH OOD E LECTRI C V EHIC L ES
              NEVs are a street legal, low cost, energy efficient, zero emissions mode of
              local travel that is currently available—but current impediments to
              widespread usage include lack of interconnected low-speed routes and
              driver confusion regarding where these vehicles can safely be operated.
              These problems can be addressed in Hemet by implementing an integrated
              local NEV plan that overcomes connection issues, identifies safe routes,
              and enables clear communication about where residents can go in low-
              speed vehicles.
              The unintended consequence of providing a high level of mobility on our
              roadways includes high-speed auto-oriented patterns that sometimes inhibit
              the operation of low-speed vehicles and other modes of transportation.
              Drivers are gradually becoming aware of the official low-speed vehicle
              classification, commonly described as NEVs, which are already approved at
              federal and state levels for use on public streets. With their emphasis on
              short trips and speed capabilities capped at 25 miles per hour (mph), NEVs
              are generally restricted to streets with posted speed limits of 35 mph or less.
              Accommodating a Low-Speed-Travel Culture in Hemet
              Accommodating low-speed vehicles with zero emissions is a potent strategy
              to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions while encouraging a healthier
              level of community interaction. Although some level of NEV ownership
              and operation will occur regardless of the city’s attention to the matter,
              Hemet can proactively address conflicting mode issues and encourage safe
              NEV operations by:
                   identifying the suitable NEV backbone routes as potentially shown in
                   Figure 4.3,
                   implementing street signage and striping of lanes for appropriate
                   operation of low-speed vehicles,
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T      G   E  N  E  R   A L    P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    4-27

                                                                                CIRCULATION
     providing parking incentives and low-cost charging stations, and
     promoting the NEV plan to the public.
These activities are essential to acceptance and use of NEVs by residents
and businesses.
Use of NEVs by the general public has increased for transporting kids to
school, shopping, and other neighborhood trips. To accommodate the
NEV users, special parking areas can be provided in local grocery and
commercial shopping centers. Additionally, the downtown core of Hemet,
and the neighborhoods immediately surrounding it, tends to have collector
streets with speed limits of 25 to 35 mph, which are suitable for NEVs.
Given Hemet’s grid street system with lower speed limits and relatively
compact geography, NEV vehicles can be accommodated as a means of
providing local transport. Larger, new planned developments present the
same opportunity if low-speed connecting roads are provided.
Expanding NEV Use by Implementing a Citywide NEV Plan
NEVs have many benefits. NEVs can offer residents the ability to circulate
the community without having to start an automobile with a combustion-
powered engine. The NEV will be an enjoyable way to reach nearby
commercial and activity centers in the local area and to visit neighbors. In
addition, NEVs:
     are a relatively inexpensive vehicle to own and operate,
     are particularly well suited to trips less than 10 miles,
     do not contribute to the air pollution caused by the cold starts and
     operation of typical high-speed autos,
     achieve an energy equivalent of at least 150 miles per gallon (based
     upon 2002 California Energy Commission report), and
     have potential to run fossil-fuel free using solar or wind power to
     generate their electricity.
Figure 4.3 shows a potential NEV network for Hemet that is oriented to
existing roadways and could therefore be implemented in the next few
years. It incorporates “backbone low speed connectors” that focus on
streets with a posted speed limit of 35 mph or less. Low speed connectors
either provide direct connection to key destinations or link to NEV/bike
lanes on higher speed routes. Shared NEV/bike lanes are proposed for
higher speed routes in conjunction with Class II bike lanes. Restriping or, in
some cases, widening of roadway cross-sections may be necessary where
bike lanes do not exist or where existing bike lanes are less than 7 feet wide.
The planned backbone network provides a basic NEV system that can be
modified or embellished as needed as new areas of the city are developed.
Connections to nearby jurisdictions can also be evaluated where appropriate
because travel is rarely restricted by City boundaries.
         C   I  T Y      O   F     H   E  M   E   T    G  E    N E R A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                         4-28

                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                               Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Jacinto
                                                                                                        Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                River
                                                                                                                                                                               Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                 California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                 Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ee
                                                                                                              Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                         Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ian
                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ve
                                                                                                                                                             Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                               Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                   Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                     ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                     Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kirby St
                                                                                                                                          ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Y
                                                                                                                                                                  HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                        ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                   AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                               SF
                                                                                                                                        A qu
                                                           Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                     AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                   ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                  San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                   Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                        Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                              ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                                 Warren Rd
                                                                                                                          Ste
                                                                                                                                                              Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 go
                                                                                                                                                             ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pk
                                                                                                                                                           iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                      on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                               ni
                                                                                                                                                  g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                           e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                                    Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                               Diamond Valley Lake
                                                        DIAMOND VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                              State St
                                                             WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 088 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                    NEV Network                                                                                                                                                                        Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                    Backbone Low Speed Connector                                                                                                                                       Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Street
                                                                                                                                                                                    Potential NEV/Bike Lanes (Class 2)
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     Urban Crossroads 2011                                                                                                                                          Potential Off Road NEV/Bike Path (Class 1)                                                                                                                         Railroad                                                                                                                                                                             F i g u r e     4 . 3
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Creek/Canal                                                                                                                                                              NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       River/Lake
                     1       0.5   0                                 1       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VEHICLE (NEV) NETWORK
                                                                                 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                       CIRCULATION
Backside of Figure 4.3
       C   I  T Y      O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                       4-30
 CIRCULATION
              While there is sometimes interest in allowing golf carts to be included in a
              NEV plan, this may raise concerns for on-street usage on a citywide scale.
              When a NEV travels at its top speed of 25 mph, it still holds up some
              traffic in shared-lane conditions on local or collector streets. If it travels
              more slowly, it may encourage inappropriate passing by vehicles from the
              rear that could disrupt neighborhood safety. There are several models of
              NEV today that travel at 25 mph and should offer a reasonable variety to
              residents.
              NEVs, Transit, and Bikes—Strategies for Safe Operations
              Implementation of a citywide NEV Plan should be carefully reviewed by
              professionals and stakeholders so that potential conflicts between low-
              speed vehicles and autos, bikes, or transit operations can be addressed
              within each segment designated. For example, NEVs are not allowed in
              standard bike lanes (Class II facilities), which are often 5–6 feet wide (too
              narrow for NEVs). They are also not allowed in the auto lanes on fast
              roads. The initial NEV network suggested for Hemet identifies the
              backbone network where NEVs can safely operate and shared NEV/bike
              lanes for selected routes with higher speeds. Once this network is refined
              and adopted into a NEV plan, the network can be made available to
              residents and businesses to communicate how to get around town in low-
              speed vehicles.
               4.6 P UB LIC T RANSP ORTAT ION
              A comprehensive public transit network is critical in providing a
              transportation system that meets the goals and policies of the Circulation
              Element. As vehicle congestion continues to grow and opportunities to
              add road capacity are further limited, transit will increasingly be utilized to
              meet the mobility needs of the City of Hemet over the next 30 years.
              Transit promotes livable communities. Use of public transit will also
              promote more walkable neighborhoods, foster more cohesive communities,
              and provide better transportation options for members of the community
              where car ownership is either a hardship or an impossibility. Providing
              more transportation choices through extension of public transit
              opportunities will enable the City’s residents and employees to rely less on
              automobile travel, reduce vehicle-miles traveled, and accommodate new
              development while minimizing the need for unsustainable roadway
              expansion.
              Public transit in the Hemet area consists of taxis, paratransit vans, buses,
              and future passenger services through the Metrolink rail system. Figure 4.4
              illustrates transit service features in Hemet.
              4.6.1 PASSENGER RAIL SERVICE
              The existing San Jacinto Branch Rail line runs east/west through Hemet
              from Perris. The rail line is the Riverside–San Jacinto spur line originally
              owned by the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe Railroad (ATSF), was
              purchased by the Riverside County Transportation Commission. AT&SF
              operated the rail line from 1888 to 1897, primarily to serve the agricultural
              operations in the valley. The BNSF Railway operates freight service as the
C I T Y O F H   E  M   E   T     G   E  N   E  R  A L    P   L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    4-31

                                                                                CIRCULATION
successor to ATSF. The line runs between Riverside and San Jacinto via
March Air Base, Perris, and Hemet. In the Hemet Planning Area, the line
runs northeasterly from Winchester to downtown Hemet, where it curves
north and runs along Harvard Street, parallel to and east of State Street.
The original depot is located at the corner of State Street and Florida
Avenue, and the Hemet Library is located adjacent to the line. A downtown
passenger station is envisioned, as is a passenger station proximate to the
future SR 79 and relocated Stetson Avenue interchange.
Metrolink is a regional passenger rail service to reduce the congestion on
highways and improve mobility throughout southern California. Metrolink
provides rail service to Riverside County. The Riverside Line runs trains
from Riverside to Orange County and Los Angeles. Metrolink has multiple
stations in Riverside County, including Pedley Station, Riverside-
Downtown Station, Riverside–La Sierra Station, and West Corona Station.
An extension of the Riverside Transit Corridor along the San Jacinto
branch line to Hemet is proposed, and Perris and Perris-South Stations are
proposed for construction in 2013. Long-term plans call for an extension of
the line to Hemet, connecting Hemet with Los Angeles, Orange, and San
Bernardino Counties and other parts of Riverside County.
Potential future Metrolink stations are located near the future SR 79
alignment at Stetson Avenue in west Hemet and near State Street at Menlo
Avenue in downtown Hemet. Metrolink trains would be accommodated on
the existing BNSF Railway line. Completion of transportation
improvements to Metrolink linking Hemet to new destinations will increase
traveling and commuting options for Hemet residents and reduce
dependence on private automobile travel. As new areas are developed near
transportation corridors and nodes, residents and visitors will benefit from
the “smart growth” designs, which promote greater walkability and
proximity to daily services, thus reducing both the detrimental
environmental effects of vehicles and congestion.
Considerations for Future Railway Designs
The existing BNSF Railway line currently crosses the Planning Area and the
City at grade (i.e., no overpasses). The rail line is generally only crossed by
streets designated in this element as Collector and above.. Street crossings
are typically protected by automatic signals and gates. Freight trains operate
on a demand schedule (i.e., upon request) and demand has been low
enough that the movements of the infrequent trains, street traffic, and
pedestrians have not conflicted. If freight demand substantially increases
within the developed portions of the City, or when Metrolink service is
provided, street crossings will need to be evaluated. Although grade-
separated crossings are generally preferred, overpasses are probably
infeasible within the developed portions of the City because of existing
development and may not be warranted from a traffic/train usage
perspective. However, larger new developments should be evaluated for
potential effects of traffic and pedestrians on crossing functioning and
safety, and constructing or accommodating the future construction of
overpasses should be considered. Overpasses are most appropriate in new
development in the southwest portion of the Planning Area.
         C   I T Y      O  F    H    E M   E   T     G   E  N   E  R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        4-32

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Jacinto
                                                                                                        Beech St                                 Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 River
                                                                                                                                                                                Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                 California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ee
                                                                                                              Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                         Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ian
                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ve
                                                                                                                                                              Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                    Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                      ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                     Florida Ave                                                                                            Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kirby St
                                                                                                                                          ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                                                   HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                         ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                    AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                           Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                      AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                    ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                  San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                    Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                         Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                               ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                                  Warren Rd
                                                                                                                           Ste
                                                                                                                                                               Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  go
                                                                                                                                                              ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pk
                                                                                                                                                            iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                       on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                   g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                            e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                     Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                Diamond Valley Lake
                                                        DIAMOND VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                               State St
                                                             WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 089 1/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                     LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                     Transit                                                                                                                                                       Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                    Existing Bus Route                                                                                                                             Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                       Potential Future Bus Service                                                                                                                   Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     Urban Crossroads 2011                                                                                                                                          Future Commuter Rail                                                                                                                           Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F i g u r e     4 . 4
                     ESRI 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                    Potential Future Metrolink Station                                                                                                             Creek/Canal
                     1       0.5   0                                 1       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                  TRANSIT SERVICE FEATURES
                                                                                 Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                   CIRCULATION
Back of Figure 4.4
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   4-34
 CIRCULATION
              4.6.2         BUS AND LOCAL TRANSIT SERVICES
              The Riverside Transit Agency (RTA) provides public transportation
              throughout Riverside County. RTA operates fixed bus routes providing
              public transit service throughout a 2,500-square-mile area of western
              Riverside County. RTA's fixed routes have been designed to establish
              transportation connections between all cities and unincorporated
              communities in western Riverside County. RTA bus lines 32, 33, and 42
              provide local access in the Hemet Planning Area and neighboring San
              Jacinto as shown in Figure 4.4 (Transit Service Features). RTA routes
              currently use the Hemet Valley Mall located near the intersection of Florida
              Avenue and Kirby Street as a hub point for all routes serving the Hemet
              and San Jacinto areas and for those routes connecting to regional
              destinations.
              Future transit routes are also shown on Figure 4.4, and are anticipated to
              provide additonal connectivity throughout the less centralized portions of
              the City and Planning Area. Ultimately, RTA envisions constructing a
              Transit Center in the Hemet area. A location has not been determined, but
              one alternative would be to site the center in conjunction with a downtown
              or west Hemet Metrolink station.
              The current SR 79 alignment through the Cities of San Jacinto and Hemet
              is only suitable to accommodate local public transportation services.
              However, a number of future transit opportunities exist near the SR 79
              realignment. A multi-modal public transportation system offers many
              benefits, such as increased mobility, decreased traffic congestion, energy
              savings, and decreased pollution and GHGs. A transit system could be built
              around a set of land use nodes throughout Hemet and nearby cities. A one-
              way loop, with stops within a 5-minute walk, can effectively serve about 1.5
              square miles with 10-minute frequencies of service and require only a single
              vehicle and a single lane right-of-way. New services would
              need to be established to provide the compatibility with a future multi-
              modal transportation system. The right-of-way for the realignment of SR 79
              also includes designated right-of-way for transit; however, the type of
              transit facility has not yet been designated. The City is committed to
              ensuring that public transportation becomes a viable travel alternative to the
              automobile and is taking steps to ensure that transit accessibility is a primary
              consideration within new mixed-use and redevelopment proposals.
              Design Considerations for Public Transit
              To advance public transit use, comfort, and safety, consider the following
              strategies in transit design:
                       Integrate methods that will allow buses to stop for passengers
                       without disrupting vehicular traffic such as a wider traffic lanes or a
                       turnout at the bus stop location.
                       Locate transit stops to minimize the impact of buses and ridership
                       activity on nearby neighborhoods. Incorporate buffer zones as
                       feasible.
                       Locate bus stops on the “far-side” of an intersection to avoid
                       conflicts with traffic queuing in the right turn lane.
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E   T     G    E  N  E  R  A L      P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                    4-35

                                                                                  CIRCULATION
          Provide amenities for transit users such as benches, shade, lighting,
          shelters, and bicycle racks, where appropriate.
          Ensure that transit stops meet Americans with Disabilities Act
          (ADA) requirements by providing a continuous paved connection
          to and from the stop.
Paratransit Options
Several paratransit options exist for senior citizens that are not able to drive,
or would rather not drive. RTA’s Dial-A-Ride program provides general
advanced reservation service, Senior/Disabled service, and Priority Service
for persons certified under the Americans with Disabilities Act. Care-A-Van
service is also offered within the City of Hemet for seniors and disabled
travelers that qualify as low income. Hemet Valley Medical Center offers
patient transportation to and from the hospital.
 4.7 B ICYCLE            AND P E DESTRI AN C IRCULATION
Bicycling promotes the neighborhood character and community feel of
Hemet by allowing for a low-impact, convenient, and healthy transportation
option. Reducing short commute and utilitarian vehicle trips can promote
healthier living, and encourage residents to interact with their local
neighborhood by patronizing local business and socializing with neighbors.
An effective bicycle transportation plan promotes bicycling as both a viable
transportation alternative and an enjoyable recreational pastime.
A comprehensive bicycle network, including bicycle routes, convenient
bicycle parking facilities, and overall street designs that make the roadway
network more hospitable to cycling, will make cycling competitive with the
private automobile for short trips. Implementing a bicycle network helps to
achieve the balance in the transportation network by providing an
affordable alternative to the private automobile, and provides better
transportation options for people who cannot drive.
The Circulation Element identifies a master plan for bicycle and pedestrian
trail systems throughout the City and Planning Area, allowing residents to
travel from neighborhoods to key destinations like schools, parks, shopping
and employment centers. The Bikeway Circulation Plan is provided in
Figure 4.5. Additional off-road bike trails for recreational users is discussed
in Chapter 8 (Recreation and Trails) and shown in Figure 8.3.
In addition to offering recreational and public health benefits, nonvehicular
modes of transportation offer options for both commuting and
convenience trips around the City. Also, the mixed-use environments
advocated by Land Use Element policies will encourage increased
pedestrian activity on City sidewalks for both business and pleasure. Finally,
an equestrian network in selected areas will offer recreational benefits,
although it will be limited to nontraffic areas to avoid conflicts between
horses and traffic. An effective bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian network
must be safe and accessible and must connect key activity centers within the
City with each other and with the regional trail system. Hemet’s current
bike trail system includes Class 1 bike paths, Class 2 bike lanes, and Class 3
bike routes. Recreational trails such as mixed-use trails and trails for
equestrian and hiking only are discussed in the Recreation and Trails
          C  I  T Y      O  F     H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N   E  R  A L      P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        4-36

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of                                                                                                                                                              County                                                           Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                              Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Jacinto
                                                                                                                      Beech St                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       River
                                                                                                                                                                                               Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                               California Ave
                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ü
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -                                                                                                                                                                                                Cree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                            Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyon Ave               Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                    Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ian
                                                                                                                                                         en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                                        Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                             Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                           Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                             Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                 Myers St
            Florida Ave                                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                             Flo
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ri    da
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ave                                               Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -                         Acacia Ave
                                                                                      ü
                                                                                      -
                                                                                      ø
                                                                                      -                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Buena Vista St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto St     Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mayberry Ave                                    Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Meridian St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Y
                                                                                                                                                    du c
                                                                                                                                                                                HEMET-RYAN                        LWA
                                                                                                                                                  Aq u
                                                                                                                                                                                 AIRPORT                     RA I                        Kirby St                                                                                                                                                                                    Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yale St
                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                      Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                      AT&
                          Riverside
                                                                                                                                                 ieg o                     Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l
                                                                                                                                                San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca
                           County
                                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thornton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           et   Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                 Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      em
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Elk St                                                                                                                        Crest Dr                                            eH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Chambers St                                                                                                                                                       Lak
                                                                                                                                                            Warren Rd       Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                         RAMONA
                                             Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BOWL
                                        s on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside
                                    t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                Ste
                                                                                                           California Ave
                                                                                      Simpson Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i go                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                                                           ky                                                                                                  P   ky
                                                                                                                                                                         iP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                                    on                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                            i   g                                                                                                                                                                                                         bel                                             PARK
                                                                                                                                                         en                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gib
                                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                                  Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ista
             Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                          Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                   DIAMOND VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                                    State St
                                                                        WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Riverside
                                                   Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 087 6/14/2017                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sources: Esri, USGS,
                      o                                                                                                                                                           LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                  Bikeways                                                                                                                                                                                              Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Last Update:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4/11/2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GPA 16-001
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Class 1 (Off Road)                                                                                                                                                                 Planning Area
                      Sources:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          River/Lake
                      Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Class 2 (On Road, Two Way Striped Lanes)
                      Urban Crossroads 2011                                                                                                                                                          Class 2 (On Road, One Way Striped Lane)                                                                                                                                            Creek/Canal
                      ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F i g u r e      4 . 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Class 3 (On Road, Designated Shared Use)
                      1       0.5           0                                   1          2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Railroad                                                                                                                                       BIKEWAY CIRCULATION PLAN
                                                                                               Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n

                                                       CIRCULATION
Back side of Figure 4.5
        C  I  T Y      O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                       4-38
 CIRCULATION
              Element (Chapter 8). Opportunities for Class 3 bike routes exist along
              many of the City’s collector streets and sometimes secondary streets,
              typically following quarter-mile grids. Designated Scenic Highways have a
              design requirement for wide multiple-use paseos that accommodate
              pedestrians, joggers, and bicyclists, and wider sections already exist on
              Sanderson and Florida Avenues. While these multiple-use paseos do not
              meet the formal Class 1, 2, or 3 definitions of bikeways, they nevertheless
              provide a valuable resource for users.
              Currently, opportunities for bicycling or walking as viable transportation
              options vary in different parts of the City. In the older, central portion of
              the City, designated bike routes are constrained by street widths that
              typically do not accommodate designated lanes. This is particularly true on
              collector streets where the typical widths allow only either on-street parking,
              designated bike lanes, or medians. However, the central portion of the City
              often has sidewalks, and the grid system provides flexibility for bicycle
              riders on side streets. Newer portions of the City typically have a larger grid
              system that may or may not include sidewalks or bike paths, although some
              of the more recently developed areas often include mixed-use pathways,
              particularly in areas developed under specific plan entitlements. As
              development occurs, particularly at the subdivision level, improvements to
              pedestrian and bicycle access are required. In the more rural edges of the
              City, these improvements have also included equestrian facilities where
              practical connections exist to rural equestrian-oriented areas. Existing trail
              systems within the City usually are not well connected to other trails or
              common uses. The City will continue to develop and maintain a
              comprehensive network of on-street bicycle lanes, off-street bicycle paths,
              sidewalks, and trails. The City will work to increase the safety and utility of
              the system, with a particular focus on sidewalk-deficient residential and
              industrial areas.
               Bikeway Circulation Plan
              The bikeway circulation system envisioned within this element is shown in
              Figure 4.5 and uses three classes of bikeways, with cross-sections shown in
              Figure 4.6. These classes are similar to those used by Caltrans and the
              WRCOG Non-Motorized Transportation Plan. The circulation system is
              intended to serve both local and regional bicycle trips. The bikeway
              circulation system follows a hierarchy serving individual homes and
              destinations (nondesignated routes and Class 3), feeding into a wider
              circulation system (Class 2), and augmented by a separate through system
              that provides regional connections (Class 1).
              Class 3 bikeways (bike routes) are suitable as shared routes with regard to
              size and traffic, are continuous or connect to Class I or Class II bikeways.
              Normally, bike routes are shared with motor vehicles and look like an
              ordinary street, but have signs designating the street as a “Bike Route”
              (serving to inform bicyclists and remind motorists of the presence of
              bicyclists). A summary of the bikeway classifications is provided in
              Table 4.4.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L     P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   4-39

G 06268298.09 010 1/24/2012
                                                                F i g u r e  4 . 6
                            Source:                      Bikeway Cross-Sections
                            Urban Crossroads 2010 H e m e t  G e n e r a l  P l a n
 CIRCULATION
                                                 Table 4.4
                             Descriptions of Bikeway Classifications
              Class 1 bikeway (bike path)     Provides a completely separated right-of-way for
                                              the exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians with
                                              minimized cross-flow by motorists
              Class 2 bikeway (bike lane)     Provides a striped lane for one-way bike travel
                                              on a street
              Class 3 bikeway (bike route)    Provides for shared use with pedestrian or
                                              motor-vehicle traffic
              Although not recognized as formal bikeways, ordinary side streets also
              serve to feed bicycle traffic to formal bikeways and to provide bicyclists
              with routes for short convenience trips. This is particularly true in the
              central portion of the City, with its closely spaced grid of streets.
              Additionally, residential neighborhood sidewalks provide places for children
              to ride bicycles. Finally, paseos along Scenic Highways provide similar
              opportunities.
              Bicyclists vary significantly in their skill level, reasons for bicycling, and
              common destinations. All of these factors can affect what facilities a cyclist
              will use and value, and how a cyclist will use those facilities. The following
              definitions (Urban Crossroads, 2011) help to describe and assess the
              different needs of the City of Hemet’s cycling public:
              Casual Bicyclist Includes those who feel less comfortable negotiating
              traffic, often bicycle shorter distances than experiences riders, and may be
              unfamiliar with many of the rules of the road. Casual bicyclists benefit
              from route markers and wayfinding signage, bicycle lanes, wider curbs, and
              educational programs.
              Commuter Bicyclist-Employee Bicycle commuters who ride to work,
              marking their entire commute by bicycle or by using their bicycle to link
              with other modes of transportation including buses, trains, or carpools and
              rideshares. Commuter bicyclists value direct routes between residential and
              employment areas, safe and secure bicycle parking facilities, and locer and
              shower facilities at their place of employment.
              Commuter Bicyclist-Student Bicyclists who travel between their home
              and their school. Grade school bicycle commuters typically commute less
              than five miles to school, cross few arterials, and often use the sidewalk.
              College and university students are likely to bicycle less than five miles as
              well, but may travel as long as ten to fifteen miles. Like employee
              commuters, student commuters are likely to value direct routes, and may be
              more likely than employee commuters to prefer routes with less traffic and
              arterial crossings.
              Experienced Bicyclist Includes those who prefer the most direct route
              between origin and destination and prefer riding within or near the vehicle
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N   E  R  A L      P   L   A  N      2 0 3 0
                                   4-41

                                                                                 CIRCULATION
travel lanes. Experienced bicyclists negotiate streets in much the same
manner as motor vehicles, merging across traffic to make left turns, and
avoiding bicycle lanes and shoulders that contain gravel and glass.
Experienced bicyclists benefit from wider curb lanes and bicycle-actuated
loop detectors at signals.
Recreational Bicyclists-Casual Bicyclist Casual recreational cyclists are
those who generally want to ride on off-street bikeways and cover shorter
trip distances at slower speeds. Casual cyclists will tend to take trips of less
than 10 miles in length, and may ride as a family group with children.
Recreational destinations are also important for casual cyclists, as they
provide a place to stop and get off the bike. To this end, having secure
bicycle parking at destinations is important.
Recreational Bicyclists-Road Bicyclist Road cyclists bicycle almost
exclusively on roadways, which accommodate higher speeds, longer
distances, and few conflicts with other recreational users. Typical trip
distances for the road cyclist can range from 10 miles to over 50 miles.
While the average road cyclist would likely prefer to ride on roads with little
or no traffic, they are generally comfortable riding in traffic if necessary. To
this end, a road cyclist will tend to ride in a manner similar to a motor
vehicle (e.g., when approaching traffic signals or making left turns). Road
cyclists are typically not seeking a recreational destination along the route,
as a ride itself is the recreation.
The use of bicycles for travel and recreation should be encouraged through
the provision of bicycle facilities, including travel routes, lighting, rest
amenities, and storage facilities. Additionally, bicycle safety programs can
increase the tendency to choose the bicycle travel mode. The proposed
bikeway system includes more connectivity than in previous plans, allowing
bicycle users better access throughout the City and planning area.
Pedestrian Network
The City’s existing pedestrian network consists of ordinary street sidewalks,
of paseos in larger scale developments or along portions of Florida and
Sanderson Avenues, or of regional trails that may be shared with bicyclists
or equestrians. Sidewalks are required in new developments except where
rural street standards can be applied because the lot sizes along side streets
are large. Some existing areas of the City that are outside the core central
area were developed either as rural areas or as large lot subdivisions and do
not have sidewalks. As future improvements are made to major streets, or
as new development occurs, these areas will gradually include more
sidewalks. All new commercial and industrial development must include
sidewalks. Additionally, the Community Design Element includes multi-use
paths along Scenic Highways. The Land Use Element also envisions
pedestrian-friendly design for new development.
         C   I   T Y      O   F     H E M  E   T    G    E  N   E   R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        4-42

 CIRCULATION
              4.7.1 RIVERSIDE COUNTY NON-MOTORIZED
                       TRANSPORTATION PLAN
              The Western Riverside Council of Governments (WRCOG) Non-
              Motorized Transportation Plan (NMTP) provides a regional backbone
              network of bicyle and pedestrian facilities to provide enhanced
              transportation mobility.
              The NMTP identifies 28 distinct regional bicycle and pedestrian-friendly
              routes spanning 440 miles throughout Western Riverside County. The
              proposed system provides multi-jurisdiction connections between
              WRCOG’s member agencies. The resulting network includes existing and
              potential on-street (Class II and Class III) and off-road (Class I) routes
              intended for near-term through long-range implementation. The routes
              provide access to Metrolink stations, transit centers, and key activity areas
              throughout the region. The backbone network provides connectivity
              between cities, the unincorporated Riverside County area, and adjacent
              counties.
              The NMTP will be incorporated into Southern California Association of
              Governments’ (SCAG) Regional Transportation Plan (RTP). The proposed
              regional routes may be implemented in segments over time and should be
              considered in any regional planning effort.
                                                 Table 4.5
                       WRCOG Non-Motorized Transportation Corridors
                                       in the Hemet Planning Area
                                                                                    Length
                 Route                 Name                Classification
                                                                                    (Miles)
                             San Jacinto River –
                  10                                          Class 11               28.5
                             Bautista Creek
                             San Jacinto – Diamond
                  14                                         Class 1/11              11.5
                             Valley
                  15         Salt Creek – Domenigoni         Class 1/11              23.7
                  22         Gibbel - Fairview               Class 1/11               7.8
              There are four corridors that are planned within the City of Hemet or the
              Planning Area, as outlined in Table 4.5 and illustrated in the NMTP
              corridor maps (Appendix D). All of the proposed corridors have been
              incorporated into the City of Hemet’s bikeway network (Figure 4.5) and
              off-street trails network (Figure 8.3).
              4.8      F REIG HT         AND G O ODS M OVEMENT
              An efficient and effective goods movement system is essential to Hemet’s
              economic livelihood. Although Riverside County generates a significant
              amount of truck traffic from agricultural and industrial uses, it also serves as
              a pass-through for truck traffic that ultimately serves other areas inside and
              outside of California. Trucks comprise at least 15 percent of the daily traffic
              volume on some of the primary goods movement corridors in Riverside
              County, such as I-15 from Temecula to Ontario, SR 60 west from I-215,
              and I-10 in the Coachella Valley and San Gorgonio Pass areas. Healthy
C I T Y O F H  E  M   E   T      G   E  N   E  R A L     P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                    4-43

                                                                                 CIRCULATION
industrial growth is expected within the City of Hemet and Riverside
County; therefore, the scale of industrial-related truck traffic will continue
to increase. It is anticipated that the region's truck volumes will increase by
40 percent through 2020.
The movement of freight and goods to, from, and inside Hemet is typically
by truck, but can also be by rail and air. Regional truck routes follow SR 74,
SR 79, and Domenigoni Parkway. The designation of Truck Routes is
intended to route truck traffic on City arterials so that trucks cause the least
amount of neighborhood disruption. Pursuant to Hemet Municipal Code
Section 78-61, the City of Hemet designated truck routes on:
     Florida Avenue,
     Warren Road,
     Sanderson Avenue,
     State Street and San Jacinto Street north of Florida Avenue,
     Menlo Avenue between Sanderson Avenue and San Jacinto Street,
     Stetson Avenue between Sanderson Avenue and State Street, and
     Domenigoni Parkway.
Smaller delivery trucks serve the commercial and industrial areas, but are
also dispersed throughout the City. Several issues have arisen from larger
truck traffic. Truck traffic using smaller residential streets as bypasses are
harmful to the character of residential areas. Secondly, overnight parking
for semitrailer trucks has been problematic both from a community
character perspective and because of the potential for unintended activities
and criminal behavior. Wentworth Avenue, Tanya Avenue, and Elk Street
have been used as truck parking areas. However, Elk Street is planned for
future residential development and will need to restrict truck parking once
new development occurs.
The truck network on California State Highways was instituted by AB 866
to implement the federal Surface Transportation Assistance Act (STAA).
The STAA required states to allow larger single- and double-trailer trucks
on a national network of interstate highways and on the federal-aid primary
system for roads other than interstate highways. State highways with
geometric standards that could accommodate STAA trucks were classified
as Terminal Access highways. State highways that were determined to have
insufficient geometric designs and were not safe for trucks of specific
lengths to travel were classified as Advisory highways.
SR 79 is designated as part of the STAA truck network; however, the
geometrics of SR 79 do not support truck traffic for oversize trucks. The
segment of SR 79 between SR 74 and Gilman Springs Road is classified as
an Advisory highway. Consequently, STAA trucks are advised to use
Sanderson Avenue in this area, which has resulted in adding regional truck
traffic to the local road network. Large trucks traveling on local roads are
exacerbating traffic congestion and degrading the safety and pavement
structure of Sanderson Avenue and other local roads. Existing circulation
         C   I  T Y      O   F    H   E  M   E  T    G   E  N  E  R   A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        4-44
 CIRCULATION
              conditions in Hemet are not sufficient to accommodate the current and
              anticipated goods movement needs through Hemet. The City has approved
              truck routes on Sanderson Avenue, State Street, San Jacinto Street, Florida
              Avenue, and portions of Stetson Avenue. Portions of Warren Road and
              Domenigoni Parkway are currently proposed as additional STAA truck
              routes.
              In addition to trucking opportunities through the City, BNSF Railway also
              provides on-demand freight service along the railroad corridor from
              Riverside, although demand has not been high. Industrial areas in the
              southwestern portion of the City and along the North State Street are close
              to the railroad tracks, as is the Hemet-Ryan Airport. Opportunities may
              exist for connecting future industrial areas in the southwestern portion of
              the planning area to be served by the railroad tracks.
              4.9       A IR T RANSP ORTAT ION
              The Hemet-Ryan Airport is located in the southwest portion of the city and
              operates as a general aviation airport serving Hemet and the surrounding
              area. It consists of one main runway that is currently designated as 5-23,
              running approximately west-southwest to east-northeast. This runway is
              100 feet wide and 4,315 feet in useable length (4,815 feet in total length)
              and has non-instrument approaches. A second, parallel runway has served
              as a sail plane runway, but is no longer in use for this purpose. No control
              tower is on-site. The 2004 master plan for the airport concluded that an
              ultimate runway length of 5,300 feet would satisfy needs, although the
              opportunities for lengthening the runway configuration are constrained by
              the current limits of the airport and development on the north, east, and
              south. Opportunities for expansion to the west exist, but are also
              constrained because of biological habitat and endangered fauna. Currently,
              all runway protection zones are contained within the airport. Airport
              features are shown on Figure 4.7. The County of Riverside is currently in
              the process of updating the Airport Master Plan and anticipates adoption in
              2012.. The Draft Airport Master Plan (dated September, 2011), indicates
              that the airport is not proposing an expansion of the runway at this time
              due to environmental and infrastructure constraints, and the anticipated
              future demand for aircraft operations at the facility. The updated Draft
              Master Plan projects a modest increase in airport operations over the next
              20-year period (2011-2031) and the continuation of the airport as a general
              aviation facility.
              The Hemet-Ryan Airport serves users of smaller general aviation aircraft
              and the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection’s fire
              fighting aircraft. The airport can also provide air freight service, although
              that service is limited to smaller aircraft because of the airport’s shorter
              runway length and non-instrument approaches. Air freight can be expected
              to be limited to smaller, high value or time-critical goods and will play a
              relatively small role in the movement of freight and goods. The airport is
              owned and operated by Riverside County.
              The airport’s primary landside area, or the area not devoted to runways,
              taxiways, and hangar areas, is in the southern portion of the airport,
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T      G  E  N  E  R A L      P  L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                                   4-45

                                                                               CIRCULATION
adjacent to industrial land uses. This area is used by persons or companies
providing services and support to aviation, such as fuel suppliers,
mechanics, and air freight shippers, and is connected to the City and
regional road network by local streets north of the intersection of Stetson
and Cawston Avenues. This Circulation Element assumes that Stetson
Avenue will be widened and relocated to provide a major road entry into
the City. This would serve to improve road access to the airport. Other
general aviation airports nearby include airports in the French Valley area
near Temecula, Perris, Riverside, and San Bernardino. Scheduled passenger
service is provided regionally by airports including those in Palm Springs,
San Diego, Ontario, Orange County, and Los Angeles County.
Additional discussion, goals and policies regarding the airport and the
surrounding area is discussed in the Land Use Element (Chapter 2) and the
Public Safety Element (Chapter 6). The Land Use Element discusses issues
and opportunities relating to the airport and the compatibility of the likely
flight paths with existing and potential land usage around the airport. The
Public Safety Element addresses the noise and potential safety hazards
associated with flight operations at the airport. Both Elements include
Goals and Polices related to the Airport, and Chapter 12 includes
Implementation Programs concerning the airport and environs.
4.10     IMPLEMENTA TION STRAT EGIES
Implementation of the Circulation Element and its programs involves
several city departments including Engineering, Public Works and Planning.
Specific implementation programs are provided in Chapter 12. To ensure
that the concepts and technical information provided in the Circulation
Element is adhered to over the buildout period, the following strategies are
recommended:
     Evaluate Interim Circulation Conditions While new development
     typically pays for circulation improvements, a lag time frequently exists
     between development activity and construction of supporting roads.
     This is especially true for off-site circulation improvements in the City
     of Hemet where a landowner or developer does not control the right-
     of-way necessary for improvements. This issue is compounded by the
     circulation network’s reliance, to a large degree, on several large
     projects such as the SR 79 realignment project and Metrolink to
     provide regional capacity. The City of Hemet will need to continually
     monitor ongoing transportation activities and minimize potential
     impacts associated with interim development conditions.
     Prioritize Ongoing Coordination with Transportation Agencies
     Hemet will need to continue an active presence on regional agency
     boards such as RCTC, WRCOG, and the Riverside Transit Agency
     (RTA) to ensure that the City’s needs and transportation priorities are
     addressed, particularly in regard to the construction of Hwy 79, the
     extension of the Metrolink line, and the establishment of a regional
     transit center.
          C  I  T Y      O  F     H  E   M   E  T     G  E  N E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        4-46

                                                                                                  Whittier Rd
                                                                                     Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ntwo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Aircraft Storage Hangers
                                                                         Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                 T-Hangers
                                                                                                                                                                                 (Future Site)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                 Box Hangers
                                                                                                                                                                 (Future Site)
                                                     nt
                                                  nme
                                                g
                                         d   Ali                                                                       Riverside County
                                    nR                                                                                 Sheriffs Aviation Unit                                                    Fixed Base Operations
                            a   r re
                                                                                                                                                              Auto Parking
                      r   eW
                 tu
              Fu
                                                                                                                            Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                                  Fisher St
                                                                                                                                            ent
                                                                                                                                      lig nm
                                                                                                                                  veA
                                                                                                                                nA
                                                                                                                           tetso
                                                                                                                   u  re S
                                                                                                                Fut
G06268298.11 003 03/11
                          o
                          Sources:
                          Mead & Hunt 2005
                          Adapted by AECOM 2011                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F i g u r e          4.7
                          350 175            0            350   700                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HEMET-RYAN AIRPORT
                                                                  Feet                                                                                                                                                                                            H e m e t             G e n e r a l         P l a n
                                                    CIRCULATION
Back of Figure 4.12
        C  I T Y    O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                    4-48
 CIRCULATION
                Require Studies that Address Project Level Conditions Many
                traffic studies look at the future when the entire circulation system is
                developed. Hemet will also need to assess traffic impacts based on
                existing and opening-day conditions of individual projects to ensure
                that adequate capacity exists to serve any new development project.
                Periodically Update the Circulation System and Capital
                Improvement Program s part of an ongoing monitoring program,
                Hemet will need to periodically assess the circulation plan presented in
                this element and the CIP to determine whether changes are needed
                during the planning period of 2010–2030. In this manner, the City can
                take a proactive approach to regional circulation needs and changes and
                take appropriate steps before any system constraints develop.
                Capture the Synergy of Regional Transportation Facilities
                Capitalize upon the provision of a future regional highways (SR-79 and
                MCP), a commuter rail line, and airport to attract regional serving
                commercial, office, and industrial uses.
                Continue to Expand Multi-Modal Transportation Opportunities
                Provide safe and convenient alternative transportation options
                including bikeways, pedestrian corridors, NEV compatible streets, and
                transit to enhance complete streets and the quality of life within the
                community.
                Actively Pursue Available Funding Sources A variety of Federal,
                State and Local funding sources and grants are available for
                transportation, bikeway and pedestrian improvements. A matrix of
                currently available funding sources is provided in Appendix D.
C I T Y O F H E M   E   T    G   E  N  E  R  A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                4-49

                                                         CIRCULATION
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                         4-50
 CIRCULATION
              G OALS AND P OLICIES
                         Build and maintain a transportation system that is
              GOAL       designed to meet the current and future needs of
                         Hemet’s residents and businesses while providing a
              C-1        balance between mobility, cost, and the quality of
                         the City’s living environment.
              POLICIES
              C-1.1     Complete Streets Support the implementation of
                        complete streets through a multi-modal transportation
                        network that balances the needs of pedestrians, bicyclists,
                        transit riders, mobility-challenged persons, older people,
                        children, and vehicles while providing sufficient mobility
                        and abundant access options for existing and future users
                        of the street system.
              C-1.2     Comprehensive Design Street improvement projects
                        shall be designed in a comprehensive fashion to include
                        consideration of street trees, pedestrian walkways, bicycle
                        lanes, equestrian pathways, signing, lighting, noise, and air
                        quality wherever any of these factors are applicable.
              C-1.3     Traffic Flow Maintain Level of Service (LOS) C or better
                        for roadway segment operations, and LOS D or better for
                        peak-hour intersection movements. Portions of Florida
                        Avenue and Sanderson Avenue may operate at or below
                        LOS D on a case-by-case basis.
              C-1.4     Traffic Management Continue to improve signal
                        coordination and advanced traffic management systems at
                        major intersections and along roadway corridors in order
                        to optimize traffic flow through the City and reduce traffic
                        queuing. Mechanisms include adding turn-out lanes at key
                        intersections with transition back to the original number of
                        lanes at mid-block as feasible to reduce bottlenecks.
              C-1.5     Traffic Control System Provide a coordinated traffic
                        control system that moves traffic within and through the
                        City in an efficient and orderly manner. Upgrade systems
                        as technology evolves.
              C-1.6     Roadway Capacity Identify roadways that cannot be
                        widened to their full master-planned width because
                        existing development or other physical constraints prohibit
                        acquisition of full right-of-way and consider parking
                        restrictions, access management, roadway restriping, and
                        intersection improvements as potential methods of
                        increasing roadway capacity.
C I T Y O F H  E  M E T G   E  N  E   R  A L     P   L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                           4-51

                                                                            CIRCULATION
C-1.7        Connectivity Promote the efficient use of the street
             system by providing convenient connections between and
             within neighborhoods and adjacent land uses.
C-1.8        Reciprocal Access Require reciprocal accessways and
             consolidate commercial driveway entries along Florida
             Avenue, Sanderson Avenue, State Street, San Jacinto
             Street, and other commercial streets as practical.
C-1.9        Driveway Standards As part of City roadway standards,
             maintain and enforce minimum driveway separation
             standards for the various types of roadways included in the
             City of Hemet General Plan Roadway Circulation Master
             Plan. Wherever possible, consolidate driveways on arterial
             streets and implement access controls during
             redevelopment of adjacent parcels.
C-1.10       Center Median Design Implement the design and
             construction of center landscaped medians with
             appropriate breaks for full turning movements along
             Florida Avenue, Stetson Avenue, Sanderson Avenue,
             Domenigoni Parkway, Warren Road, and other arterial
             corridors consistent with the General Plan’s Circulation
             Map.
C-1.11       Parkway Design Emphasize the landscaping of parkways,
             roadways, entries, and gateways consistent with the
             Community Design Element including replacing any tree
             removed from the public right-of-way with a California-
             friendly or shade tree of similar size and shape to a suitable
             location.
C-1.12       Maintain Grid System Maintain and encourage the
             existing grid system of streets to facilitate neighborhood
             accessibility, emergency response, and transportation
             capacity.
C-1.13       Residential Subdivision Street Design Design streets
             inside residential subdivisions for lower speeds by:
                  a. promoting the use of short curvilinear street
                      segments while maintaining the overall grid
                      pattern;
                  b. using visually shorter streets;
                  c. limiting collector streets to streets that have
                      driveways on rear alleys with enhanced front
                      parkway landscaping, and traffic-slowing designs;
                  d. promoting unloaded collectors with no residential
                      driveway access; and
       C I T Y      O  F    H    E M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L      P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   4-52

 CIRCULATION
                               e. ensuring a minimum of two points of access to all
                                   subdivisions.
              C-1.14     Rural Street Character Avoid changing the visual
                         character of existing rural residential neighborhood streets
                         by constructing the minimum level of street improvements
                         needed for public safety. Consider using drainage swales
                         instead of curbs and gutters and prohibiting on-street
                         parking.
              C-1.15     New Development Approval of new development
                         projects shall:
                               a. require that all roadways within a new
                                   development be constructed to the ultimate right-
                                   of-way and that master-planned roadways next to
                                   the project site be, at a minimum, constructed to
                                   their master planned half-width plus 10 feet, or
                                   greater if necessary to maintain adequate traffic
                                   flow;
                               b. require new developments to meet roadway and
                                   intersection performance standards and/or
                                   contribute their fair share toward improvements
                                   pursuant to a traffic impact analysis;
                               c. require new developments within designated
                                   commercial corridors to acquire or grant
                                   reciprocal access and parking agreements to
                                   facilitate movement with adjacent commercial
                                   uses without affecting the adjacent roadway;
                               d. require dedication and improvement of adequate
                                   right-of-way along new roadways to minimize
                                   impacts of proposed development projects on the
                                   City’s circulation system;.
                               e. limit lot development to reverse frontage and/or
                                   side-one lots on all arterials.
              C-1.16     Mixed Use District Street Design To facilitate transit-
                         and–pedestrian-oriented street design in the Mixed Use
                         District, consider the implementation of off-street shared
                         parking with parking signage improvements, consolidation
                         of driveways, installation of raised landscaped medians, bus
                         turnouts, traffic signal enhancements, special pavement
                         treatments at pedestrian crossings and intersections, curb
                         extensions, enhanced crosswalks, wider sidewalks, and
                         other appropriate measures which enhance traffic flow,
                         transit efficiency, and pedestrian movements.
C I T Y O F H  E  M  E T G   E   N  E   R   A L     P  L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                            4-53

                                                                           CIRCULATION
C-1.17       Traffic Analyses Evaluate development proposals for
             potential impacts on the transportation and infrastructure
             system based on traffic analyses that follow the protocols
             established by the City. The traffic analysis should evaluate
             the need for both ultimate and interim improvements
             resulting from the development proposal.
C-1.18       Future Roadways Future roadways and intersections
             must meet roadway classification design specifications and
             performance criteria.
C-1.19       Street Standard Compliance Require compliance with
             established street standards for public, private, and rural
             streets, including traffic calming facilities, where
             appropriate.
GOAL          Coordinate and cooperate in the implementation of
              regional and inter-jurisdictional transportation plans
C-2           and regional transportation systems.
POLICIES
C-2.1        State Route 79 Advocate efforts by the Riverside County
             Transportation Commission and California Department of
             Transportation to plan and build the realignment of State
             Route (SR) 79, as shown on the Circulation Map.
C-2.2        Regional Coordination Coordinate with appropriate
             jurisdictions and agencies to encourage the timely
             improvement of roadway and transit facilities that address
             area-wide and regional travel needs including the State
             Transportation Improvement Program (STIP), the
             Riverside County Integrated Project (RCIP), and the
             Community         and     Environmental       Transportation
             Acceptability Process (CETAP).
C-2.3        Mid-County Parkway Support development of the Mid-
             County Parkway that will run from Highway 79 in San
             Jacinto to I-215 in Perris and will interface with Cajalco
             Road that connects to I-15 in Corona.
C-2.4        Roadway          Design        Consistency        Coordinate
             implementation of new roadway connections with adjacent
             cities and Riverside County to ensure consistency in design
             and operations of the new facilities and connections.
C-2.5        Regional Impacts Coordinate with Riverside County and
             adjacent jurisdictions regarding the planning, coordination,
             and impacts of circulation improvements in adjacent
             jurisdictions, the Sphere of Influence area and the Planning
             Area.
       C I T Y      O  F     H   E M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   4-54
 CIRCULATION
              C-2.6     Metrolink Extension Promote the extension of
                        Metrolink service on the Burlington Northern Santa Fe
                        Railway line from Riverside to stations located near the
                        realigned SR 79 and downtown Hemet.
              C-2.7     Regional Transit Services Coordinate with Western
                        Riverside Council of Governments, Riverside County, and
                        Riverside County Transportation Commission to identify,
                        protect, and pursue opportunities for public transit along
                        major transportation corridors and future rail service that
                        connect the City with other population and employment
                        centers.
              GOAL       Protect neighborhoods and reduce transportation-
                         related risk by establishing a street circulation
              C-3        system that promotes safety.
              POLICIES
              C-3.1     Speed Limits Establish speed limits throughout the City
                        that relate to the design and operating characteristics of
                        each roadway to promote the safety of residents and
                        travelers.
              C-3.2     Street Maintenance Provide for a street maintenance
                        operation in the City’s Capital Improvement Program to
                        ensure the upkeep and safety of the City’s roadways.
              C-3.3     Sight Distance Ensure that new roadways and
                        intersections provide adequate sight distances for safe
                        vehicular movement.
              C-3.4     Emergency and Service Vehicle Right-of-Way
                        Establish and implement street standards that maintain an
                        acceptable right-of-way to accommodate emergency,
                        utility, maintenance, and service vehicles.
              C-3.5     Safe Routes to School Work with the Hemet Unified
                        School District (HUSD) and local private schools to
                        ensure the provision of safe bicycle and pedestrian paths
                        leading to and from school facilities and surrounding
                        neighborhoods.
              C-3.6     Safe Alternatives to School Work with HUSD, local
                        private schools, parent teacher associations, homeowner
                        associations, and other interested parties to establish safe
                        drop-off and pick-up zones, create “walking school buses”
                        and “bike trains”, encourage carpooling, and facilitate
                        expanded use of crossing guards.
              C-3.7     HUSD EIRs Review and comment on HUSD
                        environmental impact reports (EIRs) to ensure that
C I T Y O F H  E  M E T G   E   N  E  R  A L     P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                           4-55

                                                                             CIRCULATION
             proposed school circulation systems address traffic and
             pedestrian safety within and adjacent to the site.
C-3.8        Creative Traffic Management Apply creative traffic
             management approaches to address congestion in areas
             with unique problems, particularly on roadways and
             intersections in the vicinity of schools in the morning and
             afternoon peak hours, and near churches, parks, and
             community centers.
C-3.9        Priority Sidewalk Construction Give priority to street,
             sidewalk, and curb construction in areas near schools to
             facilitate safe pedestrian travel to schools.
C-3.10       Eliminate Hazards to Cyclists and Pedestrians
             Identify and seek to eliminate hazards to safe and efficient
             bicycle or pedestrian movement citywide.
              Promote and support modes of transportation that
GOAL          offer an alternative to single-occupancy automobile
C-4           use and help reduce air pollution and road
              congestion.
POLICIES
C-4.1        Sustainable Urban Design Promote urban design
             measures that encourage alternatives to single-occupancy
             vehicle transportation and direct new growth along
             transportation corridors as a means of reducing roadway
             congestion, air pollution, and non-point source water
             pollution.
C-4.2        Transportation Alternatives Support a variety of transit
             vehicle types and technologies and encourage alternatives
             to single-occupancy automobile use such as rail, public
             transit, paratransit, walking, cycling, and ridesharing.
C-4.3        Non-Motorized           Transportation        Plan     Identify
             opportunities to implement the Western Riverside County
             Non-Motorized Transportation Plan within key activity
             centers of the City through the development non-
             motorized transportation corridors and facilities.
C-4.4        Neighborhood Electric Vehicles Promote the use of
             neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs) by using low-speed
             streets within projects and by ensuring connectivity with
             adjacent supporting uses such as neighborhood
             commercial uses.
C-4.5        Development Alternatives Require new development to
             include opportunities for alternative transportation, such
             as bicycle paths, pedestrian connections, bicycle storage,
       C I T Y      O   F     H  E  M   E  T     G    E  N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                     4-56
 CIRCULATION
                         and other facilities such as NEV paths, and charging
                         stations.
              C-4.6      Vehicle Mile Reduction Encourage and promote the
                         reduction of vehicle miles traveled for all vehicles and for
                         carbon-based fueled vehicles, and reduce the use of
                         gasoline and diesel fuel for on-road vehicles in accordance
                         with Senate Bill 375 regional and/or subregional targets
                         established by the California Air Resources Board. Create
                         and implement programs that will aid in improving air
                         quality by reducing motor vehicle trips, such as those
                         programs recommended by the Regional Transportation
                         Plan, Riverside County Integrated Project, and the
                         Southern California Air Quality Management Board.
              C-4.7      Employer Incentives Encourage all employers, especially
                         employers of 100 or more persons to support alternative
                         forms of transportation by providing appropriate facilities,
                         including parking for vanpools, bicycle parking, and
                         passenger loading areas
              C-4.8      Paratransit Service Work with the Riverside County
                         Transportation Commission, senior agencies, retirement
                         communities, and local organizations to provide affordable
                         and reliable paratransit and demand-responsive transit
                         services that satisfy the transit needs of the elderly and
                         disabled.
              C-4.9      Alternative Fuel Use Promote public transportation
                         systems that use alternative fuels or promote energy
                         conservation.
              C-4.10     Public Transit Identification Develop icons for easy
                         identification of public transit facilities, and require that
                         projects incorporate them when practical.
              C-4.11     Transportation Services Project Amenity Encourage
                         new senior citizen and multiple-family housing projects of
                         greater than 100 units to provide transportation services as
                         a project amenity.
              C-4.12     Public Facilities and Transportation Services
                         Coordinate the development of new public facilities with
                         mass transit service and other alternative transportation
                         services and facilities including the consideration of light
                         rail/monorail within the City.
              C-4.13     Park-and-Ride Facilities Require the provision of park-
                         and-ride facilities at transit centers and stations and
                         potential carpool origination points.
C I T Y O F H  E  M  E T G   E N   E  R  A L       P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                           4-57
                                                                           CIRCULATION
C-4.14       Transit Providers Work with public and private transit
             providers to improve transit service and encourage
             ridership through the following actions:
                 a. Require transit facilities and other alternative
                      modes of transportation such as park-and-ride lots
                      and bus turnouts in major new development and
                      redevelopment projects.
                 b. Provide fixed route transit services along
                      transportation corridors that connect major uses
                      such as the Hemet Valley Mall, Hemet Valley
                      Medical Center, the Florida Avenue commercial
                      corridor, and other commercial nodes to
                      residential areas.
                 c. Improve and enhance pedestrian connections
                      between residential, commercial, and industrial
                      uses and transit services.
                 d. Assess senior mobility needs in coordination with
                      existing paratransit providers and commercial
                      operations and institutions (such as hospitals and
                      senior care centers) that interact with Hemet’s
                      senior population.
                 e. Encourage the Riverside County Transportation
                      Commission and Metrolink/Southern California
                      Regional Rail Authority to fund the establishment
                      of two commuter rail stations along the existing
                      RCTC rail line right of way.
                 f.   Increase public education about public transit
                      options.
C-4.15       Transit-oriented Development Design Features
             Require new development to incorporate transit-oriented
             design features and attractive, accessible, and appropriate
             transit, bicycle, and pedestrian amenities to promote and
             support public transit and alternate modes of
             transportation, including but not limited to:
                 a. Designing transit stops to reduce disruption to
                      vehicular traffic;
                 b. Locating transit stops to minimize the impact of
                      buses and ridership on nearby neighborhoods;
                 c. Ensuring that all transit stops are ADA accessible;
                 d. Requiring transit stop amenities such as benches,
                      shade, lighting, and shelters , where appropriate;
       C I T Y      O  F     H   E  M   E T      G  E  N  E   R A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   4-58

 CIRCULATION
                              e. Requiring all new transit stops be equipped with
                                   bicycle racks and/or bicycle lockers;
                              f.   Encouraging senior citizen and affordable family
                                   housing projects to provide transportation
                                   services; and requiring new public facilities to
                                   incorporate transit facilities.
                         Develop, expand, and maintain a network of bicycle
              GOAL       and pedestrian accessways that provide safe and
                         comfortable           travel       between      residential
              C-5        neighborhoods, parks, schools, and commercial and
                         office centers.
              POLICIES
              C-5.1     Bikeway and Pedestrian Network Maintain an extensive
                        trails network that supports bicycles and pedestrians and
                        links residential neighborhoods, schools, commercial
                        centers and employment centers by implementing the
                        City’s Bikeway Circulation Plan and including provision
                        and dedication of bikeways and pedestrian walkways in
                        conjunction with development permits.
              C-5.2     Expand Bikeway Network Seek opportunities to acquire
                        land and build new bikeways, including using floodways,
                        easements, and abandoned rights-of-way and modifying
                        and widening existing roadways and shoulders to
                        accommodate bikeways, in accordance with the Bikeway
                        Circulation Plan.
              C-5.3     Bike-Friendly Development Require the provision of
                        designated bikeways, bicycle racks, lockers, and other
                        bicycle amenities at public parks and buildings, commercial
                        or industrial buildings, shopping centers, and other activity
                        centers as part of discretionary plans for development
                        projects.
              C-5.4     Roadway Sharing Evaluate the needs of bicycle traffic in
                        the planning, design, construction, and operation of all
                        new roadway projects including the provision of sufficient
                        paved surface width to enable bicycle traffic to share the
                        road with motor vehicles.
              C-5.5     Regional Bikeway Interconnectivity Require that
                        existing and proposed bikeways within the City connect
                        with those in neighboring jurisdictions and the Riverside
                        County Trails and Bikeway System Master Plan, whenever
                        practicable.
C I T Y O F H  E  M E T G   E    N  E  R  A L      P  L   A   N    2 0 3 0
                           4-59

                                                                           CIRCULATION
C-5.6        Pedestrian Linkages Connect commercial activity
             centers to adjacent residential areas with well-designed
             pedestrian linkages that include amenities such as benches,
             trees, landscaping, and shade structures to encourage
             people to walk to destinations.
C-5.7        ADA Compliance Encourage safe pedestrian walkways
             and compliance with Americans with Disability Act (ADA)
             requirements within all developments.
C-5.8        Health Benefits Promote the health benefits of using a
             bicycle or walking as a means of transportation.
C-5.9        Project Funding Pursue funding or grant opportunities to
             plan, construct, and maintain pedestrian, bicycle, and
             multi-use trails.
              Facilitate the movement of freight and goods as a
GOAL          means of economic expansion while protecting
C-6           residents and travelers from the negative effects of
              truck operations and rail service.
POLICIES
C-6.1        Railway-Pedestrian Safety Limit pedestrian access onto
             the railway line from street crossings and require that
             discretionary development projects consider and include
             vandal-resistant fencing or barriers to limit pedestrian
             access to the extent feasible.
C-6.2        Railway Impacts Work with the railroads and State and
             Federal agencies to minimize the adverse safety and
             congestion impacts of at-grade rail crossings of major
             streets.
C-6.3        Safety Checks Re-evaluate railroad street crossing
             features if freight demand substantially increases within the
             developed portions of the City or when Metrolink service
             is provided.
C-6.4        Truck Routes Maintain a system of truck routes that
             provides adequate access to industrial and commercial
             areas and areas of appropriate truck parking without
             intruding on residential neighborhoods.
C-6.5        Truck Access Require that new commercial and industrial
             development projects provide adequate truck access,
             parking, and loading.
GOAL          Promote improved air transportation at Hemet-Ryan
              Airport in a manner that benefits the City.
C-7
      C  I T Y     O   F     H   E M   E  T    G  E    N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                 4-60
 CIRCULATION
              POLICIES
              C-7.1     General Aviation Continue to cooperate with Riverside
                        County to ensure that the Hemet-Ryan Airport continues
                        to serve general aviation and fire safety needs.
              C-7.2     Environmental Impacts Ensure that environmental
                        impacts such as noise, air quality, pollution, traffic
                        congestion, and public safety hazards associated with
                        continued operation of Hemet-Ryan Airport are mitigated
                        to the extent practical.
              C-7.3     Airport Operations Support airport operation efforts to
                        attract new industries and associated development that
                        provide job opportunities and stimulate the local economy.
              GOAL       Identify,     pursue,     and      establish    financing
                         mechanisms and programs that provide adequate
              C-8        funding for the City’s transportation system.
              POLICIES
              C-8.1     State and Federal Financing Actively pursue available
                        State and Federal roadway improvement funds as a means
                        of financing roadway improvement needs.
              C-8.2     Regional and Local Revenue Sources Identify and
                        evaluate potential regional and local revenue sources for
                        financing transportation and transit system development
                        and improvement projects.
              C-8.3     Joint Financing Pursue coordination of joint funding and
                        development programs with adjacent cities and the County
                        of Riverside for transportation and transit related
                        improvements.
C I T Y O F H  E  M E T G   E  N  E  R  A L      P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                           4-61

                                                         CIRCULATION
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                         4-62
                                           CHAPTER 5                          COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                                                              AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Community            services       and
infrastructure provide the social and
physical backbone of the City that
enables healthy community growth
and development. Community
infrastructure is the City’s utilities:
water, sewer, drainage, solid waste,
power, and telecommunications.
Community services are the City’s
schools, health care facilities, library
facilities, and social services.
                                           Hemet Municipal Library
                                           T      he Community Services and Infrastructure Element addresses the
                                                  support systems and resources that provide both the utility
                                                  infrastructure and the public services that are available within the City.
                                                  This element is an optional element under California planning law. It
                                           is being included in the General Plan to demonstrate the importance the
                                           City places on providing adequate services to its residents, businesses, and
                                           visitors and on complying with Measure C, a ballot measure adopted by
                                           Hemet residents in 1988 that established minimum service standards for
                                           circulation, drainage, water storage and distribution, park and recreation
                                           facilities, police and fire services, and sanitary sewer services.
                                           The City is committed to ensuring the provision of safe and adequate
                                           infrastructure and community service facilities to meet the current and
                                           future needs of residents and businesses. This element addresses evolving
                                           technological and environmental issues as well as the increasingly diverse
                                           needs of the City’s residents and businesses. Specifically, the element
                                           addresses:
                C    I  T Y        O   F H  E   M   E   T     G  E   N   E  R   A L     P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                                 5-1

                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
     Water Supply: Providers, Sources, Quality, and Conservation
     Wastewater Management: Collection and Treatment
     Stormwater Management: Citywide and Site Drainage
     Natural Gas and Electricity
     Telecommunications
     Solid Waste Management
COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES
     Educational Facilities
     Health Care Facilities
     Library Services
     Community and Senior Centers
     Government and General Social Service Facilities
This element is also related to issues more fully discussed in other elements.
Roads and other transportation services are discussed in the Circulation
Element. Fire and police protection and emergency response are discussed
in the Public Safety Element. Recreation facilities are described in the
Recreation and Trails Element, and cultural opportunities are discussed in
the Art and Culture Element. Conservation of natural and renewable energy
resources is discussed in the Open Space and Conservation Element.
5.1      I SSUES      AND O PPORTU NITIES
The rapid growth and changing demographics in the Hemet area over the
past 20 years have altered the physical and social infrastructure of the
community. The City has an opportunity to incorporate innovative new
approaches to delivering services that are responsive to existing community
needs while establishing a framework for future growth. Development
issues to be considered include:
Water Locally the Hemet and San Jacinto Groundwater Basin aquifer is
being used faster than it is being replenished and faster than can be
sustained over time; however, the supply and conservation of water is a
statewide issue. In recognition of a statewide “water crisis,” governmental
agencies, water providers, and water users have joined together to establish
a combination of management and conservation mechanisms to ensure an
adequate supply of water for current and future California residents and
businesses. The City will continue to be an active participant with local
water districts in promoting water conservation, water recycling, and
groundwater recharge efforts.
Drainage Systems The City’s relatively flat topography and sensitive
biological habitats, particularly in West Hemet, create flood control and
habitat preservation issues that must be addressed before development can
occur. In addition to numerous property owners, multiple federal, state, and
         C  I  T Y     O    F    H  E  M  E   T     G  E   N  E  R  A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       5-2

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              county agencies have jurisdiction over portions of the undeveloped sections
              of the City and Planning Area. To enable appropriate and necessary
              development, the City is working with the various stakeholders to design
              and finance necessary stormwater drainage systems.
              Sustainable Infrastructure Water, wastewater, and stormwater drainage
              infrastructure in older sections of the community is aging and will need to
              be replaced over time. In West Hemet and other undeveloped or
              underdeveloped areas of the community, these infrastructure needs are still
              being determined. Utility providers are focusing on renewable energy
              systems and conservation mechanisms. Telecommunications is a constantly
              evolving industry as new technology is introduced. The City has an
              opportunity to establish standards for developing sustainable infrastructure
              in new and infill projects to reduce the impact of development on natural
              resources, energy consumption, and the local environment.
              Solid Waste Management The Lamb Canyon Landfill is reaching
              capacity. In addition to continuing its waste reduction efforts, the City is
              considering new strategies for managing its long-term operation of waste
              management.
              Community Services The City is proud and appreciative of its education,
              health care, library, and community service providers and supports their
              efforts in meeting the constantly changing needs and demographics of the
              community. To ensure ongoing financial support for the Hemet Public
              Library, the City may pursue partnerships with jurisdictions in the Library’s
              service area. The City intends to provide “green” leadership by
              incorporating alternative energy in its facilities and conservation practices
              and encourages the service providers to follow suit.
              5.2       R ELAT ED P R OGRAM S , P LANS ,                AND
                         R EGULATI ONS
              Many plans and programs enacted through federal, state, and local
              legislation relate directly to the management and operation of community
              services and infrastructure. These plans and programs are administered by
              various state, regional, and local agencies. Salient plans and regulations
              include:
              Water Quality Control Plans The Water Quality Control Plan for the
              Santa Ana River Basin (Basin Plan) adopted by the Santa Ana Regional
              Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) establishes water quality standards
              for the ground and surface waters of the region. The RWQCB is
              responsible for issuing National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
              (NPDES) waste discharge permits to protect the beneficial uses of the
              State’s waters. The City is a co-permittee with the Riverside County Flood
              Control and Water Conservation District, the County of Riverside, and the
              incorporated cities of Riverside County within the Santa Ana Region
              (Region 8) and the San Diego Region (Region 9) in the Area-Wide Urban
              Runoff Management Program (Municipal NPDES Permit.) This permit
              regulates the discharge of pollutants in urban runoff from the City’s
              municipal separate storm sewer system by requiring the City to develop
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E   N  E  R  A L    P  L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                                    5-3

                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
programs and policies, including best management practices (BMPs) to
achieve water quality standards. The Riverside County Water Quality
Management Plan for Urban Runoff was developed in compliance with the
Municipal NPDES Permit to address post-construction urban runoff from
new development. The WQMP provides guidelines for project-specific
BMPs to minimize the impact of urban runoff. Each project-specific
WQMP is reviewed and approved by the appropriate co-permitttee.
Urban Water Management Plans Water districts use a variety of planning
processes to plan for the provision of water within their service areas.
Urban water management plans (UWMP) are typically used to estimate
future demand for water and required improvements to meet future need.
Sources of water and other issues that affect the provision of water within
the service area are addressed in these plans. Pursuant to state law, each of
the three water districts serving the City of Hemet and its Planning Area
(the City of Hemet, Eastern Municipal Water District [EMWD], and Lake
Hemet Municipal Water District [LHMWD]) prepare urban water
management plans.
California Water Code Section 10910 Water Code Section 10910 was
amended in 2001 by Senate Bill 610 and Senate Bill 221 to promote more
collaborative planning between local water suppliers and cities and counties.
The bills require that detailed information regarding water availability be
provided to a city/county prior to approval of specified large development
projects. Under SB 610, if a project contains 500 or more residential units,
500,000 square feet of retail commercial space, or 250,000 square feet of
office commercial space, a water assessment must be furnished to the local
jurisdiction for inclusion in the project’s California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA) analysis. Under SB 221, local government approval of certain
residential subdivisions requires an affirmative written verification of
sufficient water supply. Additionally, both SB 610 and SB 221 identify the
UWMP as the planning document to be used by a water supplier to meet
the standards set forth in each statute, and require additional information if
groundwater is identified as a source available to the supplier.
Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District The
Riverside County FCWCD is the regional flood management authority for
the western part of Riverside County. The City of Hemet’s drainage systems
work in concert with the Riverside County Flood Control District. Some of
the larger facilities are owned and maintained by the Riverside County
FCWMD. The Riverside County FCWCD is responsible for:
     identifying flood hazards and problems,
     regulating floodplains and development,
     regulating drainage and development,
     planning county watercourse and drainage,
     educating about flood prevention and safety,
     constructing flood control structures and facilities,
     providing flood warning and early detection,
         C   I T Y      O  F     H  E  M   E  T     G    E  N E   R A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        5-4

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                   maintaining and operating completed structures
                   Groundwater Management Act, and
                   Hemet/San Jacinto Water Management Plan.
              National Pollutant Discharge and Elimination System Hemet is under
              the jurisdiction of the Santa Ana RWQCB, which implements the NPDES
              permit for the Santa Ana River watershed area. The NPDES permit, a
              requirement under the Clean Water Act, addresses pollution from urban
              runoff that affects the water quality of receiving waters (such as streams and
              lakes). Requirements include incorporating best management practices
              (BMPs) to reduce runoff from construction and current uses, reporting any
              violations to the RWQCB, and providing education regarding the potential
              negative water quality impacts of urban runoff.
              Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Energy Efficiency Standards
              The State’s energy efficiency standards for residential and nonresidential
              buildings were established in 1978 in response to a legislative mandate to
              reduce energy consumption. Title 24 standards are updated periodically to
              allow consideration and incorporation of new energy efficiency
              technologies and methods. The California Energy Commission has adopted
              changes to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards, to accomplish the
              following:
                   to respond to California’s energy crisis to reduce energy bills, increase
                   energy delivery system reliability, and contribute to an improved
                   economic condition for the state;
                   to respond to the AB 970 (Statutes of 2000) urgency legislation to
                   adopt and implement updated and cost-effective building energy
                   efficiency standards;
                   to respond to various statutes of 2001, which included urgency
                   legislation to adopt energy efficiency building standards for outdoor
                   lighting; and
                   to emphasize energy efficiency measures that save energy at peak
                   periods and seasons, improve the quality of installation of energy
                   efficiency measures, incorporate recent publicly funded building science
                   research, and collaborate with California utilities to incorporate results
                   of appropriate market incentives programs for specific technologies.
              In addition, the 2010 California Green Building Standards Code, or
              CALGreen Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11),
              requires buildings to reduce energy and water consumption by 15% and
              20%, respectively from the baseline levels defined in the Code. The code
              contains both mandatory measures which are applied in all jurisdictions and
              Tier I and Tier II “voluntary” performance standards which may be
              adopted by individual jurisdictions, but are required for all projects in those
              jurisdictions once they have been adopted. The CALGreen code outlines
              the requirements for site planning and design, energy efficiency, water
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G   E   N E  R  A L       P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                    5-5

                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
efficiency and conservation, materials conservation, resource use efficiency,
and environmental quality that apply within that jurisdiction.
Riverside County Integrated Waste Management Plan In 1972, the
California Legislature adopted the California Solid Waste Management and
Resource Recovery Act, requiring each county within the state to prepare a
solid waste management plan for all waste generated in the county and
disposed of within or outside of the county. Of particular note for the City
of Hemet is the County’s Siting Element, contained within the Riverside
County Integrated Waste Management Plan document that demonstrates
that at least 15 years of remaining disposal capacity exists to serve all the
jurisdictions within the County. If the capacity is not adequate, a discussion
of alternative disposal sites and additional diversion programs must be
included in the Siting Element. Disposal capacity projections are updated
annually as part of the State Annual Reporting process to ensure that at
least 15 years of disposal capacity always remains.
California Integrated Waste Management Act The State of California
regulates solid waste collection and disposal. Mandates in the Integrated
Waste Management Act establish target reductions in the amount of solid
waste that each jurisdiction adds to landfills. These percentages are updated
and modified periodically, but the core purpose endures: all materials must
be properly managed to minimize the generation of waste (source
reduction), maximize the diversion of materials from landfills (recycling),
and manage all materials to their highest and best use.
City of Hemet Measure C On June 7, 1988, Hemet voters approved a
measure to require updating the City’s General Plan to incorporate
performance measures related to traffic, drainage facilities, water storage
and distribution facilities, park and recreational facilities, police services, fire
services, and sanitary sewers. These performance standards were
incorporated into the 1992 General Plan as a component of the Public
Services and Facilities Element. They are incorporated into the various,
goals, policies and implementation measures within General Plan 2030 and
are attached as Appendix G.
School District Facilities Master Plans To plan for future facility needs,
school districts typically take a long-range planning approach. Long-range
facility plans and master plans allow school districts to estimate the number
of additional students that new development will generate and plan for
needed improvements to meet demand. The plans may also consider
demographic trends, such as increased household size, that can affect the
need for future school services. Coordination with the school districts to
provide adequate educational facilities is an issue addressed in this element.
The City and the Planning Area are primarily within the Hemet Unified
School District (HUSD), but include portions of the San Jacinto and
Perris/Nuevo School Districts.
          C  I  T Y      O   F    H  E   M  E  T     G     E   N  E  R   A L       P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                          5-6

              COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                                       5.3      C OMMUNITY I NFRA STRU CTU RE
                                       Community infrastructure provides the sometimes invisible physical
                                       support system that allows us to enjoy healthy, productive lives. Reliable
                                       water supply systems meet our needs for daily living and allow for
                                       dependable fire suppression. Community sewer lines allow urban
                                       wastewater to be conveyed safely to treatment facilities and avoid reliance
                                       on septic systems that can pollute groundwater resources. Storm drainage
                                       systems are vital for the prevention of flooding caused by intense storm
                                       events. Hemet residents rely on the refuse and recycling collection system
                                               to properly dispose of waste products. Electricity, gas, and
                                               telecommunications infrastructure contribute to our comfort,
                                               convenience, and efficiency.
                                               One of the most fundamental functions of government is providing
                                               its citizens with functioning infrastructure. The City of Hemet
                                               provides some of this infrastructure directly, while other
                                               components are provided by other public agencies, special districts,
                                               private companies, or a combination of sources. To the extent that
                                               specific improvements may be provided by infrastructure, this
                                               element references conservation practices; however, a more
                                               extensive discussion of conservation measures is located in the
Preserved Open Space Retention Basin at Four   Open Space and Conservation Element. For the purposes of this
Seasons Senior Community                       General Plan, transportation infrastructure is addressed in the
                                               Circulation Element.
                                       5.3.1         WATER SUPPLY: PROVIDERS, SOURCES, QUALITY,
                                                     AND CONSERVATION
                                       Providers of Water
                                       Three water districts serve the City of Hemet and the Planning Area: City of
                                       Hemet Water District, EMWD, and LHMWD. Figure 5.1 shows the service
                                       areas of each district.
                                       City of Hemet Water District The City supplies potable water within a
                                       5.25-square-mile service area located mostly within the central part of the
                                       incorporated City. The City relies on groundwater as its supply source,
                                       which is pumped by 11 City-owned wells, of which nine are in the Hemet
                                       Groundwater Basin and two are within the San Jacinto Groundwater Basin.
                                       The City plans to continue to use local groundwater as its primary supply
                                       source through 2030; and therefore, recognizes the need to implement a
                                       combination of basin recharge measures through both natural and artificial
                                       means and water conservation measures. In addition, the City has one
                                       connection with an EMWD well to be accessed on an as-needed basis only.
                                       The City estimates that demand for water within its service area will
                                       increase from 5,767 acre-feet to 6,370 acre-feet from 2005 to 2030.
                                       Groundwater supplies will meet demand assuming Hemet and San Jacinto
                                       Groundwater Basins recharge efforts are successful. To further improve
                                       system reliability, the City plans to add a new 2-million-gallon reservoir to
                                       the water system to increase storage capacity and allow for flexibility should
                                       an existing reservoir need to be taken offline for cleaning or maintenance.
            C   I T Y      O  F     H    E M   E   T     G   E   N E  R  A L     P   L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                             5-7
                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Aging infrastructure, which is deteriorating or of obsolete design, is a
growing concern in the older sections of the City. Replacement of
deteriorating or inadequate water lines may be needed to ensure the
efficient provision of water supplies over time. Additionally, some of the
City’s water lines are located within easements along rear property lines
instead of within streets or alleys. Although this does not affect the function
of the lines, it does make maintenance, repair, or replacement difficult.
Eastern Municipal Water District EMWD’s 555-square mile service area
extends from Moreno Valley to Temecula. Portions of the City and
Planning Area lie within EMWD’s East Valley Service Area, which generally
serves the area south of Stetson Avenue, west of Sanderson Avenue, and
north of Menlo Avenue and the Planning Area to the west and south of the
City. Within the East Valley Service Area, most of the water used comes
from a system of 13 local wells located in the San Jacinto Groundwater
Basin. These wells produce almost 20,000 acre-feet of water every year.
This is also the primary source of the water that EMWD sells to the City of
Hemet Water Department and LHMWD. Other sources of water include
water purchased from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern
California (MWD) and water recycled from EMWD treatment facilities.
EMWD anticipates increased demand for water in its service area, which is
largely underdeveloped. EMWD intends to use imported water from MWD
to help recharge the San Jacinto Groundwater Basin and increase reliability.
Recycled water use is expected to increase significantly as infrastructure is
expanded for industrial, agricultural, and landscape purposes.
Lake Hemet Municipal Water District LHMWD’s 26-square-mile
service area includes the eastern portion of the City, unincorporated East
Hemet and Valle Vista, and rural areas outside of the City’s sphere of
influence. LHMWD operates 11 wells along the San Jacinto River for most
of its annual water supply. Of the district’s total annual water supply of
approximately 17,000 acre-feet, 20 percent comes from the surface water of
the San Jacinto River system, 4 percent is imported from EMWD, and the
remainder comes from the aforementioned wells. LHMWD plans to add to
capacity in the near future by drilling another well and by constructing a
new 500,000-gallon storage reservoir near Hop Patch Road. LHMWD also
intends to increase its use of EMWD recycled water for agricultural use by
constructing a pipeline and pump station. LHMWD maintains Lake Hemet
in the mountains southeast of Hemet as a reservoir and recreational facility.
LHMWD predicts that the population it serves will increase from 39,111 in
2005 to 49,512 by 2025. To meet demand, LHMWD is relying on the
successful recharge of the San Jacinto Groundwater Basin; however, it is
also increasing its use of recycled water for agricultural use and constructing
a membrane filtration plant to enable the use of surface water from the San
Jacinto River for potable use.
Sources of Water
Three sources of water exist in the City and Planning Area: groundwater,
imported water, and recycled water.
         C   I   T Y    O   F     H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N   E R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        5-8

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                  ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                               HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                     ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                        iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                               g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 070 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                               LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                   City of Hemet Sewer                                                                                                         Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                               Water Districts                                                                                                                                 Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                   Lake Hemet Municipal District                                                                                               Street
                     Sources:
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                   City of Hemet Water District                                                                                                Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                     Eastern Municipal Water District                                                                                            Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F i g u r e     5 . 1
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                    River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                              WATER AND SEWER SERVICE AREAS
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Back of Figure 5.1
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   5-10
 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              Groundwater The preferred water source of the local water agencies is
              groundwater because of its high quality and because it reduces dependency
              on imported water supplies. The cities of Hemet and San Jacinto, EMWD,
              LHMWD, and private water producers are stakeholders in the Hemet/San
              Jacinto Groundwater Management Area (GMA) shown in Figure 5.2. The
              GMA consists of the Hemet Groundwater Basin (Hemet North and Hemet
              South) and the San Jacinto Groundwater Basin (Upper Pressure and
              Canyon). The San Jacinto Basin is physically separated from the Hemet
              Basins by the San Jacinto Fault; therefore, inhibiting flow between the two
              basins. The City of Hemet pumps almost exclusively from the Hemet South
              Sub-basin. EMWD, LHMWD, and the City of San Jacinto pump primarily
              from the San Jacinto Upper Pressure Zone and the Canyon Sub-area. It is
              estimated that about 40,000 acre-feet of groundwater can be withdrawn
              from the Hemet and San Jacinto Groundwater Basins during an average
              year without depleting the aquifer. Since demand generally exceeds this
              amount, the basins have been experiencing an overdraft since the 1960s.
              High degrees of water extraction may also result in subsidence issues caused
              by the shrinking of aquifer soils and an increase in water salinity. Natural
              recharge to the basins is primarily from the percolation of flow in the San
              Jacinto River and its tributary streams as well as rainfall. Natural recharge is
              augmented by spreading imported and reclaimed water within the basins.
              To ensure the long-term viability of the aquifer as a source of water in the
              City and Planning Area, in 2003 the stakeholders agreed to prepare a
              Groundwater Management Plan (Plan) for the GMA with the California
              Department of Resources acting as an impartial mediator. The Plan, which
              is anticipated to be ready for adoption in 2012, has eight primary goals:
                   address pumping overdraft and declining groundwater levels;
                   provide for Soboba Tribe prior and paramount water rights;.
                   ensure reliable water supply;
                   provide for planned urban growth;
                   protect and enhance water quality;
                   develop cost-effective water supply;
                   provide adequate monitoring for water supply and water quality; and
                   supersede the Fruitvale judgment and agreement.
              Additionally, it is anticipated the parties will request that the Court
              adjudicate the situation and issue a physical solution as a judgment effecting
              the major water purveyors and pumpers within the basins. The Physical
              Solution would consist of numerous water supply and conjunctive use
              projects with the core project being the Hemet/San Jacinto Integrated
              Recharge and Recovery Program (IRRP), which provides direct recharge to
              the groundwater basin through percolation ponds within the San Jacinto
              riverbed. The IRRP is intended to satisfy Soboba Tribe water rights, offset
              overdraft in the GMA by an estimated 10,000 acre feet per year, and
              provide an additional 15,000 acre feet per year of water supply to help meet
              projected demand increases. In addition to IRRP, the Plan identifies other
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T    G    E  N  E  R   A L    P   L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                   5-11
                        COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
projects that can potentially meet the goals listed above. These include
conservation, direct recharge, in-lieu recharge, and recycled water projects.
To meet the goal of reducing groundwater production to eliminate the
overdraft, the four public agencies in the GMA (the cities of Hemet and
San Jacinto, EMWD, LHMWD) agreed upon base production rights that
established the initial amount each agency would be able to pump without
the need to replenish the basin. These rights were calculated on the basis of
actual production during the 1995-99 calendar years and adjusted for
specific historical operational activities.
Imported Water MWD imports water to the region from the Colorado
River and the California State Water Project. Water from the Colorado
River is delivered into the area via the Colorado River Aqueduct. The State
Water Project is California’s statewide water and power development and
conveyance system. It includes pumping and power plants; reservoirs, lakes,
and storage tanks; and canals, tunnels, and pipelines that capture, store, and
convey water from northern California to southern California.
MWD acts as a wholesaler, selling imported water to EMWD. EMWD, in
turn, also acts as a wholesaler to the City of Hemet Water Department and
the LHMWD, as additional supplies are needed.
Recycled Water EMWD is one of the largest recycled water providers in
California, offering an alternative to groundwater or imported water. At this
time, neither the City of Hemet nor LHMWD have the capacity to treat
wastewater; therefore, all recycled water in the City and Planning Area is
provided by EMWD. EMWD treats wastewater at its water reclamation
facilities then supplies the treated water for specific nonpotable uses.
Reclaimed or recycled wastewater is categorized by grade of treatment:
secondary or tertiary. State regulations allow secondary treated water to
irrigate pasture for milking animals and to be used for fodder, fiber, and
seed crops. Tertiary water is permitted for swimming, boating, fishing, and
landscape irrigation for golf courses, parks, cemeteries, landscapes,
playgrounds, and school yards.
EMWD is actively promoting its recycled water services with support from
the City. EMWD has more than 200 active accounts with more than half of
its production sold for agricultural, irrigation, landscaping, and industrial
use. Figure 5.3 shows the recycled water distribution network in the
Planning Area. With continued community education, the establishment of
“green” development standards, and the installation of tertiary water
infrastructure systems, demand for recycled water use is expected to
increase, which will help maintain local groundwater resources. During
summer months, recycled water is in high demand; during the cooler,
wetter parts of the year, surplus recycled water is stored in unlined surface
impoundments, resulting in extensive groundwater recharge.
All three water districts serving the City and the Planning Area intend to
increase their use of recycled water. Water conservation is further discussed
in the Open Space and Conservation Element.
          C  I T Y      O   F    H    E   M E T     G   E  N  E  R  A L       P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       5-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                  ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                               HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                     ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                        iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                               g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 069 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                 Santa Ana Watershed                                                                                                                   Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                 Groundwater Basins                                                                                                                    Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                    Hemet North                                                                                                           Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     EMWD 2011                                                                                                                                                   Hemet South                                                                                                           Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                   San Jacinto Canyon                                                                                                    Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F i g u r e     5 . 2
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                      San Jacinto Upper Pressure                                                                                            River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                          GROUNDWATER MANAGEMENT ZONES
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Back of Figure 5.2
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   5-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                  ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                               HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                     ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                        iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                               g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
            Olive Ave                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 068 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                 Recycled Water Storage Tank                                                                                                                                                   Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                 Brine Disposal Pipeline: Alternate 1 (Proposed)                                                                                                                               Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                 Brine Disposal Pipeline: Alternate 2 (Proposed)                                                                                                                               Street
                     Sources:
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                                 Recycled Water Pipeline                                                                                                                                                       Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F i g u r e     5 . 3
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    River/Lake                                                                                                                                  RECYCLED WATER AND BRINE LINES
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Back of Figure 5.3
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   5-16
 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              Water Quality
              To ensure that tap water is safe to drink, the U.S. Environmental Protection
              Agency and the California Department of Public Health established
              regulations that limit the amount of certain contaminants in water provided
              by public water systems. Water districts are required to prepare a water
              quality report annually that summarizes the results of water quality tests and
              provides specific information about the quality of water supplied to its
              customers. The water districts assess the “vulnerability” of its water supply
              to contaminants resulting from contact with the watershed, both surface
              and groundwater. Contaminant sources include agricultural operations,
              recreational activities, stormwater runoff, increasing urbanization, and
              wastewater. Stormwater management is discussed further in Section 5.4.3.
              The City of Hemet Water District, EMWD, and LHMWD have all
              prepared detailed water reports regarding water quality at each well site or
              source. Water that does not meet U.S Environmental Protection Agency or
              California Department of Public Health standards is either removed as a
              potable water supply source or treated appropriately by the respective water
              district.
              Conservation Measures
              As discussed in detail in the Open Space and Conservation Element,
              conservation measures being implemented by the City, EMWD, and
              LHMWD include water education, demonstration landscape projects, the
              retrofitting of street medians and parks with water efficient plants and
              irrigation, the use of new water-efficient technology in building
              construction, natural approaches to managing streams and creating drainage
              infrastructure to recharge the aquifer, the expansion of recycled water
              production and distribution, and incentives such as free audits of homes
              and businesses to help identify ways to reduce water consumption.
              5.3.2          WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT: COLLECTION AND
                             TREATMENT
              The City of Hemet Water Department, LHMWD, and EMWD all provide
              wastewater collection services within their water service areas. The City
              Water Department and LHMWD, however, do not operate treatment
              facilities. Both districts deliver wastewater to EMWD for treatment. Each
              district’s water service area is generally the same as its wastewater service
              area; however, the City does collect wastewater in small portions of the
              water service areas of EMWD and LHMWD, as shown in Figure 5.1.
              Additionally, some residences have on-site sanitary septic disposal systems,
              typically with tanks and leach fields. The design and permits for new on-site
              systems, also called onsite wastewater treatment systems are subject to
              review and approval by the Riverside County Department of
              Environmental Health and the jurisdiction in which the property is located.
              The City reviews proposals for residential sewer and septic connections in
              conjunction with building permits, and requires connection to a sewer
              unless a project is located more than 660 feet from a sewer line and has a
              lot size of at least 20,000 square feet.
C I T Y O F H   E  M    E  T    G    E  N  E  R  A L     P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    5-17

                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
EMWD’s Hemet/San Jacinto Regional Water
Reclamation Facility provides wastewater
treatment services for the Hemet–San Jacinto
area. This 255-acre facility, located in western
San Jacinto, conducts primary, secondary, and
tertiary treatment of wastewater, removing
bacteria, viruses, and virtually all suspended
solids. The facility’s current capacity is 11
million gallons per day (mgd) and the ultimate
planned expansion capacity is 27 mgd.
The facility also includes a 60-acre
demonstration wetland that processes 2.5 mgd
of secondary treated water. This wetland is
used as wildlife habitat and is also expected to
act as a high-quality natural wastewater
treatment site once the ecosystem matures.
Built in partnership with the U.S. Bureau of Hemet/San Jacinto Regional Water Reclamation Facility Wetlands
Reclamation in the early 1990s, the wetlands Demonstration Project
site now offers a lush habitat for migratory
waterfowl, shore birds, and raptors along the
Pacific Flyway. More than 100 species have
been spotted.
EMWD has initiated a Water and Wastewater Salinity Management Project
that provides for the disposal of nonrecyclable waste brine from industry
within its service area through the construction of pipelines that will
connect to existing brine management facilities. One of the proposed
pipelines will serve the Hemet area as shown in Figure 5.3. The project has
two main objectives:
     to protect existing groundwater supplies and lower the salinity of
     recycled water, which will reduce the need for imported water, and
     to provide an incentive to high-tech industries to locate in the EMWD
     service area for access to Hemet’s process for disposing of industrial
     waste.
5.3.3          STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Natural Drainage Systems
Stormwater drainage infrastructure within the Hemet area consists of a
network of natural and improved streams, storm channels, storm drains,
and catch basins intended to manage stormwater that flows into one of
three drainage systems that traverse the City and Planning Area: Salt Creek;
San Jacinto River, and Santa Margarita River. Figure 5.4 shows the location
of these three drainage systems.
The Santa Ana RWQCB oversees the Salt Creek and San Jacinto River
drainage systems. Both systems drain westerly through Canyon Lake into
Lake Elsinore and eventually through the Santa Ana River to the Pacific
Ocean via Temescal Canyon Creek. The San Diego RWQCB oversees the
         C   I  T Y     O  F     H   E  M  E  T    G   E  N   E  R  A L   P  L A N    2 0 3 0
                                                      5-18

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                  ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                               HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                     ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                        iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                               g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 071 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                 Stormwater Drainage Areas                                                                                                                    Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto River Drainage Area                                                                                              Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                 Salt Creek Drainage Area                                                                                                     Street
                     Sources:
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                                 Santa Margarita Drainage Area                                                                                                Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F i g u r e     5 . 4
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                     STORMWATER DRAINAGE
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Back of Figure 5.4
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   5-20
 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              Santa Margarita River drainage system that flows southwesterly through the
              Temecula area and Camp Pendleton toward the Pacific Ocean.
              Salt Creek Drainage System The majority of the stormwater collected in
              the City of Hemet drains southerly and is ultimately discharged into Salt
              Creek, which is located in the southwest part of the City. Salt Creek is the
              primary drainage course for the City. It is an earthen channel of
              approximately 660 feet wide that carries approximately 11,000 cubic feet of
              water per second. South of Stetson Avenue, water flows along a drainage
              course referred to as Pepper Creek, from east to west at the base of the
              Santa Rosa Hills, and curves southwesterly near State Street to join Salt
              Creek. Salt Creek begins by flowing northwesterly from the canyon
              following Sage Road, south of South State Street, draining the surrounding
              hills, including Avery Canyon east of Gibbel Road.
              San Jacinto River Drainage System A small portion of the City drains
              northeasterly into the San Jacinto River. The San Jacinto River drainage
              system is located in the eastern portion of the Planning Area and flows
              from southeast to northwest in that area. Along the City’s easterly edge,
              stormwater flows into the Bautista Creek drainage system. Bautista Creek
              joins with the San Jacinto River immediately north of Mountain Avenue.
              Santa Margarita Drainage System The Santa Margarita River drainage
              system is located in the southerly area of the City and Planning Area around
              Diamond Valley Lake.
              Basic procedures for the management of all non-point source (NPS)
              pollutants associated with land development, including agricultural
              conversion, are currently in place through the City’s implementation of the
              Riverside County Drainage Area Management Plan-Santa Ana and Santa
              Margarita Regions-April 2007 (DAMP), as required by the 2005 Riverside
              County municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) permit. The DAMP
              includes requirements related to the planning and permitting of
              development projects, including projects that convert agricultural lands to
              residential and commercial uses, to ensure that pollutant loads from these
              projects have been reduced to the Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP). In
              addition, the City is preparing to implement provisions of the 2010 MS4
              Permit for the Santa Ana Region, which will implement many new
              requirements related to land development, including the implementation of
              Low Impact Development principles through project-specific Water
              Quality Management Plans.
              Drainage Considerations
              Drainage Infrastructure The City is responsible for providing stormwater
              drainage infrastructure within Hemet. Maintenance of larger drainage
              facilities is either handled through a Community Facilities Maintenance
              District established by the City or through the Riverside County FCWCD.
              All non-master planned facilities smaller than 36 inches in diameter are
              maintained by the City of Hemet. Of the major stormwater drainage
              facilities in the City, Hemet Channel and Stetson Channel are owned and
              maintained by the Riverside County FCWCD; the City owns and maintains
              Salt Creek.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G   E  N E  R   A L     P   L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                   5-21

                       COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
A master flood control and drainage plan was prepared for Hemet in 1984.
The plan identified drainage issues and necessary infrastructure
improvements to provide flood protection for both existing and future
development in the City. Historically, curbs and gutters of streets were used
as the primary flood control devices in Hemet; however, since most of the
City is extremely flat, this method resulted in flooding in some areas of the
City. Subsequently, developments relied on a system of large, single-use
detention basins and concrete channels that effectively channeled
stormwater, but failed to allow rainwater to soak into the ground, which is
necessary in the Hemet area to help recharge the groundwater basins.
Current infrastructure strategies and BMPs reflect an increased reliance on
“soft” infrastructure such as naturalized streambeds or vegetated drainage
swales along streets that allow runoff to be filtered by the vegetation and
slowed, alleviating some of the runoff problems associated with
development and helping to recharge the aquifer.
The City’s 1984 master flood control and drainage plan needs to be updated
to reflect the current built environment and to incorporate recently
completed drainage systems. The plan would also include drainage solutions
for West Hemet, including the hydration of the vernal pools.
Vernal Pools A drainage issue in the West Hemet area is
preserving the hydrology of the vernal pools as surrounding areas
develop. Vernal pools are phenomena that contain protected
flora and fauna that occur only in limited locations. These pools
are seasonal and contain particular soil, plant, and fauna species,
and are classified as protected habitat and species by federal and
state regulations. Vernal pools require natural, rainy-season sheet
flow to remain healthy biological habitats. However, water that
drains onto vernal pool areas from streets and landscaping,
especially during dryer seasons, damages those habitats. The issue
is how to maintain natural sheet flow during the rainy season
while also accommodating development drainage that occurs
year-round and that does not affect the natural seasonal drainage Alkali   Playa/Vernal Pool Area along the San
                                                                     Diego Aqueduct, West of Hemet Ryan Airport
required by vernal pools. Areas approximately south of Menlo
Avenue and west of the San Diego canal drain toward this vernal
pool area. Within this area, there is also the issue of how to
conduct drainage southerly across Florida Avenue, which acts as
a barrier to standard flows. An updated drainage master plan or
comprehensive drainage strategy is necessary to address these
conditions and accommodate new development in the area.
The City will notify and consult with staff of the Regional Board, the Army
Corps, the California Department of fish and Game, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, and Western Riverside County Regional Conservation
Authority when a proposed land development project may impact vernal
pools or streambeds. Impacts to vernal pools and mitigation plans shall also
be assessed through the CEQA process at the time of project review and
approval.
         C   I T Y       O  F    H  E  M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L     P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                       5-22

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
             On-Site Drainage & Low Impact Development Strategies
             New development adds impervious surfaces, such as roads, parking lots,
             rooftops and irrigated landscaped areas that affect the drainage basins. To
             minimize this impact, the City is encouraging the incorporation of Low
             Impact Development (LID) strategies to manage stormwater runoff. LID
             emphasizes conservation and use of on-site natural features to control
             stormwater close to the source.
             Low Impact Development (LID) is a stormwater management approach
             with a basic principle that is modeled after nature: manage rainfall at the
             source using uniformly distributed decentralized micro-scale controls.
             LID’s goal is to mimic a site’s predevelopment hydrology by using design
             techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain runoff close to
             its source. Instead of conveying and managing/treating storm water in
             large, costly end-of-pipe facilities located at the bottom of drainage areas,
             LID addresses storm water through small, cost-effective landscape features
             located at the lot level.
             The 2010 Riverside County MS4 permit requires the Co-permittees to
             incorporate LID site design principals in the revised WQMP. The design
             goal is to maintain or replicate the pre-development hydrologic regime
             through the use of design techniques that create a functionally equivalent
             post-development hydrologic regime through site preservation techniques
             and the use of integrated and distributed infiltration, retention, detention,
             evapotranspiration, filtration and treatment system. The revised WQMP
             incorporating LID principles was submitted to the Regional Board for
             approval on July 29, 2011.
             The City is in the process of revising, where feasible, its ordinances, codes,
             building and landscape design standards to promote green
             infrastructure/LID techniques as required by the 2010 Riverside County
             MS4 permit, and has included these efforts as an implementation program
             in Chapter 12.
             The concept of Low Impact Development (LID) was created to ensure new
             development is designed in consideration of overall environmental
             conditions, including regional water quality. LID incorporates into land use
             planning “green infrastructure” concepts such as zero runoff, rainfall
             harvesting, groundwater recharge, biofiltration, native landscapes, green
             streets, and other measures that promote water quality protection in new
             development. The goal of LID is to protect a community’s natural, pre-
             development water flow in order to minimize ecological impacts of
             urbanization. Basic planning principles include the following:
             1. Stormwater Management. In LID, stormwater is managed as a
                  natural system by creating permeable surfaces to infiltrate runoff into
                  the underlying soil and reduce the amount of runoff from impervious
                  surfaces. Design measures to manage stormwater at the source include
                  bio-retention areas such as raingardens, bioswales, constructed
                  wetlands, and vegetated swales.
C I T Y O F H E M E T         G E N E R A L               P L A N        2 0 3 0
                                  5-23

                        COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
2. Urban Runoff Reduction. Urban runoff during dry weather is largely
     the result of too much water for landscape irrigation, and washing of
     driveways and sidewalks. This runoff mixes with fertilizer, pesticides,
     pollutants on roadways, and other contaminants to create some of the
     most polluted water entering creeks and rivers. LID measures include
     irrigation control and the use of native and compatible plant species
     that require less water.
3. Site Design and Circulation. Minimizing the amount of asphalt and
     other impervious road and parking surfaces in site design and
     circulation decreases the amount of runoff and pollutants, while
     reducing both infrastructure and maintenance costs. Modifications to
     conventional design to reduce impervious surface area includes reduced
     street widths, reduced parking, use of porous materials in driveways
     and parking areas, and the use of traffic calming measures that include
     stormwater capture components. Well-planned development that
     maximizes pedestrian circulation, incorporates green belts, conserves
     open space, and protects natural features will also protect water quality.
Policies have been included in the General Plan that use the principles of
LID, encourage a comprehensive, community-wide system for protecting
water quality standards, comply with the City’s NPDES permit, and
promote the Ahwahnee Water Principles for Resource Efficient Land Use
(refer to the text box in this section), which are intended to reverse the
trend of increasingly paved and constructed areas that alter the rate and
volumes of surface water runoff and groundwater recharge.
Based on these principles, the City encourages the use of new technology
and BMPs to address key design issues, including incorporating retention
basins into landscape designs as an attractive on-site amenity as well as a
stormwater management mechanism and incorporating drainage systems
that recognize that the City is too flat for underground drains that rely on
the proper degree of slope or fall to reach the larger storm drainage
channels.
Stormwater Quality Control
To protect the nation’s watersheds, streambeds, groundwater aquifers,
lakes, and oceans from contaminants washed into the storm drains,
numerous federal, state, and local laws and regulations have been enacted.
Under the auspices of the Santa Ana RWQCB, the City participates in the
Basin Plan, a water quality management plan and the NPDES permit
program of Riverside County in partnership with all cities in the Santa Ana
Basin of Riverside County and the Riverside County FCWCD. In
compliance with this NPDES permit, the City has implemented the WQMP
program to ensure that the land use approval and permitting process
minimizes the impact of urban runoff from new development and
significant redevelopment projects.
The City of Hemet is a Co-Permittee in, and is required to comply with, the
Riverside County municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) permit
(Waste Discharge Requirements for Riverside County - Order No.
2010-0033, NPDES No. CAS618033) adopted by the Regional Board on
          C   I T Y     O   F   H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N  E   R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       5-24

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              January 29, 2010. In conformance with this MS4 permit, and the Water
              Quality Management Plan (WQMP) it requires, applicable new
              development and significant re-development projects must consider and
              implement structural and non-structural Best Management Practices
              (BMPs) to retain and treat pollutants of concern (in dry-weather runoff and
              first-flush stormwater runoff) consistent with the MEP standard, and
              minimize hydrologic conditions of concern (HCOCs), both during and
              post-construction.
              NPDES Permits and Waste Discharge Requirements
              Per the requirements of the 2010 Riverside County MS4 permit, the City is
              obligated to advise the development, construction, and business
              communities of the need to comply with the following general waste
              discharge requirement permits:
              Construction General Permit
              Dischargers whose projects disturb one or more acres of soil or whose
              projects disturb less than one acre but are part of a larger common plan of
              development that in total disturbs one or more acres, are required to obtain
              coverage under the General Permit for Discharges of Storm Water
              Associated with Construction Activity (Construction General Permit Order
              2009-0009-DWQ). Construction activity subject to this permit includes
              clearing, grading and disturbances to the ground such as stockpiling, or
              excavation, but does not include regular maintenance activities performed
              to restore the original line, grade, or capacity of the facility.
              The Construction General Permit requires the development and
              implementation of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). The
              SWPPP must list Best Management Practices (BMPs) the discharger will
              use to protect storm water runoff and the placement of those BMPs.
              Additionally, the SWPPP must contain a visual monitoring program; a
              chemical monitoring program for "non-visible" pollutants to be
              implemented if there is a failure of BMPs; and a sediment monitoring plan
              if the site discharges directly to a water body listed on the 303(d) list for
              sediment.
              General Industrial Permit
              The Industrial Storm Water General Permit Order 97-03-DWQ (General
              Industrial Permit) is an NPDES permit that regulates discharges associated
              with 10 broad categories of industrial activities. The General Industrial
              Permit requires the implementation of management measures that will
              achieve the performance standard of best available technology economically
              achievable (BAT) and best conventional pollutant control technology
              (BCT). The General Industrial Permit also requires the development of a
              Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and a monitoring plan.
              Through the SWPPP, sources of pollutants are to be identified and the
              means to manage the sources to reduce storm water pollution are described.
C I T Y O F H   E  M   E  T    G   E   N   E  R  A L      P   L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                  5-25
                        COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
General De Minimus Permit
Order No. R8-2009-0003, General Waste Discharge Requirements for
Dischargers to Surface Waters that Pose an Insignificant (De Minimus)
Threat to Water Quality (General De Minimus Permit) regulates de
minimus discharge projects within the Santa Ana Region.
Wastewater discharges regulated under this Order include the following
discharges:
     Construction dewatering wastes; wastes associated with well
     installation, development, test pumping and purging; aquifer testing
     wastes; dewatering wastes from subterranean seepage, except for
     discharges from utility vaults; discharges resulting from hydrostatic
     testing of vessels, pipelines, tanks, etc.; discharges resulting from the
     maintenance of potable water supply pipelines, tanks, reservoirs, etc.;
     discharges resulting from the disinfection of potable water supply
     pipelines, tanks, reservoirs, etc.; discharges from potable water supply
     systems resulting from initial system startup, routine startup, sampling
     of influent flow, system failures, pressure releases, etc.; discharges from
     fire hydrant testing or flushing; air conditioning condensate; swimming
     pool discharge; discharges resulting from diverted stream flows;
     decanted filter backwash wastewater and/or sludge dewatering filtrate
     water from water treatment facilities; and other similar types of wastes
     as determined by the Regional Water Board Executive Officer, which
     pose a de minimus threat to water quality yet must be regulated under
     waste discharge requirements.
The General De Minimus Permit prohibits discharge of pollutants,
establishes effluent limitations for various constituents, and requires
monitoring and reporting.
Clean Water Act Section 303(d) Impaired Waters
Pursuant to Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act, Regional Water Quality
Control Boards must identify and list impaired water bodies. These are
water bodies where the limits or levels of water quality constituents or
characteristics are being violated and it is presumed designated Beneficial
Uses (uses of water necessary for the survival of man, plants and wildlife)
are not met.
Federal regulations require that a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) be
established for each 303(d) listed water body for each pollutant causing
impairment. A TMDL is the maximum load of a pollutant(s) that can be
discharged from point and nonpoint sources without exceeding water
quality standards in the water body. Each state is required every two years
to review its existing 303(d) List, make changes as necessary, and submit its
303(d) List and TMDL priorities to the U.S. EPA.
On December 20, 2004, the Santa Ana Region Water Quality Control
Board amended the Water Quality Control Plan for the Santa Ana River
Basin (Basin Plan) to incorporate the Lake Elsinore and Canyon Lake
Nutrient TMDLs. These TMDLs include urban waste load allocations and
          C   I T Y     O   F    H   E   M   E  T    G   E   N   E  R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        5-26
 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              specify numeric targets and response numeric targets to reduce nitrogen
              and phosphorus in Urban Runoff.
              The City is one of several municipalities located on the San Jacinto
              Watershed that drains through Canyon Lake to Lake Elsinore. Both lakes
              have been placed by the Santa Ana RWQCB on the EPA’s Clean Water Act
              §303(d) list of impaired waters due to excessive nutrients (nitrogen and
              phosphorous) in the water. To remedy the problem, the RWQCB adopted a
              15-year plan that incorporates Nutrient Total Maximum Daily Loads
              (TMDL) for Lake Elsinore and Canyon Lake and requires stakeholders in
              the watershed to complete numerous studies, reports, and plans to
              implement the TMDL. In July 2006 the City and other stakeholders formed
              the Lake Elsinore Canyon Lake TMDL Task Force to ensure that
              implementation tasks and compliance dates are met. Final compliance with
              the wasteload and load allocations must be achieved by December 31, 2020.
              General Plan Policy CSI-4.3 has been included in the General Plan
              supporting cooperative efforts to address TMDL requirements and
              improve water quality in the San Jacinto River Watershed.
              5.3.4        NATURAL GAS AND ELECTRICITY
              Electricity and natural gas are provided by utilities that operate
              independently of the City. Any developer of a new development must
              acquire verification from the utility providers that the provider can
              accommodate the additional demand for service. The City is committed to
              working with the utility companies serving the community to ensure that, in
              addition to the adequate provision of services, advances in energy
              conservation and “green” technologies are incorporated into development
              standards and infrastructure improvements.
              The two primary utilities and their environmental efforts are summarized
              below and further discussed in the Open Space and Conservation Element.
              Natural Gas
              Southern California Gas Company (SoCalGas), a division of Sempra
              Energy, supplies natural gas to both businesses and residences in Hemet.
              The City does not have any natural gas storage facilities. Natural gas is
              provided through a network of gas transmission pipelines and distributed
              through existing mains, which can be extended to serve new projects.
              SoCalGas is investing in research, development, and demonstration of new
              and emerging clean, energy-efficient technologies with the goal of bringing
              these technologies to residential, commercial, and industrial markets to help
              people reduce their energy use. As the nation’s largest natural gas provider,
              SoCalGas has earned a number of honors for environmental stewardship,
              including the 2010 Excellence in ENERGY STAR® Promotion Award
              from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for outstanding
              contributions to energy efficiency and environmental education.
C I T Y O F H  E  M   E  T    G   E   N  E  R   A L    P  L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                                 5-27

                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                           Ahwahnee Water Principles
                         For Resource Efficient Land Use
  1. Community design should be compact, walkable, and transit-oriented so that
     automobile-generated run-off pollutants are minimized and the open lands that
     absorb water are preserved to the maximum extent possible.
  2. Natural resources such as wetlands, flood plains, recharge zones, riparian areas,
     open space, and native habitats should be identified, preserved and restored as
     valued assets for flood protection, water quality improvement, groundwater
     recharge, habitat, and overall long-term water resources sustainability.
  3. Water holding areas such as creek beds, recessed athletic fields, ponds, cisterns,
     and other features that serve to recharge groundwater, reduce runoff, improve
     water quality and decrease flooding should be incorporated into the urban
     landscape.
  4. All aspects of landscaping from the selection of plants to soil preparation and
     the installation of irrigation systems should be designed to reduce water
     demand, retain runoff, decrease flooding, and recharge groundwater.
  5. Permeable surfaces should be used for hardscape. Impervious surfaces such as
     driveways, streets, and parking lots should be minimized so that land is
     available to absorb storm water, reduce polluted urban runoff, recharge
     groundwater, and reduce flooding.
  6. Dual plumbing that allows grey water from showers, sinks and washers to be
     reused for landscape irrigation should be included in the infrastructure of new
     development.
  7. Community design should maximize the use of recycled water for appropriate
     applications including outdoor irrigation, toilet flushing, and commercial and
     industrial processes. Purple pipe should be installed in all new construction and
     remodeled buildings in anticipation of the future availability of recycled water.
  8. Urban water conservation technologies such as low-flow toilets, efficient clothes
     washers, and more efficient water-using industrial equipment should be
     incorporated in all new construction and retrofitted in remodeled buildings.
  9. Groundwater treatment and brackish water desalination should be pursued
     when necessary to maximized locally available, drought-proof water supplies.
Source: California Regional Water Quality Control Board. The Water Principles were created by
         the Local Government Commission Center for Livable Communities in Sacramento
         California to complement the Ahwahnee Principles for Resource-Efficient Communities
    C   I  T Y       O  F    H E   M  E  T    G   E  N  E   R  A L     P   L  A   N   2 0 3 0
                                                 5-28
 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              Electricity
              Electrical power in Hemet is provided by Southern California Edison
              (SCE). SCE maintains and operates the transmission and distribution
              infrastructure necessary to provide electricity to users throughout its service
              area of approximately 50,000 square miles in central, coastal, and southern
              California. SCE is committed to developing renewable energy resources
              such as wind, geothermal, solar, biomass, and small hydro energy. A
              growing percentage of the energy supplied by SCE is from these renewable
              sources in compliance with a state mandate to generate 33 percent of their
              electricity from renewable resources by 2020. The City supports and
              encourages those efforts.
              SCE also recognizes that high voltage overhead lines are generally
              considered to have negative visual impacts; therefore, SCE participates with
              efforts to underground regular overhead utility lines. The City requires that
              new projects install underground connections and that they underground
              existing power and telephone poles in commercial and residential areas
              when practical based on the size of the lines.
              5.3.5         TELECOMMUNICATIONS
              Telecommunication is generally defined as the transmission of information,
              over significant distances. Currently, telecommunication services are
              provided by utilities that operate independently of the City and include
              landline and wireless services for telephone, radio, television, and internet
              devices. The City is committed to facilitating access to these services while
              ensuring that the associated equipment is safe and attractive. In addition to
              permitting wireless communication antenna facilities on private property
              through provisions of the zoning code, the City offers free access
              connections at the Hemet Public Library and other City facilities.
              As technology evolves, the City needs to be prepared to address any
              supporting infrastructure needs that affect private or public property.
              Telecommunications plays an important role in the local, national, and
              international economies. Identifying and providing access to “cutting edge”
              telecommunication technology is an incentive to attract key employers and
              industries that improve the City’s jobs/housing balance.
              5.3.6         SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
              Solid waste management is the collection, transport, processing, recycling or
              disposal, and monitoring of waste materials. Waste management is
              undertaken to reduce the effect of waste products on health, protect
              groundwater and the environment at disposal sites, improve community
              aesthetics, and to conserve landfill capacity. The recycling of waste materials
              is a prime component of waste management efforts. The State of California
              Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle) requires
              local government and waste handlers to provide for and engage in recycling.
              Recycling of solid waste is also discussed in the Open Space and
              Conservation Element.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T    G   E  N  E  R  A L       P   L A   N     2 0 3 0
                                  5-29

                        COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Solid Waste Management Providers
There are two solid waste management providers within the Planning Area:
CR&R Waste and Recycling Services, which provides services within the
City boundaries, and Waste Management of the Inland Empire (WM),
which serves the unincorporated area of the Planning Area. Additionally,
Hemet owners or residents may obtain a City permit that would allow self-
hauling of solid waste in lieu of utilizing services offered by CR&R.
CR&R Waste and Recycling Services CR&R provides waste and
recycling services in the City of Hemet, replacing the City’s Integrated
Waste Management Division in December 2011. Services offered include:
     Single-family residential recycling services.
     Multiple-family residential recycling services.
     Commercial businesses recycling services.
     Commercial food waste collection program.
     Clean air vehicles.
     Hazardous materials disposal.
     Guaranteed landfill diversion rate of 50 percent by the end of 2012 and
     55 percent by the end of 2016.
     Comprehensive public education and outreach to maintain high
     diversion rates.
CR&R delivers the solid waste and recycling materials that it collects to its
Perris Transfer and Material Recovery Facility located in Perris, California.
At this facility, waste collected may be processed or transferred to another
site for processing depending on the type of waste material. Waste materials
are occasionally disposed at the Lamb Canyon Sanitary Landfill in
Beaumont, which is owned and operated by the Riverside County Waste
Management Department and located 10 miles north of Hemet on State
Route 79. E-Waste is also accepted for drop off at the Lamb Canyon
landfill, and is occasionally collected through events sponsored by local
non-profit organizations, such as the Green Coalition.
The City of Hemet currently complies with the 50% landfill diversion
requirement mandated by the State of California. Long term compliance
with new requirements for 70% diversion will require increased public
education and participation in recycling program offerings in the
community.
Disposal for certain hazardous materials is available to City residents
through services provided through CR&R Inc. Hazardous materials
collection events are also held locally by Riverside County Waste
Management.
          C  I  T Y      O  F     H   E  M   E  T     G   E  N  E R A L    P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                         5-30

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              Waste Management of the Inland Empire Outside of the City, waste
              collection is contracted to WM. Most waste collected by WM is taken to a
              transfer station in Moreno Valley, where it is sent to the El Sobrante
              Landfill, although on occasion waste will go to the Lamb Canyon Landfill.
              WM takes its commingled recyclables to private facilities such as Recycle
              America in Los Angeles or Pomona Valley Recycling in Pomona for
              processing.
              Inactive Landfills
              Two inactive landfill sites are within the Hemet Planning Area. Inactive
              sites are typically sites that have ceased operations and are regulated by the
              California Integrated Waste Management Board, but that have not gone
              through formal landfill closure procedures. One is located northwest of
              Warren Road and Esplanade Avenue within the City limits and is owned by
              the City. A Class 3 landfill, the facility accepted only inert types of debris
              such concrete, asphalt, sand, and other types of construction waste. The
              other landfill is located in the Valle Vista area and is owned by LHMWD.
              5.4       C OMMUNITY S ERVICE F ACILITIES
              Community services enhance quality of life, foster a sense of belonging, and
              promote civic involvement by youth, adults, families, and seniors. The City
              is committed to ensuring that community services are provided at levels
              sufficient to meet the needs of a growing and demographically evolving city.
              This requires coordinated planning efforts between governmental agencies,
              service providers, and nonprofit organizations.
              Although the service providers discussed in this section have located their
              facilities within the City’s jurisdictional boundaries, their service areas
              generally extend into unincorporated Riverside County. Discussions are
              warranted on how to share management of these services over the long
              term to ensure adequate coverage and to provide an opportunity to
              maximize available financial and personnel resources.
              5.4.1         EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
              The Hemet area offers solid educational opportunities for its residents. In
              addition to several private institutions providing prekindergarten through
              high school education, three public school districts serve the City and the
              Planning Area. Regional higher education opportunities are provided by the
              Mt. San Jacinto Community College District, University of California,
              Riverside, and by several private colleges, including Loma Linda University,
              California Baptist University, and the University of Redlands.
              K–12 Public Institutions Most of Hemet and its sphere of influence lie
              within the HUSD. A small portion of the Planning Area is served by other
              school districts; however, no schools are located within those areas. The
              San Jacinto Unified School District serves an area of the City north of
              Menlo Avenue and east and west of State Street and a small area northwest
              of Park Avenue and Meridian Street. These neighborhoods are within the
              attendance districts of Park Hill Elementary School, North Mountain
              Middle School, and San Jacinto High School. The undeveloped hillside
              areas in the northwest portion of Reinhart Canyon are served by the
C I T Y O F H   E  M   E  T      G   E  N  E   R A L      P   L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                    5-31

                        COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Nuview Elementary and Perris Union High School Districts, although it is
unlikely that residential growth will ever occur in this area.
HUSD operates ten elementary schools, four middle schools, three high
schools, two charter schools, and an alternative education site which houses
a continuation high school, adult education, independent study, and other
alternative education programs. An additional five HUSD schools are
located outside of the Planning Area in Anza, Aguanga, Idyllwild, and
Winchester.
One of HUSD’s charter schools, the Western Center Academy, was
established in 2010 by HUSD in conjunction with the Western Science
Center. The school is designed to serve as a national model in middle
school education through the innovative use of science, mathematics, and
technology as the foundation for a rigorous and exciting multidisciplinary
learning experience for sixth through eighth grade students. The Western
Center Academy’s central instructional goal is to integrate a “museum
discovery” based approach with the formal educational methods commonly
practiced in schools. Museum discovery–based learning, which is unique,
experiential, active, participatory, and uses real specimens; complements the
connection with the Western Science Museum. Students have the
opportunity to learn about science, math, and technology in specialized lab
sessions that use inquiry-based learning models to explore elective subjects
including paleontology, archaeology, entomology, physics, chemistry,
astronomy, field ecology, aquatic biology, and geology.
In response to recent growth, HUSD has been actively seeking new sites
for schools. HUSD’s 2007-2013 facilities master plan outlines and guides
school construction plans through 2019. This plan provides for enrollment
of 26,000 students by 2013 and more than 39,000 at maturity. Although
HUSD’s facilities master plan does not guarantee funding for all of its
proposed projects, HUSD has been active in identifying various funding
mechanisms. Figure 5.5 identifies school district boundaries and the
locations of each existing and currently proposed public school sites in the
Planning Area.
The facilities master plans of the Hemet and San Jacinto Unified School
Districts also contain goals and objectives that relate mostly to internal
facilities planning. However, those pertinent to the City’s General Plan are
listed below:
     Inventory all development projects and identify buildout schedule.
     Plan and locate schools that serve neighborhoods and have good
     access.
     Provide annual updates on building activity.
     Provide ongoing communication with developers and the community.
     Incorporate joint use and public use opportunities of school facilities
     where feasible and cost effective.
          C   I T Y      O   F    H   E  M  E   T    G   E  N  E R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        5-32

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of                                                                         San Jacinto HS                                                               County                                                                Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                             Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                 Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          North Mountain MS                  San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               River
                                                                                                                                                                              Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                  Tahquitz HS                                                                                                                                                                      Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fruitvale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Eaton AveES
                                                                                                                                                                                Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Park Hill ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ian
                                                                                                                                           en              Rancho Viejo MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                               Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                                                                                                               Cawston ES                                                           Oakland Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jacob Wiens ES                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                           Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Santa Fe Education Center                                                                                                                                    Bautista Creek ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                              Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                 Myers St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HELP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Florida Ave                                                                                   Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Acacia MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                    ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                             Flo                                 Acacia Ave                                                                                                                             Acacia Ave                                                                                                           Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hemet ES                                                                                                    Little Lake ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HUSD Office                                                                                                             Dartmouth MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Valle Vista ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Whittier ES                                                                                               Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HAAAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                      ed u                      HEMET-RYAN                           AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                 AILW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                            R                                                           Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                         Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                  A qu                           AIRPORT                 SF                                                                                                                                                                    Ramona ES
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                    AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                 ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Alessandro                                                                                                                           Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hemet HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                          ai n
                                                                                                                                                                             Harmony ES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Elk St                                                                                                                                                                                 me
                                                                                                                                                                 Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                      Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Crest Dr                                             eH
                                                                                                                            ts   on                                                                                                                     Chambers St                                                                                                                                                    Lak
                                                                                                                                               Warren Rd
                                                                                                                        Ste                                                                                                                                                                 Diamond Valley MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          McSweeny ES                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                            Mustang Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                       West Valley HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bautista Rd               Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                             go
                                                                                                                                                           ky                                                                                        ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pk
                                                                                                                                                         iP                                       Western Center Academy                                           y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                    on                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                                             ni
                                                                                                                                                g                                                                                                                                                                                                  bel                                            PARK
                                                                                                                                         e                                                                                                                                                                                                Gib
                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                  Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                             Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 072 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                  LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                  Schools                                                                      Future Schools                                                                                                                                                                             Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                   Elementary School                                                                   Future Elementary School Site Area (Location TBD)                                                                                                                  Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                   Middle School                                                                       Future Middle School Site Area (Location TBD)                                                                                                                      Street
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                      High School                                                                         Future High School Site Area (Location TBD)                                                                                                                        Railroad
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                                   Alternative Schools                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Creek/Canal
                     ESRI 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               School Districts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              F i g u r e     5 . 5
                                                                                                                                                                                   HUSD Offices                                                                        Hemet Unified                                                                                                                                                      River/Lake
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SCHOOLS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Jacinto
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Nuview Union/Perris Union High
                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Back of Figure 5.5
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   5-34
 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              The City of Hemet is committed to working with both school districts
              regarding early notification of development projects and coordination
              regarding potential school sites.
              Mt. San Jacinto Community College District Hemet is located within
              the Mt. San Jacinto Community College District and is served by its two
              campuses. The San Jacinto Campus opened in 1965 in the northern area of
              San Jacinto with plans to accommodate 12,000 to 15,000 students. The
              campus includes a Business and Technology Center with laboratories for
              business, computer information science, engineering technologies,
              electronics, and photography and a state-of-the-art Music Center. The
              Menifee Campus opened in 1990 after the residents of Temecula, Lake
              Elsinore, Perris, and adjacent areas voted to join the district. The master
              plan for the Menifee Valley Campus will ultimately plan for 15,000 to
              20,000 students.
              Energy Conservation Opportunities In 2010, HUSD signed an
              agreement to install a network of solar panels that is anticipated to provide
              almost a quarter of the district’s electricity needs, save the district 10
              percent on its annual $3.85-million electric bill, and deliver shade. The solar
              project ties together solar panels at 17 schools and other sites. At several
              sites new solar structures will be built that double as carports/parking
              covers. At the remaining participating sites, new solar structures will be
              built that double as shade structures.
              5.4.2         HEALTH CARE FACILITIES
              Adequate health care services and facilities are important to the vitality of a
              community. Hemet has traditionally served as a regional health care center
              for the valley area due primarily to its focus as a retirement community.
              With the population of Hemet growing and the nation’s “baby boom”
              population aging, the expansion of health care services and facilities
              continues to be a priority.
              Hemet Valley Medical Center Hemet is served by the Hemet Valley
              Medical Center (HVMC), a 327-bed full-service hospital. This is the major
              medical facility in the Hemet–San Jacinto area. Historically, HVMC was one
              of several hospitals within a public healthcare district that covered Hemet
              and nearby areas. The district devolved to private ownership under the
              Valley Health System, and the hospital ownership subsequently transferred
              to Physicians for Healthy Hospitals, a private entity. The transfer included
              the Hemet Medical Arts Building, Hemet Valley Health Care, and the
              Menifee Valley Medical Center. The area around HVMC has grown to
              include many private medical offices that benefit from concentration within
              a medical community and proximity to a hospital.
              HVMC is fully accredited and serves as the largest private employer in the
              Hemet–San Jacinto Valley. Current and potential employment opportunities
              for skilled and highly trained health professionals are anticipated to increase
              based on local growth projections and U. S. Department of Labor statistics.
              Attracting well-educated residents and higher wage earners by retaining and
              expanding HVMC and other related medical facilities is a health care and
              economic development goal of the City.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L     P   L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   5-35

                        COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Mercy Air Services Mercy Air Services is a private company that provides
emergency medical air transport services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. One
of Mercy Air’s medical helicopters is currently based at Hemet-Ryan
Airport and staffed with a flight nurse and a paramedic who share the
Hemet Fire Station No. 4 facility. Mercy Air, which intends to build a
heliport at Fire Station No. 4, responds to critical aid calls and flies injured
patients to the nearest trauma center. The company bills the patients for the
flights; no cost is incurred by the City, the County, or emergency
responders.
American Medical Response—Hemet/Pass American Medical
Response (AMR) Hemet/Pass provides emergency medical transport
services for the central Riverside County area. AMR Hemet/Pass employs
approximately 157 paramedics and emergency medical technicians and
handles an average of 29,000 calls annually. Additionally, AMR Hemet/Pass
works closely with law enforcement agencies to provide tactical emergency
medical services as needed.
Urgent Care Facilities Urgent care facilities provide for the treatment of
conditions requiring prompt attention, but not posing an immediate, serious
health threat. This reduces demand on the HVMC emergency room, which
allows the emergency room to focus its resources on more serious cases.
Additionally, a large network of urgent care facilities enables residents to
receive quicker treatment for nonemergency conditions. To facilitate service
expansion, urgent care facilities are permitted in all commercial areas of the
City.
Healthy Communities The City recognizes that chronic health conditions
and disease reduce the productivity and quality of life for residents and that
many of the diseases prevalent in our society are linked to lifestyle
and individual behaviors. Lack of physical activity, unhealthy
eating and personal habits, limited opportunities to experience
open space and nature, limited opportunities for social interaction
and cultural activities, and exposure to environmental toxins in the
air, water, and soil are contributing factors to poor physical and
mental health. To address these concerns and promote a healthier
Hemet, the City has integrated goals and policies throughout the
various elements of the 2011 General Plan with the intent of
fostering the overall health and well-being of the City’s residents. Hemet Public Library
These goals and policies have been compiled in Appendix F.
5.4.3          LIBRARY SERVICES
Libraries provide communities with diverse resources and services. They
preserve culture and history and transmit them from one generation to the
next. They also provide social settings for community activities, support
formal education, and provide opportunities for individuals that can last a
lifetime.
In 2003, the City of Hemet opened a new 52,000-square-foot library in a
centrally located building that also houses other community facilities. The
library holdings exceed 100,000 volumes. The Riverside County Library
System operates a smaller branch library in Valle Vista with approximately
          C  I  T Y      O  F    H   E  M  E  T     G    E  N  E  R   A L      P L A N    2 0 3 0
                                                        5-36

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              35,000 volumes. The Hemet Public Library provides a broad array of library
              services, from the traditional loaning of books and audiovisual materials,
              answering of questions, and provision of children's programming to the
              "new basic" services of public computers, book discussion groups, and free
              wireless access for those who bring their own laptops to the library. In
              addition, the library offers adult literacy and Families for Literacy programs
              for English-speaking adults and their families (with tutoring provided by
              trained volunteers) and a local history collection and services through the
              Heritage Room (staffed by volunteers from the local historical society). The
              library offers a homework center, a community meeting room, and a large
              children’s area with a dedicated storytelling room. The second floor of the
              library contains a large multi-purpose room for community events and
              workshops.
              The library has adopted a number of techniques to allow the library
              customer to be self-sufficient. Techniques include customer self-checkout,
              self-check-in, self-registration for library cards, and self-pickup of holds.
              The library provides a number of electronic databases that provide fast,
              easy, and timely access to newspaper and magazine articles, homework
              assistance, genealogical research material, test preparation guides and
              practice tests, and information geared to assist California families. In
              addition, the library has made online reference services available to its users
              24 hours a day, 7 days a week, so a question can be asked and answered at
              any time, even when the library is closed. The library has implemented the
              use of radio frequency identification labels, which speeds checkout and
              check-in activities and allows for a practical, ongoing inventory of holdings.
              A community support group, the Friends of the Library, provides
              fundraising and recently provided funds for an inventory wand that can be
              used to take inventory at the shelves without removing each item to scan
              barcodes.
              On average, 1,600 people visit the library each day, and of these, 320 use
              the public Internet services. Recent growth in the community has occurred
              largely among the groups that make the greatest use the public library
              system—families and children. These demographic shifts have resulted in
              the need to change both the type and quantity of material and services
              required. One of the greatest needs at the library is for additional staff to
              serve the younger population. Although the library has an extensive
              volunteer force, the facility needs permanent staff who are experienced in
              dealing with the specific child developmental and educational needs of this
              demographic. This type of permanent staff will help ensure that the library’s
              mission to support the curricular, literary, and recreational reading needs of
              Hemet is met. Additionally, the library’s service area extends outside of the
              City’s jurisdictional boundaries into unincorporated Riverside County and
              the City of San Jacinto. However, the City of Hemet receives no financial
              assistance from either of those jurisdictions to help with the costs of
              maintaining the library facility.
              5.4.4             COMMUNITY AND SENIOR CENTERS
              The Hemet area’s recreation, art, and other community resources are
              further discussed in the Recreation and Trails and the Art and Culture
C I T Y O F H   E  M  E   T     G   E  N  E   R  A L      P  L  A N      2 0 3 0
                                   5-37

                         COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Elements. This section focuses on the facilities that offer other types of
comprehensive services to the community.
James Simpson Memorial Center The James Simpson Memorial Center
is located in the City’s downtown civic center adjacent to the library.
Named in honor of the late Mayor James Simpson, who served on the
Hemet City Council from 1947 to 1968, the center has been operated by
the City since 1978. The center provides a variety of services, such as
assistance with housing, legal issues, and information. Additionally, the
Simpson center offers a variety of senior activities, such as senior lunches,
aerobics, craft classes, health education, and entertainment. It has provided
a location for seniors to socialize, exercise, learn, and teach for many years.
During hot weather, the center serves as a Cool Zone for people without air
conditioning.
Although the Simpson center has always served all age groups, the
community’s changing demographics has increased demand for services for
nonseniors. To ensure that the community’s needs are met, the center is
constantly reviewing and updating its programs and activities. Like the
library, the center serves residents from outside of the City’s jurisdictional
boundaries. To expand its programs and better control costs, the City has
entered into partnerships with other service providers, such as the YMCA,
and identifying “green building” standards that can be incorporated into
center maintenance.
Community Centers Several facilities are in the City that offer a venue for
community activities. Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District offers
classes for dancing, education, health and leisure, and sports at its park
facilities, particularly Valley-Wide Regional Park in adjacent San Jacinto.
The Esplanade Arts Center, operated by the Diamond Valley Arts Council,
offers classes, workshops, exhibitions, and performances at its facility on
Esplanade Avenue. The new 15,000-square-foot Pearl E. Rogers Corps
(Salvation Army) Community Center, which is scheduled to open in 2011,
will offer activities for children, youth, adults, and seniors, as well as social
service, counseling, and emergency shelter programs.
Many of the City’s master planned residential communities also include
neighborhood community centers with a range of activities and recreational
amenities for their residents. Some of the more prominent centers are
provided at the new communities of Four Seasons, McSweeny Farms,
Peppertree, and Seven Hills and at the established mobile home parks of
Sierra Dawn, Hemet West, Colonial Country Club, and Casa del Sol.
5.4.5          GOVERNMENT AND GENERAL SOCIAL SERVICE
               FACILITIES
Various governmental agencies and nonprofit organizations provide offices
and clinics that serve residents, businesses, and institutions within the City
and the City’s Planning Area. The types of facilities and services currently
provided in Hemet include the following:
          C  I  T Y      O   F    H   E  M  E   T     G  E  N   E  R  A L      P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        5-38

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              Federal Facilities
                   Social Security Administration
                   Inland Empire SCORE, Small Business Administration
              SCORE is a nonprofit association comprising volunteer business
              counselors who are trained to serve as counselors, advisors, and mentors to
              aspiring entrepreneurs and business owners. The services are offered at no
              fee, as a community service.
              State Facilities
                   Department of Motor Vehicles
                   Youth Opportunity Center, Employment Development Department, at
                   the California Family Life Center (see Nongovernmental Facilities)
                   California Superior Court for civil, small claims, family law, traffic, and
                   criminal cases as needed
              The court is proposing to expand and construct a new courthouse to serve
              Hemet and the valley area. As of 2011, the court is in its site selection
              process. The City of Hemet has encouraged the court to select a site within
              the downtown area adjacent to other government buildings and services.
              Alternatively, sites in the western portion of the City are a potential
              location.
              Riverside County Facilities
                   Department of Child Support Services (San Jacinto), Regional Office
                   Department of County Assessor-Clerk,-Recorder, Regional Office
                   Department of Environmental Health, Regional Office
                   Department of Public Social Services, Regional Office
                   Department of Mental Health Clinic
                   Department of Veterans Services Center
                   Department of Public Health, Family Care Center
                   Department of Public Health, Women, Infants and Children Nutrition
                   Services Clinic
                   Economic Development Agency, Workforce Development Center
              Tribal Facilities
              The Soboba Reservation offers educational services (preschool-level
              education and the Noli School), a parks and recreation department, a sports
              complex, the Soboba Cultural Center—Cham-Mix Poki’ (House of Our
              Culture), and various tribal programs. These services and programs are
              focused toward the Soboba people living within the reservation adjacent to
              the City and living within Hemet and the surrounding area.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T    G    E  N E   R A L       P L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   5-39

                     COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Nongovernmental and Nonprofit Organizations
The City appreciates and supports the efforts of private organizations to
improve the quality of life of residents within the City. Numerous nonprofit
organizations currently operate facilities within Hemet, including churches
and the California Family Life Center, Valley Restart Center, Assistance
League—Hemet Chapter House and Thrift Store, Veteran’s Service Office,
Salvation Army—Corps Community Center and Thrift Store, United
Way/United Communities Network, Lions Club Resource Center, and
Rotary Club.
        C  I  T Y     O    F     H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N E  R  A L    P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       5-40

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              G OALS AND P OLICIES
              C OMMUNITY      SERVICES AND INFRA S TRU CTU RE
                          Coordinate new development and redevelopment
              GOAL        with the provision of adequate infrastructure for
              CSI-1       water,       sewer,      stormwater,        energy,     and
                          communications.
              POLICIES
              CSI-1.1    Infrastructure         Availability      Encourage    future
                         development to occur in areas where infrastructure for
                         water, sewer, and stormwater can most efficiently be
                         provided.
              CSI-1.2    Infrastructure Adequacy Ensure that new development
                         and redevelopment provides infrastructure for water,
                         sewer, and stormwater that adequately serves the proposed
                         uses and that has been coordinated with affected
                         infrastructure providers.
              CSI-1.3    Provider Notification Provide development information
                         to local water districts, Riverside County Flood Control
                         and Water Conservation District, and energy utilities to
                         assist in their planning efforts to ensure adequate
                         infrastructure is available for anticipated development.
              CSI-1.4    Fee Structures Ensure that fee structures are sufficient
                         for new development and redevelopment to pay their fair
                         share of the cost of infrastructure improvements and
                         public facilities.
              CSI-1.5    Financing Mechanisms Encourage the use of specific
                         plans, development agreements, community facilities
                         districts, or other mechanisms that specify and regulate the
                         nature, timing, cost, and financing of water, wastewater,
                         and/or storm drainage improvements and services.
              CSI-1.6    Business and Employment Districts Work with
                         property owners to establish a financing mechanism, such
                         as financing districts, to provide infrastructure and
                         maintenance in major employment locations and corridors,
                         such as in west Hemet and along the Domenigoni Parkway
                         and Florida Avenue corridors to attract new investment
                         and industry.
              CSI-1.7    Redevelopment Financing Consider the use of
                         redevelopment financing, where appropriate, to provide
                         infrastructure in areas where the City wishes to stimulate
                         development.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E   N   E  R    A L    P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                           5-41
                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
CSI-1.8       Capital Improvement Program Ensure that the capital
              improvement program meets the City’s ongoing
              infrastructure needs and is updated annually as part of the
              budget cycle.
               Maintain a water delivery system that is capable of
GOAL           meeting the daily and peak demands of Hemet
CSI-2          residents and businesses in an efficient and
               environmentally sound manner.
POLICIES
CSI-2.1       Agency Coordination Coordinate with the Eastern
              Municipal Water District and Lake Hemet Municipal
              Water District to meet the projected water demand and to
              ensure reduction of existing and projected water supply
              impacts.
CSI-2.2       Water Supply Assessments Require evidence of adequate
              water supply, or a water supply assessment when
              appropriate pursuant to state law, to support proposed
              development.
CSI-2.3       Performance Standards Developments shall be required
              to install water facilities sufficient to meet performance
              standards established by the water agency serving the
              project. All facilities must be operational prior to issuance
              of building permits.
CSI-2.4       Recycled Water Use Support water districts’ efforts to
              promote the use of recycled water where infrastructure is
              available and to expand infrastructure where it does not
              currently exist.
CSI-2.5       Recycled Water Line Expansion Work with the water
              districts to explore options for expanding recycled water
              pipelines to serve City parks and public landscape
              corridors that are near existing infrastructure.
CSI-2.6       Common Area Recycled Water Require the installation
              of recycled water lines for all appropriate streetscapes and
              common areas when within one-half mile of either an
              existing and/or master planned tertiary water trunk line, as
              shown on any water district’s master plan, as feasible. The
              facilities shall meet performance standards established by
              the supplier of reclaimed water to the site.
CSI-2.7       Ground Water Recharge Ensure that adequate aquifer
              water recharge areas are preserved and protected through a
              comprehensive water management strategy.
        C I T Y      O   F     H  E   M E   T    G   E  N   E  R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    5-42

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              CSI-2.8    Best Management Practice Features/Equipment
                         Require installation of best management practice features
                         for water for all new development and for applicable
                         rehabilitation.
              CSI-2.9    Location of Water Lines As part of discretionary project
                         approvals and building permit reviews, require that all
                         future water lines be located within street or alley rights-of-
                         way.
                          Ensure the provision of a wastewater collection,
              GOAL        treatment, and disposal system capable of meeting
                          the daily and peak demands of Hemet residents and
              CSI-3       businesses in an efficient and environmentally sound
                          manner.
              POLICIES
              CSI-3.1    Performance Standards New development shall install
                         sufficient sewer facilities needed to meet performance
                         standards established by the site’s wastewater collection
                         agency.
              CSI-3.2    Location of Sewer and Gray Water Lines Require that
                         all future sewer and gray water lines be located within
                         street or alley rights-of-way.
              CSI-3.3    Industrial Discharge Work with the water districts to
                         encourage the provision of brine disposal pipelines and
                         any other new technologies that benefit the expansion of
                         the City’s industrial job base.
              CSI-3.4    Sanitary Sewers Promote the extension of sanitary sewers
                         to serve all new and existing land uses and densities, as
                         feasible, to protect groundwater quality. Require new
                         development, and existing development where feasible, to
                         connect to the sanitary sewer system. Exceptions may be
                         considered for properties with a minimum lot size of ½
                         acre and that are located more than 660 feet from a sewer
                         line.
                          Maintain adequate stormwater management and
              GOAL        drainage systems to help protect against flood
              CSI-4       hazards, recharge the aquifer, and preserve
                          groundwater quality.
              POLICIES
              CSI-4.1    Sufficient Service Ensure sufficient levels of stormwater
                         drainage are provided to protect the community from
                         flood hazards and to minimize the discharge of materials
                         into the storm drain system that are toxic or that would
                         obstruct flows.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N  E   R   A L     P  L  A N      2 0 3 0
                            5-43

                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
CSI-4.2       100-Year Storm Flows Provide public storm drainage
              facilities to adequately accommodate expected 100-year
              flood flows. Ensure that roadways remain passable for at
              least one lane in each direction. Coordinate with the
              Riverside County Flood Control District regarding the
              preference and requirements for District maintenance of
              regional and master planned drainage facilities.
CSI-4.3       Pollutant Discharge Prevent pollutant discharge into
              storm drain systems and natural drainages and aquifers by
              cooperating in regional programs with stakeholders and
              the Regional Water Quality Control Board to implement
              the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
              program, Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans, Water
              Quality Master Plans, , comply with the requirements of
              the Lake Elsinore Canyon Lake TMDL to reduce nitrogen
              and phosphorous in the San Jacinto River Watershed, and
              provide education on best management practices for the
              public and the development community
CSI-4.4:      Groundwater Recharge Require development projects to
              minimize stormwater runoff and provide on-site
              opportunities for groundwater recharge that are integrated
              into the project design and amenities, and utilizing Low
              Impact Development techniques.
CSI-4.5       Drainage System Mitigation In accordance with the
              City’s performance standards for drainage facilities
              mandated by Measure C, require any significant impacts on
              local and regional storm drain systems associated with
              proposed development or redevelopment to be mitigated
              including the preparation of downstream drainage
              mitigation plans when appropriate to the scale and location
              of the project.
CSI-4.6       Aesthetic Design Require use of landscaped swales and
              detention areas that provide percolation to the greatest
              extent possible using best management practices in order
              to promote sensitive and aesthetic design solutions for
              retaining on-site the incremental increases in runoff from a
              development site.
CSI-4.7       Bioswales Discourage lined channels and encourage “soft
              bottom” channels that provide slower water runoff, first-
              flush capabilities, groundwater recharge potential, and
              streambed vegetation.
CSI-4.8       Street Storm Drains Require that the design and upgrade
              of street storm drains be based on the relative risk to
              public health and safety, the potential for hindrance of
              emergency access and egress from excessive flood depth,
              the threat of contamination of the storm drain system with
        C I T Y      O   F    H  E   M  E T     G   E  N   E  R A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   5-44

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                         sewage effluent, in the most environmentally-sensitive
                         manner that is feasible.
              CSI-4.9    Master Flood Control and Drainage Plan. Provide
                         comprehensive and ongoing updates to the City’s Master
                         Flood Control and Drainage Plan, or create sub-area
                         Drainage Plans to reflect current land use patterns, best
                         management practices, and environmental constraints.
              CSI-4.10   Low Impact Development Limit disruption of natural
                         hydrology by reducing impervious cover, increasing on-site
                         infiltration, and managing stormwater runoff at the source.
                         Use the following principles in development design:
                         1. On undeveloped sites proposed for development,
                              promote on-site stormwater infiltration through design
                              techniques such as pervious paving, draining runoff
                              into bioswales or properly designed landscaped areas,
                              preservation of natural soils and vegetation, and
                              limiting impervious surfaces;
                         2. On previously developed sites proposed for major
                              alteration,     provide     stormwater      management
                              improvements to restore natural infiltration to the
                              extent practicable;
                         3. Provide flexibility for design standards on impervious
                              surfaces when it can be shown that such reductions
                              will not have a negative impact and will provide the
                              benefits of stormwater retention, groundwater
                              infiltration, reduction of heat islands, enhancement of
                              habitat and biodiversity, and other environmental
                              benefits.
                         4. Encourage and promote the use of new materials, Best
                              Management Practices, and technology for improved
                              stormwater management, such as pervious paving,
                              green roofs, rain gardens, and vegetated swales.
                         5. Integrate detention and retention basins into the
                              landscape design of development sites using methods
                              such as a network of small ephemeral swales treated
                              with attractive planting.
                         6. Discourage the use of mounded turf and lawn areas
                              that drain onto adjacent sidewalks and parking lots;
                              replace these areas with landscape designs that retain
                              runoff and allow infiltration.
C I T Y O F H  E  M  E T G  E   N   E   R  A L      P L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                           5-45

                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
CSI-4.11      Ahwahnee Water Principles Incorporate the Ahwahnee
              Water Principles for Resource Efficient Land Use into
              development design, as appropriate, to reduce costs and
              improve the reliability and quality of the City’s water
              resources.
GOAL           Facilitate the provision and maintenance of
               adequate systems to provide and conserve natural
CSI-5          gas, electricity, and telecommunications systems.
POLICIES
CSI-5.1       Telecommunication Facilities Facilitate provision and
              enhancement of telecommunications services throughout
              the Planning Area while promoting collocated and/or
              “stealthed” wireless communications antenna facilities and
              the provision of new technology to minimize cell towers.
CSI-5.2       Utility Facilities Promote the availability of reliable and
              reasonably priced utilities necessary for businesses and
              residences to prosper.
CSI-5.3       Energy Services Ensure the provision of reliable, quality
              energy services and promote energy conservation
              throughout the City.
CSI-5.4       Solar Energy Encourage new buildings to maximize solar
              access to promote passive solar energy use, natural
              ventilation, effective use of daylight, an on-site solar
              generation.
CSI-5.5       Energy Efficient Design Encourage the efficient use of
              energy resources by residential, commercial, and industrial
              users by requiring project proposals to incorporate energy
              efficient products and techniques into their designs in
              accordance with adopted California Green Building
              Standards Code standards and other adopted development
              standards.
CSI-5.6       Building Retrofits Encourage the retrofitting of existing
              buildings to use low maintenance, durable building
              materials, and high-efficiency energy systems and
              appliances.
CSI-5.7       Utility Undergrounding Require the coordination of
              capital improvement planning for utility undergrounding
              with the utility companies and developers to ensure
              adequate financing and appropriate timing.
CSI-5.8       Agency Coordination Provide early notification to utility
              companies regarding new development to ensure that
              services will be available in a timely manner, and encourage
        C I T Y      O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E  R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                     5-46

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                         developers of large scale or complex developments to
                         contact local utilities early in the process to insure that
                         projected energy and utility demands will be able to be
                         accommodated .
              CSI-5.9    Municipal Operations Reduce energy consumption in
                         municipal operations.
              CSI-5.10   Conservation and Clean Energy Programs Explore the
                         use of grant funds and programs with SCE and non-profit
                         agencies to establish programs for energy conservation
                         (e.g., home weatherization, Energy Star applicants) and
                         transition to the use of clean and renewable energy (e.g.,
                         photovoltaic retrofits, solar hot water heaters and pumps).
                          Maintain an adequate and efficient system of
              GOAL        collection and disposal of solid waste generated in
              CSI-6       the City in compliance with California Integrated
                          Waste Management Board requirements.
              POLICIES
              CSI-6.1    Solid Waste System Promote efficient, economical, and
                         environmentally sound waste collection, management, and
                         disposal.
              CSI-6.2    Recycling Achieve maximum diversion of materials from
                         disposal through the reduction, reuse, and recycling of
                         wastes to the highest and best use.
              CSI-6.3    Waste Handling Strategy Update the City’s waste
                         handling strategy, as needed, to address issues of landfill
                         capacity and new state regulations.
              GOAL        Consult with local educational institutions to
                          coordinate the provision of adequate and
              CSI-7       appropriate educational facilities and services.
              POLICIES
              CSI-7.1:   City/School Districts Coordination Coordinate
                         development activity between the City and area school
                         districts to adequately provide for the needs of the school
                         districts through the collection of development fees and
                         the appropriate location of school sites.
              CSI-7.2    Early Participation Involve area school districts in the
                         review process for new development to ensure that the
                         school district can serve the new development and to
                         minimize associated impacts.
              CSI-7.3    School Siting Encourage the siting of schools close to the
                         neighborhoods they are intended to serve, siting to
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N   E  R A L      P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                            5-47

                    COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              facilitate safe access for students walking, bicycling, or
              driving to and from school sites, and siting to minimize the
              extension of infrastructure and services.
CSI-7.4       Facility Joint Use Encourage the joint use of schools and
              parks for public use.
CSI-7-5       Facility Design Promote the design of school and
              community facilities so that there are multiple-purpose
              buildings and benefits for the surrounding area and users.
CSI-7.6       Safe Routes Residential communities should be designed
              to minimize walking distance to schools and create
              pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods with safe bike and
              pedestrian routes to schools.
CSI-7.7       Linkages Coordinate new development and school site
              planning to establish walkways, bike paths, greenways, and
              other elements that link school sites with surrounding uses.
CSI-7.8:      Infrastructure Design To the extent feasible and
              appropriate, infrastructure designed for new development
              shall provide a beneficial impact on the location and
              implementation of community facilities such as schools,
              parks, fire stations, and other public services.
CSI-7.9:      Higher Education Pursue the establishment of technical
              trade schools and college campuses or facilities that offer
              education and training opportunities for Hemet residents
              and businesses.
               Work with local employers and health providers to
GOAL           facilitate the provision of excellent health care
CSI-8          services to meet the needs of Hemet’s diverse
               population.
POLICIES
CSI-8.1:      Health Care Facilities Encourage the establishment of a
              broad range of health care facilities and associated
              hospitals, acute care facilities, medical offices, businesses,
              and medical educational and research facilities.
CSI-8.2       Regional Leader Support the efforts of local medical
              facilities and other health care providers to expand health
              care and health care services in the community, and make
              Hemet a regional health care leader.
CSI-8.3       Facility Siting Encourage the concentration and orderly
              expansion of health facilities in the City to facilitate access
              by all segments of the population.
        C I T Y      O   F    H   E  M   E  T    G   E  N   E  R   A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    5-48

 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
              CSI-8.4    Green Building Through incentives such as expedited
                         review of development projects, promote nonrequired
                         alternative energy practices and Leadership in Energy and
                         Environmental Design (LEED®) certifications.
              CSI-8.5    Emergency Services Promote the provision of the
                         emergency services available, including paramedic,
                         ambulance, and helicopter transport to area hospitals and
                         trauma centers.
              CSI-8.6    Healthy City Employee Programs Promote the health
                         and well-being of City employees by adopting healthy
                         living/healthy employee programs and practices such
                         health challenges, healthy food choices, and healthy work
                         environments.
              CSI-8.7    Healthy Employee Programs Encourage local
                         employers to adopt healthy living/healthy employee
                         programs and practices such health challenges, healthy
                         food choices, and healthy work environments.
              CSI-8.8    Community Education Support community education
                         programs on healthy eating habits and lifestyles with topics
                         that include nutrition, physical activity, and vegetable
                         gardening.
              CSI-8.9    City Health Leadership Seek opportunities to promote
                         healthy lifestyles, activities, and food choices at City offices
                         and City-organized events.
              CSI-8.9    Healthy Community Partnership Coordinate with the
                         Riverside County Public Health Department on
                         educational efforts, projects, and programs that enhance
                         the health of persons who live and work in Hemet.
                          Maintain and enhance a City library system that
              GOAL        contributes to quality of life through accessible and
              CSI-9       diverse library collections, technologically improved
                          services, and a welcoming environment.
              POLICIES
              CSI-9.1:   Library Collections Expand and adapt the library
                         collection to meet the changing needs of the community
                         for different formats and interests while preserving a core
                         collection of materials of continuing value.
              CSI-9.2    Community Responsiveness Ensure that the library
                         system is responsive to residents’ and businesses’
                         specialized needs.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N  E   R  A L        P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                            5-49

                   COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
CSI-9.3:      Library Programming Enhance library programming and
              services for children and teens.
CSI-9.4       Funding Maintain, expand, and develop public and quasi-
              public facilities by identifying and soliciting funding from
              additional sources to supplement cultural, community, and
              library facilities and services.
CSI-9.5       Impact Fees Continue to use City-collected, library-
              specific impact fees for the development, expansion, or
              rehabilitation of existing library facilities.
GOAL           Facilitate the provision of social services that provide
               a benefit to the existing residents of Hemet, and are
CSI-10         an asset to the overall community.
POLICIES
CSI-10.1:     Service Provision Recognize that the City has a diverse
              population with specialized needs, and provide for the
              needs of the citizenry through public, nonprofit, and
              private assistance organizations.
CSI-10.2      Senior Facilities Support and encourage the development
              of independent living or care facilities for seniors in
              locations with convenient access to social services,
              commercial areas, medical services, and transportation.
CSI-10.3:     Accessibility Support and encourage the development of
              housing, businesses, and public facilities accessible to the
              physically disabled.
CSI-10.5:     Simpson Center Support cost-effective usage of the
              James Simpson Memorial Center and provision of
              community activities offered at the center for all age
              groups.
CSI-10.6      Partnerships Establish partnerships with other public and
              private sector agencies to coordinate and facilitate the
              provision of services to persons residing within the City’s
              jurisdictional boundaries.
CSI-10.7      Green Leadership Encourage service providers to
              provide “green” leadership by incorporating alternative
              energy products in their facilities and conservation
              practices in their operations.
        C I T Y     O   F      H   E  M   E  T    G    E   N E R A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                      5-50

                                         CHAPTER 6                                          PUBLIC SAFETY
Quality of life in Hemet is
influenced, in part, by the sense of
security perceived by City residents
and businesses. The Public Safety
Element demonstrates the breadth
of preparations undertaken by the
City to address issues such as
                                                 In 1918, an earthquake damaged the Bothin Building (also known as the
uncontrollable natural hazards;                  Nevins Building) on Harvard Street at Florida Avenue. The building was
environment hazards; crime and                   restored and is currently in use today.
violence; and emergency response.
                                         T    he City of Hemet takes pride in maintaining a safe and comfortable
                                              environment for its residents. Protecting the public’s safety from
                                              natural and human-made hazards is its most critical function. The
                                         Public Safety Element addresses two types of hazards: Public Safety and
                                         Noise. Both are required General Plan elements under California state law.
                                         The Public Safety section describes potential natural and human-made
                                         hazards, outlines measures to reduce the risk of hazards, identifies the
                                         resources available to respond when an incident occurs, and establishes
                                         proactive goals and policies to ensure the community’s safety. The Public
                                         Safety section includes:
                                            geologic hazards including seismically induced fault lines and ground
                                             shaking, liquefaction, and unreinforced masonry buildings;
                                            nonseismic ground failure such as slope instability leading to landslides
                                             and mudslides, expansive soils, and subsidence;
                                            flooding caused by natural causes or dam/reservoir failure;
                                            hazards related to transportation (ground and air);
                                            hazardous waste (storage, use, and transport);
                                            fire prevention and response;
                                            crime prevention and law enforcement; and
                                            critical facilities and emergency preparedness.
                   C I T Y          O F H E M E T           G E N E R A L                P L A N      2 0 3 0
                                                                6-1

                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
The Noise section recognizes the adverse health effects associated with
excessive noise, identifies the sources of noise in the community, and
establishes goals and policies to address existing and future noise
conditions. The Noise section within this element includes:
     Major noise sources, including transportation and stationary sources
     Existing and projected levels of noise and noise contours for major
     noise sources
     Land use compatibility designations to protect residences and other
     sensitive receptors from excess noise
6.1       I SSUES     AND O PPORTU NITIES
Like most Southern California cities, Hemet faces a diverse array of
potential natural hazards. The City is located on a portion of the San Jacinto
Fault Zone, considered one of the region’s most active fault zones, and
could be affected by the San Andreas Fault and the Elsinore Fault. With its
flat topography and close proximity to the San Jacinto River and Diamond
Valley Lake, flooding, particularly seasonal flooding, is a real concern in
Hemet. Additionally, one of Hemet’s greatest assets, the natural hillsides
that surround the valley, can provide fuel for wildfires or mudslides in
heavy rain.
Human-caused hazards, including noise and crime, are created by the
activities of people, businesses, manufacturers, roadways, railways, and
airports and must be regulated to enable crucial economic activity and
mobility while ensuring the safety of residents and employees. A person’s
sense of security directly impacts how a community is perceived.
The City of Hemet recognizes that its vision cannot be fully realized until
the health and safety of the community is ensured and is determined to
demonstrate its proactive approach and timely response to public safety
concerns within the community. To further its image as a desirable place to
live and to offer an attractive location for business growth, the City will
continue to comprehensively address the public safety needs and concerns
of its residents, business, institutions, and visitors.
6.2      R ELAT ED P R OGRAM S , P LANS ,                    AND
          R EGULATI ONS
This section describes the salient plans and regulations related to public
health and safety.
Seismic Hazards Mapping Act California’s 1990 Seismic Hazards
Mapping Act requires the State Geologist to compile maps identifying and
describing seismic hazard zones throughout California. Guidelines prepared
by the State Mining and Geology Board identify the responsibilities of state
and local agencies in the review of development within seismic hazard
zones. Development on a site designated as a seismic hazard zone requires
a geotechnical report and local agency consideration of the policies and
criteria established by the State Mining and Geology Board. Over the years,
          C  I  T Y     O    F     H  E   M  E   T      G E   N E R A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                          6-2

 PUBLIC SAFETY
              the program has expanded to include mapping of seismic-related hazards
              such as liquefaction- and landslide-prone areas. The Public Safety Element
              discusses seismic hazards associated with faults and those identified on state
              seismic hazard maps.
              Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act The 1972 Alquist-Priolo
              Earthquake Fault Zoning Act aims to mitigate the affects of surface faulting
              on structures for human occupancy. The act's main purpose is to prevent
              the construction of buildings used for human occupancy on the surface
              trace of active faults. The act only addresses the hazard of surface fault
              rupture and is not directed toward other earthquake hazards.
              Unreinforced Masonry Law The 1986 Unreinforced Masonry Law
              (Section 8875 et seq. of the California Government Code) requires all cities
              and counties in Seismic Zone 4 (zones near historically active faults) to
              identify potentially hazardous unreinforced masonry (URM) buildings in
              their jurisdictions, establish a URM program to reduce losses, and report
              their progress to the state. The owners of such buildings are to be notified
              of the potential earthquake hazard these buildings pose.
              National Flood Insurance Program The Federal Emergency
              Management Agency (FEMA) administers the National Flood Insurance
              Program (NFIP). Participating jurisdictions must exercise land use controls
              and purchase flood insurance as a prerequisite for receiving funds to
              purchase or build a structure in a flood hazard area. The NFIP provides
              federal flood insurance subsidies and federally financed loans for eligible
              property owners in flood-prone areas.
              Colby-Alquist Floodplain Management Act The Colby-Alquist
              Floodplain Management Act encourages local governments to plan, adopt,
              and enforce land use regulations for floodplain management to protect
              people and property from flooding hazards. The act also identifies
              requirements that jurisdictions must meet in order to receive state financial
              assistance for flood control.
              Hemet-Ryan Airport Land Use Plan The Hemet-Ryan Airport Land Use
              Plan guides future development in and around the airport. Last updated in
              1992, the Riverside County Airport Land Use Commission (RCALUC) is
              currently in the process of updating airport land use plans (ALUPs) in the
              County. The 1992 ALUP maintains four distinct land use compatibility
              areas within and surrounding the airport. These areas include Area I, II,
              Transition, and III. The ALUP also contains noise standards and other
              pertinent standards for development within its compatibility zones.
              Legislative projects proposed within these zones must be referred to the
              RCALUC for review. More details regarding the airport are available in the
              Land Use and Circulation Elements.
              City of Hemet Municipal Codes and Standards The City has adopted
              the California Building Code, California Mechanical Code, California Fire
              Code, California Electrical Code, California Residential Code, and other
              related codes that contain structural requirements for existing and new
              buildings. The codes are designed to ensure structural integrity during
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E   T    G   E   N   E  R A L    P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   6-3
                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
seismic and other hazardous events and to prevent personal injury, loss of
life, and substantial property damage. The Hemet Municipal Code also
incorporates regulations and standards for subdivisions, flood control,
stormwater management, and fire hazard reduction.
City of Hemet Measure C On June 7, 1988, Hemet voters approved a
measure to require updating the City’s General Plan to incorporate
performance measures related to traffic, drainage facilities, water storage
and distribution facilities, park and recreational facilities, police services, fire
services, and sanitary sewers. These performance standards were
incorporated into the 1992 General Plan as a component of the Public
Services and Facilities Element. They are incorporated into the various
goals, policies and implementation programs within the General Plan 2030
and are attached as Appendix G.
City of Hemet Emergency Operations Plan Hemet’s
emergency operations plan (EOP) addresses the City’s planned
response to emergencies associated with natural disasters and
technological incidents. The plan establishes the emergency
organization, assigns tasks, specifies policies and general
procedures, and provides for coordination of planning efforts of
the various emergency staff and service elements utilizing the
Standardized Emergency Management System. The EOP sets
forth the procedures associated with preparedness for, response
to, recovery from, and mitigation of a variety of types of
emergencies. This EOP is an extension of the State of California Hemet Fire Hazardous Materials (HazMat)
Emergency Plan.                                                          Team
Riverside County Multi-Jurisdictional Local Hazard Mitigation Plan
Hemet is a “Submitting Jurisdiction” within the Riverside Operational Area
Multi-Jurisdictional Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP). Riverside’s LHMP
serves as a basis for State Governor’s Office of Emergency Services (OES)
to provide technical assistance and to prioritize project funding. The LHMP
is a requirement of the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000. The act requires
that local communities enact hazard mitigation measures to reduce losses
from disasters. The LHMP includes a risk assessment covering wildfires,
floods, earthquakes, nuclear incident, civil unrest, and many other types of
hazards. The LHMP calls for yearly review of hazard mitigation activities.
The Action Plan within the LHMP serves as a guide to spending priorities
and will be adjusted annually to reflect current needs and financial
resources.
California Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24) Title 24 of the
California Code of Regulations establishes standards governing interior
noise levels that apply to all new multi-family residential units in California.
These standards require that acoustical studies be performed before
construction at building locations where the existing day-night average
noise levels (Ldn) exceeds 60 decibels (dB). The acoustical studies are
required to establish mitigation measures that will limit maximum Ldn levels
to 45 dB in any habitable room.
         C   I   T Y     O   F    H  E   M  E   T    G     E   N  E  R   A L       P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                          6-4

 PUBLIC SAFETY
              6.3       G EOL OGIC H AZARDS
              Natural landforms in the Hemet–San Jacinto Valley play an important role
              in shaping the City. While they provide a dramatic and varied topographical
              setting for the community, the region’s areas of steep slopes, unstable soils,
              and seismic hazards also create potential for human safety and property
              risks. Earthquakes pose the greatest potential for far-reaching loss of life or
              property. A lesser geologic hazard relates to slope and soil stability. Hillsides
              located mostly on the periphery of the City can be subject to landslides or
              dislodged boulders, and portions of the City have expansive soil types with
              shrink-swell behaviors related to moisture content during rainy periods.
              6.3.1         SEISMIC HAZARDS
              Hemet lies within a region with several active faults; therefore, Hemet is
              subject to risks and hazards associated with earthquakes. Most significantly,
              the City is located on a portion of the San Jacinto Fault Zone, considered
              one of the state’s most active faults and shown in Figure 6.1.
              Fault Lines and Ground Shaking
              The City is susceptible to fault rupture and ground shaking caused by
              multiple nearby earthquake fault zones. The following are the most
              significant faults affecting Hemet, although damage is possible from
              earthquakes along other faults, including faults not previously identified.
                   The San Andreas Fault, which is the largest, most significant fault in
                   California, is at its closest point approximately 15 miles northeast of
                   downtown Hemet, in the San Bernardino Mountains. The San Andreas
                   Fault is capable of producing an 8.0 magnitude (m) earthquake. The
                   San Jacinto and Elsinore Faults are the primary offshoots parallel to the
                   main San Andreas Fault, which continues into the Coachella Valley.
                   The San Jacinto Fault system underlies the northeast portion of the
                   City. This fault runs more than 125 miles, separating from the San
                   Andreas Fault near Cajon Pass and continuing southeast, passing the
                   communities of San Jacinto and Hemet along the base of the San
                   Jacinto Mountains, to the vicinity of El Centro. In the Hemet vicinity,
                   the fault disperses from a single fault trace into a set of parallel traces
                   called a fault zone, spreading through the eastern side of the planning
                   area between Park Hill and the base of the San Jacinto Mountains. The
                   San Jacinto Fault Zone is a major element of the San Andreas system
                   and is considered one of the most seismically active fault systems in
                   southern California today. Along the mountain front in this area, the
                   fault has dammed groundwater channels, forcing water to the surface as
                   hot springs. This fault is capable of producing up to a 7.5 m
                   earthquake.
                   The Elsinore Fault, also a member of the San Andreas system, runs as
                   close as 18 miles from downtown Hemet, west of the planning area.
                   The fault runs southwest of Lake Matthews, through Corona, and
                   south into Lake Elsinore. Of the three principal branches, including the
                   San Andreas and the San Jacinto Faults, the Elsinore Fault has been
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G   E   N  E  R  A L     P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                   6-5

                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY
     considerably less active than the San Andreas and San Jacinto Faults.
     The Elsinore Fault is capable of producing up to a 7.5 m earthquake.
Liquefaction
In addition to ground shaking, earthquakes present the potential for ground
and slope failure. California law requires identification of liquefaction zones,
where the stability of foundation soils must be investigated, and landslide
zones, where the stability of hill slopes must be evaluated. Unstable soils on
steep slopes may fail under the stress of a tremor. Figure 6.1 shows the
liquefaction susceptibility of the Planning Area. Areas along the western
border of the City and east of Diamond Valley Lake have the highest
potential for liquefaction because high groundwater and sediment rich soils
are present. The remainder of the City is moderately susceptible to
liquefaction.
Liquefaction has been responsible for damage in historical earthquakes
around the world. When liquefaction occurs, the strength of the soil
decreases, reducing the ability of a soil deposit to support foundations for
buildings and other structures. Liquefaction typically occurs within the
upper 50 feet of the surface, when saturated, loose, fine- to medium-grained
soils (sand and silt) are present. Earthquake shaking suddenly increases
pressure in the water that fills the pores between soil grains, causing the soil
to lose strength and behave as a liquid. The type of geologic process that
created a soil deposit has a strong influence on its liquefaction susceptibility.
Saturated soils that have been created by sedimentation in rivers and lakes
can be very susceptible to liquefaction. Because liquefaction occurs in
saturated soil, its effects are most commonly observed in low-lying areas
near bodies of water such as rivers, lakes, bays, and oceans. Liquefaction
hazards are a significant concern in the City because the City lies close to
the San Jacinto River and its numerous tributary creeks.
Unreinforced Masonry Buildings
URMs are structures that have been built without steel or other
reinforcements to help them withstand the motions caused by
wind, earthquakes, and machinery. To reduce the risk to life and
property, the State of California passed legislation requiring
jurisdictions in regions nearest historically active faults to
inventory its URM buildings and establish programs to reduce
loss. The Hemet–San Jacinto Valley area lies within Seismic
Hazard Zone 4.
Therefore, in compliance with state law, the City has identified its
URMs, notified the property owners, and adopted standards to            Some of Hemet’s unreinforced masonry buildings
ensure that as building permits are sought for tenant                   are located on Harvard Street, north of Florida
improvements or changes within these buildings, retrofitting            Avenue, in the City’s historic downtown. The City
                                                                        encourages the reinforcement and retention of
construction is adequate. As of 2010, eleven URMs remained in           these historic structures.
the downtown Hemet area: 105, 111, 114, and 122 North
Harvard Street; 102, 122, 124, 213, 215, and 190 East Florida
Avenue; and 250 Meir Street.
         C  I  T Y      O   F     H   E M   E  T     G   E   N  E  R   A L      P  L   A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                         6-6

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                           Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Jacinto
                                                                                                    Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            River
                                                                                                                                                                           Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Commonwealth Ave
                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                             Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ee
                                                                                                          Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                     Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ian
                                                                                                                                          en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                         Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                           Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                               Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                 ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                 Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kirby St
                                                                                                                                      ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                                                              HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                    ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yale St
                                                                                                                                                               AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                           SF
                                                                                                                                    A qu
                                                       Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                 AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                               ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                              San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                               Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                    Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                          ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                             Warren Rd
                                                                                                                      Ste
                                                                                                                                                          Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                         California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                             go
                                                                                                                                                         ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pk
                                                                                                                                                       iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                  on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                           ni
                                                                                                                                              g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                           Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                       Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 057 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                              LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                  San Jacinto Faults                                                      Liquefaction Susceptibility                                                                                         Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                  Alquist Priolo Fault Zone                                                                    Very High                                                                                      Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  High                                                                                           Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     Riverside County TLMA 2005                                                                                                                                                                                                                Moderate                                                                                       Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        F i g u r e     6 . 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Low
                     1       0.5   0                             1       2                                                                                                                                                                                     Very low                                                                                       River/Lake                                                                                                                                                             SEISMIC HAZARDS
                                                                             Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
Back of Figure 6.1
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G E   N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   6-8
          PUBLIC SAFETY
                        Earthquake Planning and Mitigation
                        In 1972, the State of California enacted the Alquist-Priolo Fault Zoning Act
                        to mitigate the hazard of fault rupture by prohibiting new construction
                        along all active fault lines. The act requires cities and counties to withhold
                        development permits for sites within an earthquake fault zone until geologic
                        investigations demonstrate that the sites are not threatened by surface
                        displacements from future faulting. In Hemet, the fault zone boundaries
                        shown in Figure 6.1 reflect state-delineated Alquist-Priolo Fault Zone
                        boundaries.
                        To reduce the hazards associated with seismic activity, the City requires that
                        all new development abide by the most recently adopted City and state
                        seismic and geotechnical requirements, which currently:
                             prohibit the construction of any structure for human occupancy to be
                             placed across the trace of an active fault,
                             require a request for development within 50 feet of an active fault to
                             conduct geologic investigations and submit a report by a geologist
                             registered in the state, and
                             require projects within the special studies zone to provide funding for
                             the City to retain a geologist registered in the state to prepare a geologic
                             report directed to the problem of potential surface fault displacement
                             through the project site.
                                  6.3.2         SLOPE AND SOIL STABILITY HAZARDS
                                  Steep slopes and unstable soils also affect how and where
                                  development can occur because of the potential for landslides,
                                  expanding “shrink-swell” soils, and ground subsidence.
                                  Landslides
                                  Steep topography, fractured and unconsolidated bedrock
                                  conditions, and expansive soils make many hillside areas unstable.
                                  The potential for future landslides, mudslides, or rock slides is
                                  highest in the planning area east of the City because of the
Bautista Canyon                   prevalence of steep slopes. Landsliding may result from heavy rain,
                        erosion, removal of vegetation, seismic activity, or combinations of these
                        and other factors. On steeper slopes, building pads that are a combination
                        of grading cuts and fills (where a slope is cut into and the excavated
                        material is placed to create a terrace) may also result in differential building
                        settling unless adequate subexcavation and compaction are achieved.
                        Hillside areas within the City with slopes in excess of 10 percent are shown
                        in Figure 3.7 in the Community Design Element.
                        Expansive Soils
                        Shrink-swell potential is a soil condition that influences development
                        practices. The term refers to the change in soil volume that results from a
                        change in moisture content, typically swelling when saturated and shrinking
                        when dried. Shrink-swell is likely to affect building slabs. The condition
                        occurs throughout Hemet, but is somewhat more prevalent in the eastern
         C  I T Y O F H  E   M  E   T     G   E   N  E  R  A L      P   L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                              6-9

                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
areas. Effects can be mitigated, or the expansive soil can be replaced with
different soil that is not expansive. Soil testing is required by the City as part
of building plan submittals for new construction.
Subsidence
Hemet lies within the Hemet and San Jacinto Groundwater Basins.
Groundwater is the preferred water source of the local water agencies
because of its high quality. Using groundwater also reduces dependency on
imported water supplies. As the groundwater in the aquifer is pumped out,
the aquifer cavity may be compacted and the ground may subside.
Groundwater management is a primary concern of the City and other
stakeholders. The General Plan includes goals and policies and practices
intended to reduce water exaction, ensure groundwater basin recharge, and
evaluate the potential for subsidence. These policies are included in the
Open Space and Conservation Element, Community Services and
Infrastructure Element, and Public Safety Element.
The effects of subsidence can be mitigated if soil testing is completed
before development or rehabilitation. Soil testing is required by the City as
part of building plan submittals for new construction.
6.4      F LOO D H AZARDS
Potential flooding in the Hemet area is attributable to two sources: natural
flooding (excess rain and watercourse) and local dam failure. Flooding
becomes particularly hazardous when development encroaches onto
floodplains, modifying the landscape and altering natural patterns of
conveying excess water during floods.
6.4.1          FLOOD ZONES
Hemet’s geographic location within a valley and proximity to several
significant bodies of water contribute to the significant flood risk within the
City. The greatest flood hazard is present in the southern parts of the City.
To prepare for and mitigate flood hazards, the City participates in the
NFIP. The NFIP provides federal flood insurance subsidies and federally
financed loans for property owners in flood-prone areas. Flood Insurance
Rate Maps are an important part of the NFIP and are prepared by FEMA.
FEMA maps show potential flood zones for the 100-year and
500-year floods. These are floods that, respectively, have a 1
percent and 0.2 percent chance of occurring every year (in other
words, an average of once every 100 and once every 500 years).
Flood risk information presented on FEMA maps is based on
historic, meteorologic, hydrologic, and hydraulic data, as well as
open-space conditions, flood control works, and development.
New development is not permitted in a flood zone until properly
engineered drainage systems are approved. Figure 6.2, “Flood
Zones,” shows the 100-year and 500-year flood zones in the
Planning Area.
                                                                        The Hemet/Stetson Channel is one of
                                                                        Hemet’s primary stormwater drainage
                                                                        facilities. It runs southwesterly through the
                                                                        City, draining into Salt Creek.
         C   I  T Y      O   F   H    E M    E   T     G   E  N  E  R  A L        P    L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                          6-10

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                  ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                               HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                     ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                        iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                               g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 076 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                 FEMA DFIRM Flood Zones                                                                                   Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                100-year Flood Zone                                                                       Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                   500-year Flood Zone                                                                       Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     FEMA 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F i g u r e     6 . 2
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                                               River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NATURAL FLOOD HAZARDS
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
Back of Figure 6.2
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   6-12
         PUBLIC SAFETY
                                 Stormwater Drainage
                                 Hemet’s flat topography and soil types do not allow rain to drain
                                 immediately and can cause minor inundation of large areas of the City that
                                 can last several hours. The City is constrained in the provision of a
                                 conventional storm system because an insufficient “fall,” or downward
                                 slope, exists to provide quick drainage. The City has the opportunity to use
                                 more recently developed practices and products that can lessen the effect of
                                 development on the environment. Refer to the Community Services and
                                 Infrastructure Element for further discussion of drainage.
                                 Measure C
                                 Ballot Measure C, approved by voters in the City of Hemet on June 7, 1988,
                                 established a set of mandated performance standards for several public
                                 services in Hemet, including drainage services. The performance standard
                                 for drainage facilities in Hemet is that facilities shall be provided concurrent
                                 with development to protect structures for human occupancy and major
                                 roadways from the 100-year flood. Policies have been incorporated into this
                                 element that meet or exceed the performance standards set forth in
                                 Measure C.
                                 Flood Avoidance Actions
                                 To minimize damage or loss of life within FEMA-delineated special flood
                                 zones, Hemet has enacted the following provisions within the municipal
                                 code (Chapter 14, Article V):
                                      Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
                                      property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
                                      increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities.
                                      Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
                                      such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
                                      construction.
                                      Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
                                      natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
                                      waters.
                                      Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
                                      increase flood damage.
                                                Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
                                                will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase
                                                flood hazards in other areas.
                                                The municipal code also includes standards to reduce flood
                                                hazards for construction, subdivisions, manufactured homes,
                                                utilities, and recreational vehicles.
                                           6.4.2           DAM INUNDATION
                                           Dam inundation occurs when structural damage to a dam results
                                           in a flood. Earthquakes, erosion, design flaws, or water overflow
View of Saddle Dam of Diamond Valley Lake during storms can cause dam failure. Dam inundation maps
        C  I  T Y      O  F   H    E  M  E   T     G    E   N  E  R  A L      P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                       6-13

                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY
represent the best estimate of where water would flow in the unlikely event
that a dam with a full reservoir suddenly failed. Dam owners are required to
submit inundation maps to the Governor’s Office of Emergency Services
(OES) for review and approval. Based upon approved inundation maps, or
the delineated areas, cities and counties with territory in the mapped areas
are required to adopt emergency procedures for the evacuation and control
of populated areas below the dams. Figure 6.3, “Dam Inundation Map”
shows areas that would be affected in the unlikely event of dam or reservoir
failure.
The remote event that a catastrophic earthquake causes the collapse of the
East Dam of Diamond Valley Lake, which is located within the City limits,
would be the most devastating of the possible dam failures for Hemet.
Maps from OES indicate the inundation area extends north across
Domenigoni Parkway and quickly spreads over most of western Hemet. At
Florida Avenue, the flow would cover the area between approximately
California Avenue and Lyon Avenue. The inundation would flow out of the
City in two directions: north past Tres Cerritos Hills into San Jacinto and
southwest into the community of Winchester.
Several other dams pose potential dangers to the Planning Area. The Saddle
Dam of Diamond Valley Lake is a smaller dam on the north side of the
reservoir, located south of the intersection of California Avenue and
Domenigoni Parkway. The inundation zone for this dam covers parts of the
southwestern Hemet Planning Area, but does not reach as far north as
Stetson Avenue, nor as far east as Warren Road. After spreading around
that area, the flow would take water downstream to the west, through the
community of Winchester. The inundation area for the West Dam of
Diamond Valley Lake includes only a small portion of the Planning Area,
within approximately 1 mile of the intersection of Domenigoni Parkway
and Winchester Road. The remainder of the inundation area for the West
Dam is located south and west of the planning area.
The dam creating Lake Hemet is located in the mountains southeast of
Hemet. In the unlikely case that the Lake Hemet dam fails, water would
flow downstream along the San Jacinto River as shown on Figure 6.3.
The potential inundation area includes small portions of the eastern and
northeastern edges of the Planning Area, within the banks of the San
Jacinto River, where few structures exist or are planned. The inundation
area does not extend beyond the banks of the river until it reaches San
Jacinto.
If the dam creating Little Lake, located in the planning area near the
intersection of Stetson Avenue and Soboba Street, were to fail, water would
flow north toward Park Hill as shown in Figure 6.3. The San Jacinto
Reservoir in the City of San Jacinto is no longer being used as a reservoir;
rather it is used by the Eastern Municipal Water District as a recharge basin.
As such, it keeps only a low level of water and does not maintain an official
inundation map.
         C    I T Y      O F     H  E  M  E   T    G   E   N  E  R  A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                      6-14

                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                                    Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Jacinto
                                                                                                           Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   River
                                                                                                                                                                                  Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                    California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                    Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                              Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                 Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                            Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ian
                                                                                                                                                 en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                          Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Girard St                                                                                                                                Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                      Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                        ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                        Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                            Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kirby St
                                                                                                                                             ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                     HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                           ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                      AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SF
                                                                                                                                           A qu
                                                       Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                        AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                      ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                     San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                      Little Lake                          ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Elk St                                                                                                                                                                                  me
                                                                                                                                                                      Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                           Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                                   eH
                                                                                                                                 ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                     Lak
                                                                                                                                                    Warren Rd
                                                                                                                             Ste
                                                                                                                                                                 Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                                California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    go
                                                                                                                                                                ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pk
                                                                                                                                                              iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                         on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                  ni
                                                                                                                                                     g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                              e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       East
                                                                                                                                       Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bau t
                                                                              Saddle                                                                                                                                                   Dam                                                                                          Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ek
                                                                               Dam                                                                                                                                                                    Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                  Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       State St
                                                                       West                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                       Winchester Rd
                                                                       Dam                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 077 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                       Dam Inundation Areas                                                                                                               Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                       Diamond Valley Combined                                                                                            Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                          Lake Hemet                                                                                                         Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     Riverside County TLMA 2005                                                                                                                                        Little Lake                                                                                                        Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F i g u r e     6 . 3
                     1       0.5   0                             1              2                                                                                                                                                                                                                         River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DAM INUNDATION HAZARDS
                                                                                    Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
Back of Figure 6.3
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   6-16
 PUBLIC SAFETY
              6.5       T RANSPORT AT ION -R E LAT ED H AZARDS
              Hemet has a multifaceted transportation network that includes streets,
              railways, bike paths, equestrian paths, pedestrian walkways, and air
              transport. This network provides necessary mobility for persons and goods,
              but also poses safety risks to users and others in the vicinity.
              6.5.1         GROUND TRANSPORTATION
              Traffic Hazards
              Traffic accidents typically occur when streets become wet and when roads
              have curves, sight distances, or other design attributes that result in
              motorist errors. To combat this, the City adopted accepted standards for
              road construction and reconstruction and provides traffic control devices
              and regulations to promote orderly driving. The Circulation Element
              provides street classifications and typical cross-sections for the primary
              street and road network. The Circulation Element also provides guidance
              for incorporating bicycle and pedestrian traffic and for relieving through
              trips by freight trucks in residential and constrained areas.
              Railway Operations
              One railroad line runs through Hemet, the Burlington North Santa Fe spur
              line running from Riverside to San Jacinto. Currently, trains are operated on
              an on-demand basis and only a minimal number of trains use this line
              during a typical year. The current speed limit for trains is very slow because
              of the condition of the tracks. All street crossings are at-grade crossings that
              are located along streets classified as collectors or larger streets in the
              Circulation Element. Many of these crossings have signal lights and bells as
              a railroad warning and may include crossing gates. Additionally, trains are
              required to sound warnings as they approach crossings. There is no
              indication on record that the existing railroad operations pose a materially
              hazardous condition.
              Metrolink commuter trains are envisioned to provide service to Hemet in
              the future. At that time, measures for crossing safety must be evaluated
              relative to increased numbers of operations, train speed, and passenger train
              safety. Automatic audible warnings (instead of train whistles) installed at
              crossings should also be evaluated as both a noise and safety measure. Refer
              to the Circulation Element for further discussion.
              Pedestrian, Bicyclist, and Equestrian Safety
              As part of its sustainability efforts, the City is encouraging increased
              pedestrian and bicycling activity. The success of this effort heavily depends
              on the provision of a safe and well-connected transportation network.
              Safety practices and programs include off-road trail systems, better signage,
              better lighting, traffic calming devices, more crossing guards, more police
              patrols, and the Safe Routes to Schools Program. Additional discussion is
              provided in the Recreation Element, Art and Culture Element, and the
              Circulation Element.
C I T Y O F H   E  M  E   T     G   E  N   E  R  A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   6-17
                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
6.5.2          AIR TRANSPORTATION
Air crash incidents are rare, but when they do occur, the results can be
devastating. Such incidents concern residents of Hemet because Hemet-
Ryan Airport, a County-operated airport, is located on the western edge of
the City within the Planning Area. The airport serves small private aircrafts,
helicopters, and fire suppression aircraft. Since 1957, the California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) has based its
regional air attack base at Hemet-Ryan Airport.
The variety of air services and separate flight paths within the
region require regional coordination to prevent confusion in flight
patterns and to maintain safety. Potential damage to aircraft may
also result in loss of life and property along flight paths. To avoid
such outcomes, the Federal Aviation Administration has
established land use restrictions for areas surrounding airports and
flight paths. The Hemet-Ryan Airport Comprehensive Airport Land Use
Plan was prepared by the Hemet-Ryan Sub-Committee, comprised
of members from various departments and commissions within
the City of Hemet and Riverside County. This plan responds to
concerns about residential encroachment near the airport. Land Hemet-Ryan Airport with surrounding land
                                                                       uses and Diamond Valley Lake in the
use policies in the airport land use plan were structured around background
four distinct areas for land use compatibility within and
surrounding the airport. Airport and land use compatibility is
discussed in greater detail in the Land Use Element.
The Riverside County Airport Land Use Commission is in the process of
updating the airport land use compatibility plans and corresponding safety
zones for all airports under their jurisdiction, including Hemet-Ryan
Airport. Until adoption of an updated master plan and airport land use
compatibility plan, the 1992 plan and corresponding safety zones will be
used to guide future development in and around the airport. The Land Use
Element contains additional discussion on development issues and
opportunities in the airport area.
To ensure the highest level of safety at the airport, personnel at the airport
have extensive, ongoing safety training. Safety programs for private pilots
are also offered through the Federal Aviation Administration. In the event
of airport-related emergencies, the fire department uses the Hemet-Ryan
Airport Response Plan. The plan delineates fire and police department
responsibilities, offers response plans to address a range of aircraft
emergencies, and identifies the location of fire hydrants. According to the
response plan, the fire department has primary control over all fire
suppression and rescue activities and the police department is assigned to
control access to the location and obtain additional assistance if needed.
6.6      H AZARDOUS W ASTE
The California Health and Safety Code defines a hazardous material as any
material that, based on quantity, concentration, and physical or chemical
characteristics, poses a significant potential hazard to public health and
safety or to the environment. The manufacturing, use, and transport of
hazardous materials are considered potential hazards to human activity.
         C   I  T Y      O   F   H   E  M   E T     G   E  N  E   R  A L     P  L  A N     2 0 3 0
                                                       6-18
 PUBLIC SAFETY
              6.6.1          USE AND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE
              Commercial and industrial businesses located in Hemet and nearby
              communities use hazardous materials, including such businesses as dry
              cleaners, film processors, auto service providers, landscape contractors, and
              paint shops. Larger businesses, primarily in industrial areas, can generate,
              use, and/or store large quantities of hazardous products. The current
              regulatory environment provides a high level of protection from the
              hazardous materials manufactured, transported to businesses, and stored
              within the City. Federal, state, and county agencies enforce regulations for
              hazardous waste generators and users. Residents also use a range of
              household hazardous products. To address household hazardous wastes,
              the City cooperates with the Riverside County to sponsor programs that
              raise awareness of proper use, storage, and disposal of household hazardous
              wastes.
              The Hemet Fire Department is the first responder for hazardous materials
              incidents within the City. In 1996, the Hemet Fire Department established a
              Hazardous Materials Response Team. This team handles all types of
              hazardous materials incidents.
              6.6.2          TRANSPORT OF HAZARDOUS WASTE
              There are no hazardous waste landfills or collection centers in the City or
              Planning Area. Hazardous materials pass through the Hemet area on local
              streets or railways. The City has no direct authority to regulate their
              transport.
              The Riverside County Department of Environmental Health (DEH) is
              responsible for tracking hazardous materials handlers to ensure appropriate
              reporting and compliance. DEH regulates facilities that handle and store
              on-site specified types and quantities of hazardous and acutely/extremely
              hazardous materials through permitting, routine facility inspections, and
              development of detailed site plans indicating where hazardous materials are
              stored.
              6.7       F IRE P REVENTIO N            AND R ESPO NSE
              The Hemet Fire Department is responsible for fire suppression, rescue
              activities, and hazardous materials incidents within the City. In the Planning
              Area, Riverside County contracts with CAL FIRE for fire suppression and
              rescue activities. The City has entered into reciprocal mutual aid agreements
              with CAL FIRE and the Idyllwild Fire Protection District to expedite
              service delivery and ensure the best possible care for the community.
              6.7.1          FIRE HAZARDS
              Fire hazards generally fall into two categories: urban and wildland fires.
              Urban Fire Hazard
              Structural and automobile fires are the most common types of urban fires,
              and they can be caused by a variety of human, mechanical, and natural
              factors. Urban fires can spread to other structures or areas, particularly if
              not extinguished promptly. Proactive efforts, such as fire sprinkler systems,
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G  E  N   E   R  A L     P  L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                                  6-19
                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
fire alarms, fire resistant roofing and construction methods, can help reduce
the frequency and severity of urban fires.
Wildland Fire Hazard
The wildland fire threat is high in the area surrounding Hemet
because of the region’s weather, topography, and native
vegetation. Mild and wet winters result in an annual growth of
grasses and plants that dry out during the hot summer months
and provide fuel for wildfires in the autumn, when the Santa Ana
winds blow through the area., The Santa Ana winds are hot, dry
winds that blow across the region in the late fall and often fan
and help spread wildfires. Wildland fire threat is determined by
CAL FIRE, which classifies areas by fire hazard severity zones
labeled Moderate, High, or Very High. Figure 6.4, “Wildland Fire
Hazard Severity Zones,” shows how CAL FIRE rates the
                                                                        Simpson Park Hiking Trail in the Santa
potential for wildland fires in the Planning Area.                      Rosa Hills.
                                                                        Native vegetation becomes a fire hazard
The areas with the highest threat are generally the undeveloped,        during the hot summer months.
mountainous, and hilly sections of the Santa Rosa Hills, the
Lakeview Mountains, Bautista Canyon, and Diamond Valley Lake. Simpson
Park, a city-owned wilderness park located in the Santa Rosa Hills, is within
a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone and becomes a wildland fire hazard
from approximately June through November. The park contains numerous
hiking and off-road biking trails in an unspoiled natural environment. The
City is pursuing opportunities to reduce the threat of fire in the park and
enable it to be opened for recreational activity for a longer period of time
annually.
The City has incorporated into Chapter 14 of the municipal code
mechanisms and techniques to reduce the fire hazards to the development
that is encroaching into the hillsides and interface areas. Provisions include
ensuring adequate ingress and egress to enable safe and rapid passage of
both fire equipment and private vehicles; requiring all development to
provide a dependable supply of water for both normal daily consumption
and emergency fire needs; adopting building codes that establish structural
design and construction codes that reduce vulnerability to fire hazards such
as those regarding roofing materials, vents, setbacks, exterior siding,
overhangs, and glass; and requiring perimeter protection from native
vegetation.
CAL FIRE bases firefighting aircraft at the Hemet-Ryan Airport to provide
rapid response to wildfires throughout Riverside County, northern San
Diego County, and parts of Orange, San Bernardino, and Los Angeles
Counties. In 2010, equipment included one helicopter, one air-attack plane
that coordinates resources, and two air tankers. Hemet-Ryan also has the
capacity to host other aircraft as needed during a major fire.
6.7.2          FIRE DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
In 1908, the Hemet Fire Department consisted of 12 volunteers, a two-
wheel hose cart, nozzles, buckets, axes, two fire extinguishers, and a 30-foot
extension ladder. In 2010, the Hemet Fire Department responded from
four fire stations and maintained four Type I engine companies, a 102-foot
         C   I  T Y      O   F    H   E  M  E  T    G   E  N   E  R A L      P   L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                       6-20

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Jacinto
                                                                                                        Beech St                                 Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 River
                                                                                                                                                                                Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                 California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ee
                                                                                                              Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                         Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ian
                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ve
                                                                                                                                                              Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                    Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                      ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                     Florida Ave                                                                                            Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kirby St
                                                                                                                                          ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                                                   HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                         ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                    AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                           Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                      AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                    ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                  San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                    Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                         Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                               ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                                  Warren Rd
                                                                                                                           Ste
                                                                                                                                                               Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  go
                                                                                                                                                              ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pk
                                                                                                                                                            iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                       on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                   g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                            e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                     Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                Diamond Valley Lake
                                                        DIAMOND VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                               State St
                                                             WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 056 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                   LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                   Wildland Fire Hazard Severity Zone                                                                                                                Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                       Moderate                                                                                                                      Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                       High                                                                                                                          Street
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Railroad                                                                 Wildland Fire Hazard Severity Zones are
                                                                                                                                                                       Very High
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              established by CalFire of the California
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creek/Canal
                     CAL FIRE - FRAP 2007, 2008 (Draft), and 2010                                                                                  Responsibility Areas                                                                                                                                                                                                       Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.                                                                                                                    F i g u r e     6 . 4
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       River/Lake
                                                                                                                                                                       Federal Responsibility Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WILDLAND FIRE HAZARD
                                                                                                                                                                       State Responsibility Area
                     1       0.5   0                                 1       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SEVERITY ZONES
                                                                                 Miles                                                                                 Local Responsibility Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
Back of Figure 6.4
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   6-22
        PUBLIC SAFETY
                               aerial truck company, a hazardous materials response unit, three reserve
                               units, and various staff vehicles. Despite budget constraints that have
                               hindered the City’s ability to expand operations, the department still
                               manages to be very effective. In 2010, the department responded to over
                               12,000 calls, which is twice the activity level of comparable communities
                               with a minor increase in response time and no fire-related deaths.
                               Hemet Fire Department facilities currently include:
                                    Fire Training Center: 319 East Latham Avenue;
                                    Administrative Facility: 510 East Florida Avenue;
                                    Fire Station #1: 220 North Juanita Street;
                                    Fire Station #2: 895 West Stetson Avenue;
                                    Fire Station #3: 4110 West Devonshire Avenue;
                                    Fire Station #4: 1035 South Cawston Avenue; and
                                    Fire Station #5: 120 North Hemet Street (temporarily closed).
                               Riverside County/CAL FIRE facilities currently include:
                                    Little Lake Station #26: 25954 Stanford Street;
                                    Valle Vista Station #72: 25175 Fairview Street; and
                                    Air Attack—Helitack: Hemet-Ryan Airport.
                               The locations of existing facilities and potential facilities are shown in
                               Figure 6.5, “Fire Facilities Map.” The actual locations of future stations will
                               be determined based upon potential annexations and service demands.
                               Annexation of areas into the City would require an evaluation of CAL
                               FIRE facilities to determine whether annexed areas could be served by
                               existing facilities or would require additional facilities.
                                                 With the exception of Fire Station #4, the City’s fire stations
                                                 are aging and have obsolete designs for the current
                                                 personnel and equipment. Additionally, as the community
                                                 grows and the demographics change, the location, size, and
                                                 structure of the fire stations will need to evolve accordingly.
                                                 Fire Protection
                                                 Effective fire protection cannot be accomplished solely
                                                 through the acquisition of equipment, personnel, and
                                                 training. The area’s infrastructure also must be considered,
                                                 including adequacy of nearby water supplies, transport
                                                 routes and access for fire equipment, addresses and street
                                                 signs, and maintenance. The City of Hemet has adopted the
                                                 Uniform Fire Code with City amendments. The City’s fire
                                                 chief is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of
                                                 the Uniform Fire Code throughout the City.
Hemet Fire training exercise
       C   I  T Y      O   F H  E   M   E  T      G    E  N  E  R   A L      P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                      6-23

                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY
A fire facilities plan was prepared in 2009 to ensure adequate current and
future coverage in the City. The City has entered into mutual and reciprocal
agreements with Riverside County/CAL FIRE and the Idyllwild Fire
Protection District to ensure expedited service delivery to residents of the
Hemet community.
Additionally, the fire department evaluated its emergency medical response
and concluded that it should incorporate a fire-based paramedic program to
better serve the residents of Hemet. A tiered implementation plan has been
approved by Riverside County for County areas, but implementation has
been delayed by economic conditions. The City of Hemet Fire Department
is the last medium to large city in the State of California that does not
currently offer fire-based paramedic services.
The Insurance Services Office (ISO) provides rating and statistical
information for the insurance industry in the United States. To do so, ISO
evaluates a community’s fire protection needs and services and assigns each
community a Public Protection Classification rating. The rating is
developed as a cumulative point system, based on the community’s fire-
suppression delivery system, including fire dispatch (operators, alarm
dispatch circuits, and telephone lines available), fire department (equipment
available, personnel, training, and distribution of companies), and water
supply (adequacy, condition, number, and installation of fire hydrants).
Insurance rates are based on this rating, with the best rating being a Class 1
and the worst being a Class 10. In 2008, the City of Hemet had a Class 4
ISO rating.
Fire Incidents
Table 6.1 lists the type of incidents the fire department responded to in Fiscal
Year 2009/2010 (July 2009 through June 2010). The majority of calls were for
emergency medical services. The overwhelming amount of medical aid call is
largely due to the significant senior population that resides in the City.
                                           Table 6.1
      Fire Department Incidents by Type (July 2009–June 2010)
                Type of Incident                        Number of Incidents
 Emergency medical service/rescue                            10,174
 Service call                                                  827
 Good intent                                                   529
 Fire                                                          289
 False call                                                    195
 Hazardous condition                                           129
 Rupture/explosion                                              5
 Severe weather                                                 1
 Other                                                          4
 Blank or invalid                                               2
 Total                                                        12,155
 Source: City of Hemet Fire Department, July 2010
           C    I  T Y        O   F      H    E   M E T  G  E   N  E  R  A L  P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                           6-24

X06268298.11 079 01/24/2012
                                                     LEGEND
                                                     Fire Facilities                                   Hemet Fire Department Fire Stations        Fire Station #5 (Closed)                  Hemet City Boundary
                                                             Future Fire Station Sites                       Fire Station #1                                                                Planning Area
                                                                                                                                           Riverside County/CAL FIRE facilities
                                                       Hemet Fire Department Administrative Facilities                                                                                      Street
                                                                                                             Fire Station #2                      Little Lake Station #26
                 Sources:                                                                                                                                                                   Railroad
                                                              Fire Training Facility
                 Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                                                                                                             Fire Station #3                      Valley Vista Station #72                  Creek/Canal          F i g u r e   6 . 5
                 ESRI 2010
                                                              Administrative Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                            River/Lake
                 1      0.5     0            1 2                                                             Fire Station #4                      Air Attack - Helitack: Hemet/Ryan Airport                       FIRE FACILITIES
                                                 Miles                                                                                                                                        H e m e t      G e n e r a l   P l a n
                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
Back of Figure 6.5
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   6-26
         PUBLIC SAFETY
                                Measure C
                                Ballot Measure C, approved by voters in the City of Hemet on June 7, 1988,
                                established a set of mandated performance standards for several public
                                services in Hemet, including fire protection. The performance standard for
                                fire protection in Hemet is a response time of 5 minutes or less, for 80
                                percent of fire and emergency medical calls, provided on both a citywide
                                and response area basis. In 2010, the average first unit response time was
                                just under 7 minutes.
                                Fire Prevention and Emergency Preparation Programs
                                The Hemet Fire Department offers various programs to help residents and
                                businesses be better prepared for emergencies. Cardiopulmonary
                                Resuscitation (CPR) and first-aid classes are offered on a regular basis at the
                                department’s Fire Training Center. The department also sponsors the City
                                of Hemet Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES). The RACES
                                organization consists of approximately 90 federally licensed amateur radio
                                operators specifically trained to handle emergency disaster communications.
                                All members of RACES are registered through the City of Hemet as State
                                of California Volunteer Disaster Workers. The fire department manages
                                OES and is charged with coordinating emergency response and terrorism-
                                related programs with other jurisdictions and City departments. It conducts
                                public education activities including the distribution of educational materials
                                relating to rural, urban, flood-related, and lightning-related fires, as well as
                                fire safety information for families, children, the elderly, and the disabled.
                                6.8       C RIME P R EVENTION               AND      L AW
                                          E NFOR CEMENT
                                The Hemet Police Department exists to provide superior service and
                                protection to the residents, merchants, and visitors to the City. The
                                Department is responsible for law enforcement and public safety activities
                                within the City. In the Planning Area, the Riverside County Sheriff’s
                                Department provides that function.
                                            6.8.1        LAW ENFORCEMENT CONSIDERATIONS
                                            The City of Hemet is one of the oldest incorporated cities in the
                                            San Jacinto Valley and in Riverside County. As is the case with
                                            long-established cities, Hemet neighborhoods range from new to
                                            older neighborhoods. Generally, housing within the City is more
                                            affordable than elsewhere in southern California, especially
                                            because of the number of senior developments and mobile home
                                            parks. This affordability has attracted a large rental base. Some
                                            neighborhoods have experienced deterioration or absentee or
                                            nonengaged landlords. Many of the deteriorated areas and areas
Hemet Police Department Headquarters on
                                            with nonengaged landlords have higher crime rates than other
Latham Street                               neighborhoods.
                                Although the population of the City has grown significantly over the past
                                decades, and the demographics are evolving from a senior community to a
                                family community, the crime rate has remained relatively stable. Despite
                                budget constraints and a recent reduction in the number of sworn officers,
       C   I  T Y    O   F   H    E  M   E   T    G   E  N  E   R  A L      P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                     6-27

                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
the Hemet Police Department had a crime clearance rate of 67.1 percent in
2009, which was the second highest rate in Riverside County. Countywide,
the clearance rate was 42.9 percent.
6.8.2         POLICE DEPARTMENT RESOURCES
The Hemet Police Department consists of sworn officers, support staff,
and a large contingent of part-time volunteers. Police department facilities
include:
    Headquarters: 450 E. Latham Street;
    West End Sub Station: 3663 W. Florida Ave; and
    East End Sub Station: 2047 E. Florida Ave.
The substations are staffed exclusively by volunteers and are generally open
weekdays and sometimes during special events. The department comprises
operations and support functions as summarized below:
    The Patrol Division provides the most visible and largest function of
    the department. Patrol officers are the first responders to all life-
    threatening and emergency calls. In addition, they provide service,
    crime deterrence, and investigative support.
    The Investigative Unit consists of the Detective Bureau, Crime
    Suppression Unit, and the Property and Evidence Bureau. In additional
    to solving crimes and suppressing gangs, the Crime Suppression Unit
    works with state, county, and local officials to identify sites vulnerable
    to terrorist activity and participates in the Riverside/San Bernardino
    Counties Terrorist Early Warning Group and the Riverside County
    Gang Task Force.
    The Traffic Bureau is tasked with keeping the streets safe by enforcing
    traffic laws, responding to vehicular accidents, and investigating and
    reconstructing major automobile collisions.
    The Community Services Bureau comprises officers and civilians
    dedicated to community policing and education and includes school
    resource officers, volunteers, and Police Explorers.
    The Communications Center is staffed 7 days a week, 24 hours a day
    by certified public safety 911 dispatchers. The center receives nearly
    30,000 911 calls every year in addition to over 110,000 calls on the
    regular business lines. In addition, the police department’s mobile
    command center enables the department to set up an incident
    command post in the field to control and coordinate major crime
    scenes, civil disturbances, and disaster response.
Police Incidents
In 2010, the Hemet Police Department received 57,429 calls for service.
Response times to calls vary by incident. For urgent, high-priority calls, the
response time was about 6 minutes. For routine, nonurgent calls, the
response time averaged about 24 minutes. Table 6.2 shows incidents in
         C  I  T Y      O  F     H  E   M  E   T   G    E  N E   R   A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       6-28

 PUBLIC SAFETY
              2010 and serves as an example of the numbers and types of incidents
              handled by the police department.
                                                       Table 6.2
                       Police Department Incidents by Type January 2010—
                                                   December 2010
                              Type of Incident                     Number of Incidents
               Total violent crime                                       984
                  Simple assault                                         631
                  Other violent crime                                    353
               Total property crime                                     2,990
                  Theft (not burglary or vehicle)                       1,707
                  Burglary & vehicle, arson                             1,283
               Juvenile arrests                                          651
               Adult arrests                                            2,902
               Traffic citations                                        2,038
               Accident reports                                          596
               Field interview reports                                  1,350
               Source: City of Hemet Police Department
              Measure C
              Ballot Measure C, approved by voters in the City of Hemet on June 7, 1988,
              established a set of mandated performance standards for several public
              services in Hemet, including police services. The performance standard for
              police services in Hemet is a 7-minute average response time for emergency
              calls maintained within urban areas, and a 9-minute average response time
              for emergency calls maintained within rural areas. The police department
              has met this standard.
              Police Department Programs
              Community involvement is an integral part of crime prevention. The
              Hemet Police Department offers many safety and security programs to
              residents and local businesses through the Community Services Bureau,
              which is geared toward educating the public. Programs range from an
              Alzheimer’s/Dementia registry to programs to reduce retail crime.
              Police department officials and community members have expressed the
              importance of youth-oriented activities to decrease or prevent criminal
              activity. The Support Services Division of the Hemet Police Department is
              actively involved in the community and runs several youth programs:
                   Hemet Police Activities League (PAL) is a nonprofit organization
                   dedicated to building the bond between “kids and cops” by providing a
                   safe place for youth between the ages of 8 and 17 years to hang out
                   after school and in the summer. Supervision is provided by police
                   volunteers who provide mentorship, serve as positive role models, and
                   establish relationships with at-risk youth. Hemet PAL offers a variety of
C I T Y O F H  E   M    E    T     G    E   N   E   R  A L    P  L A N   2 0 3 0
                                       6-29

                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY
     activities such as a skate park, a BMX track, video games, pool tables,
     and ping pong.
     The Hemet Police Department Explorer Program is geared toward
     guiding young people interested in careers in law enforcement. Young
     men and women between the ages of 14 and 20 learn the importance of
     teamwork, developing leadership skills, and ethical methods of problem
     solving while having fun in a law enforcement environment.
     The Hemet Police Department and the Hemet Unified School District
     have also partnered in the support and funding of a School Resource
     Officer (SRO) Program with five SROs. An SRO is a fully-trained
     police officer assigned to work in district middle schools and high
     schools. The SRO receives additional in-depth training to promote an
     effective school-based policing program.
6.8.3           CRIME PREVENTION THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL
                DESIGN
The City of Hemet has a tradition of reviewing development projects by
including the City departments responsible for public safety. This tradition
results in development designs that better promote natural surveillance,
reduce hiding places, and otherwise promote defensible space, thereby
minimizing criminal activity. This is referred to as Crime Prevention
Through Environmental Design.
A key feature of this approach is the incorporation of defensible space by
providing ease of surveillance by neighbors, fostering a sense of
territoriality, achieving natural access control, and increasing physical
security of areas. Surveillance is the principal weapon in the protection of
defensible space by keeping intruders easily observable. This is likely to
mean locating doors in highly visible locations and providing windows from
which residents can watch public spaces. Fostering a sense of territoriality is
also important to support defensible space because territoriality encourages
individuals to take control of their environment and defend it against attack.
Potential offenders recognize this sense of territory. Natural access control
can be achieved by clearly distinguishing public areas and private areas. The
concept of increasing physical security of areas is not to create an
impenetrable fortress, but rather to make it more difficult and time
consuming to enter a location. The design of a development can have a
major impact on the future potential for crime to occur in the vicinity.
6.8.4           CRIME FREE RENTAL-HOUSING PROGRAM
The City of Hemet also conducts the Crime Free Rental-Housing Program,
which is designed to help residents, owners, managers, and anyone
associated with rental properties keep illegal activity off their property. City
Police and Code Enforcement staff conduct this program to avoid
problems with rental housing. The program’s concept is to:
          C   I  T Y    O   F    H   E  M  E  T     G    E  N  E   R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        6-30

 PUBLIC SAFETY
                   involve rental stakeholders to address issues at the earliest stage;
                   provide tools for rental managers and residents to self-police crime and
                   safety issues;
                   avoid a spiral of crime; and
                   reduce blight problems by requiring property maintenance.
              The program began in the 1990s. Since that time, there has been voluntary
              participation by approximately 70 apartment projects and mobile home
              parks within the City. In 2008, mandatory participation for newly
              constructed projects was established by City Council Resolution. As a result
              of the program, the community has experienced benefits in the form of:
                   reduced cost of police response,
                   fewer code enforcement complaints,
                   stable and satisfied tenant base with less tolerance for crime, and
                   manager capability for quick responses to problems and a reduced
                   susceptibility to problem-related lawsuits from tenants after using
                   routine inspection formats and checklists.
              6.9       C RITICAL F ACILITIES                AND     E MERGE NCY
                        P REPAR EDNE SS
              Although the Hemet Fire and Police Departments are tasked with the
              responsibility of fire prevention/suppression and protecting residents and
              businesses, public safety agencies team up during emergencies. These
              teaming arrangements are handled through mutual aid agreements, which
              obligate fire and/or police departments to help each other under predefined
              circumstances. Mutual aid agreements obligate fire departments to respond
              outside of their district upon request for assistance. The Hemet Fire and
              Police Departments have mutual aid agreements with all Riverside County
              law enforcement and fire protection agencies to help each other at times of
              emergencies and planned law enforcement events in each other's
              jurisdiction.
              6.9.1          CRITICAL FACILITIES
              If a disaster or an emergency of a larger scale should occur, certain types of
              facilities and infrastructure are critical. Most notably, this consists of police
              and fire facilities and vehicles, emergency health and urgent care facilities
              and service vehicles, communication facilities, fire and police facilities,
              electric substations, access capability for both emergency responders and
              for evacuation, capability to respond to incidents related to hazardous
              materials, water supply facilities, sewage treatment plants, and evacuation
              destinations.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G   E  N   E  R  A L       P L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                   6-31
                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY
At the time of an emergency, various other facilities and entities that are not
usually considered critical will play an important role:
     animal control services (handled by the Ramona Humane Society);
     grocery stores;
     gasoline stations;
     equipment rental stores, hardware stores, and home improvement stores;
     hotels, motels, and shelters;
     meal distribution services;
     mortuaries;
     schools and other large buildings;
     taxis and fleet maintenance facilities;
     towing and impound services; and
     transportation services.
6.9.2          EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Hemet sets emergency preparedness as one of its top priorities,
recognizing that proper planning at all levels in the
community—from response agencies to businesses and
residents—will minimize the adverse effects of natural and
human-caused disasters.
To provide basic training in disaster survival and rescue skills
and improve the ability of Hemet residents and businesses to
survive until professional responders or other assistance arrives,
the City has implemented a Community Emergency Response
Team (CERT) Program. Training for the CERT Program is
provided by City of Hemet employees who are certified by Hemet Police vehicles are outfitted with
FEMA as lead instructors.                                            computers to ensure expeditious
                                                                     communication and data analysis
In case of emergencies, principal responsibility for evacuations lies with the
police department. The City coordinates with Red Cross when shelter
locations are needed. The City also uses an Emergency Advisory System
that televises emergency information to residents and businesses.
The City updated its EOP in 2007 and is planning another update in 2011.
The plan is described above in Section 6.2. The City also joined with
Riverside County to submit a Riverside Operational Area Multi-
Jurisdictional LHMP, as described above in Section 6.2.
Emergency preparedness is also closely associated with the risk of terrorist
activity. The police department is a member of and participant in the
Riverside/San Bernardino Counties Terrorist Early Warning Group and
works with state, County, and local officials to identify sites vulnerable to
terrorist activity. Upon receipt of a warning or the observation that an
emergency situation is imminent or likely to occur, the City of Hemet
initiates actions to prepare for the incident. This may involve setting up a
          C  I  T Y     O   F     H   E  M   E T    G    E  N E  R   A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                        6-32

 PUBLIC SAFETY
              Management Watch, alerting appropriate departments and agencies, and in
              some instances alerting the public. A Management Watch may entail
              collecting and analyzing information relative to the situation, directing
              response to the degree allowable, and referring other matters to the
              appropriate level for executive decision.
              6.10 N OISE
              In recognition of the adverse health effects associated with excessive noise,
              the California Government Code (Section 65302[f]) identifies the types of
              community noise to be addressed in the General Plan. The General Plan
              must identify noise sources from:
                   highways and freeways;
                   primary arterials and major local streets;
                   passenger and freight on-line railroad operations and ground rapid
                   transit systems;
                   ground facilities and maintenance functions related to airport
                   operations (commercial, general aviation, heliport, and military airport
                   operations; aircraft overflights; jet engine test stands);
                   local industrial plants, including, but not limited to, railroad
                   classification yards; and
                   other stationary ground noise sources identified by local agencies as
                   contributing to the community noise environment.
              The General Plan must then identify existing and future noise contours for
              these sources. Noise considerations inform the land use plan for the
              community. To protect noise-sensitive uses the General Plan sets goals,
              policies, and implementation programs to address existing and future noise
              conditions. For the purposes of the General Plan, noise-sensitive land uses
              include schools, hospitals, rest homes, long-term care facilities, mental
              health care facilities, and residences.
              6.10.1         NOISE CHARACTERISTICS AND MEASUREMENT
              Noise is commonly defined as unwanted sound. At high enough levels,
              noise can become a community health problem. As a form of
              environmental stress, noise can interfere with human activities such as
              sleep, conversation, recreation, and tasks demanding concentration.
              Sound is a change in air pressure. Sound pressure levels are expressed in
              decibels. Although the human ear is able to detect a wide range of sound
              pressure changes, the ear is not equally sensitive to all sound frequencies.
              To account for this variation in sensitivity, the dB scale is typically adjusted.
              The adjusted scale (dBA) is weighted based on the sensitivity of the human
              ear to noise of particular frequencies. Most jurisdictions use the dBA scale
              to measure noise levels and regulate environmental noise.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T    G   E   N  E   R A L       P  L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                   6-33
                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY
Health considerations associated with excessive noise exposure include
hearing loss or damage, interference with oral communication, and
interference with sleep. Prolonged exposure of a person to sound levels
over 85 dBA causes hearing loss. At 60 dBA, noise makes understanding
speech difficult. Sound levels over 40 to 45 dBA can disturb sleep.
6.10.2         CURRENT NOISE CONDITIONS
Figure 6.6, “Existing Noise Contours,” shows noise contours in the
planning area from 2006. The contours generally represent average noise
levels based on major noise sources in the community. The contours assist
in setting land use policy and development standards. Given the
topographic complexity of the Hemet/San Jacinto Valley, these contours
are not absolute lines of demarcation, but should be considered
conservative estimates of noise exposure, to be supplemented by detailed
and project-specific study as needed. Appendix E contains noise contour
data tables.
The noise level measurements were collected at 18 locations throughout
Hemet, including 15 short-term measurements, and three long-term
measurements. Vehicle axle counts were conducted at three locations.
Criteria for site selection included geographical distribution, land uses likely
to include noisy activities, and proximity to transportation facilities and
sensitive receptors (such as schools and hospitals). The primary purpose of
noise monitoring was to establish a noise profile for the community that
could be used to determine areas of concern.
6.10.3         NOISE SOURCES
Traffic and Roadways
Traffic noise is a major contributor to the noise environment in the
community. Major roadways, including Florida Avenue, State Street,
Stetson Avenue, Sanderson Avenue, Warren Road, Devonshire Avenue,
and San Jacinto Street, carry high volumes of traffic at relatively high
speeds, generating noise that affects surrounding neighborhoods. Those
streets that carry a higher proportion of truck traffic also have higher levels
of noise and vibration.
As development continues to occur in Hemet, increased traffic volumes on
an expanded roadway network will extend and expand the noise contours,
as shown in Figure 6.7, “Future Noise Contours.” Construction of the State
Route (SR) 79 freeway will introduce a new noise source in the western part
of the planning area, but the final configuration of this roadway has not
been determined, and the noise contours could vary depending on the
profile of the road, the travel speeds, and the type of site improvements
that are made. General Plan policies and programs consider a changing
noise environment and address potential future land use incompatibilities in
areas adjacent to major roadways.
         C   I  T Y      O   F    H  E  M  E  T     G    E  N  E  R  A L      P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        6-34

                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City of                                                                                                                                                  County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                               Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Jacinto
                                                                                                        Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               River
                                                                                                                                                                               Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                 California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                 Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ee
                                                                                                              Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave             Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                         Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ian
                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                           Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                  Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ve
                                                                                                                                                             Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St                                                                                                                         Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                               Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                              Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                   Myers St                                                                                                                        Florida Ave                                                                              Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ave                                             Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                       r id
           Florida Ave                                                     Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                           Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                    Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Meridian St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kirby St
                                                                                                                                          ct
                                                                                                                                        ed u                      HEMET-RYAN                              AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                      AILW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                   AIRPORT                        R                                                          Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                    Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                               SF
                                                                                                                                    A qu
                                                           Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                    AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                   ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Stetson Ave                                                                                     Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                  San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                 ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      et M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                   Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 em
                                                                                                                                        Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                              ts   on                                                                                                                           Chambers St                                                                                                                                           Lak
                                                                                                                                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                          Ste
                                                                                                                                                              Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                     RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nig                          State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      o   ni
                                                                                                                                                             ky                                                                                                    P   ky
                                                                                                                                                       n   iP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   o                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                ig                                                                                                                                                                                                      bel                                       PARK
                                                                                                                                           en                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                                    Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DIAMOND VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                        DIAMOND VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                               State St
                                                             WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 094 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                    Noise Levels                                                                   Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                    60dBA CNEL                                                     Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                    65dBA CNEL                                                     Street
                     Sources:
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005, 2007                                                                                                                              70dBA CNEL                                                     Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creek/Canal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F i g u r e     6 . 6
                     1       0.5   0                                 1       2                                                                                                                                                                     River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EXISTING NOISE CONTOURS
                                                                                 Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
Back of Figure 6.6
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   6-36
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                  County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave             Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                           Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                  Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Girard St                                                                                                                         Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                              Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                        Florida Ave                                                                              Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ave                                             Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                    r id
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                           Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                    Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Meridian St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                     ed u                      HEMET-RYAN                              AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                   AILW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                        R                                                          Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                    Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                 A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                 AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Stetson Ave                                                                                     Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                 ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   et M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              em
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                           Chambers St                                                                                                                                           Lak
                                                                                                                                             Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                     RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nig                          State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o   ni
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                                    P   ky
                                                                                                                                                    n   iP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                o                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                             ig                                                                                                                                                                                                      bel                                       PARK
                                                                                                                                        en                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                         Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 096 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                 Noise Levels                                                                   Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                 60dBA CNEL                                                     Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                 65dBA CNEL                                                     Street
                     Sources:
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005, 2007                                                                                                                           70dBA CNEL                                                     Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creek/Canal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F i g u r e     6 . 7
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                     River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2030 NOISE CONTOURS
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
Back of Figure 6.7
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   6-38
 PUBLIC SAFETY
              Hemet-Ryan Airport
              Hemet-Ryan Airport is used primarily by private single- and twin-engine
              aircraft, turboprops, business jets, helicopters, sailplanes and tow planes. A
              California Department of Forestry and Firefighting’s fire attack base is also
              located at the airport. A total of 70,000 aircraft were estimated to be
              operated during 2011 including sailplane operations, and could increase to
              87,150 aircraft operations by 2031. Noise contours for the airport
              (Figure 6.8, “Airport Noise Contours”) identify areas most affected by
              aircraft noise under typical air traffic patterns. General Plan policies and
              programs consider the importance of the airport and seek to protect airport
              operations from incompatible land uses. A new Airport Master Plan is
              currently under preparation which proposes no near-term expansion of the
              runway based on the low projected volume of flights and the absence of the
              larger firefighting tankers at the airport. This change in the master plan may
              also result in modifications to the noise contours for the airport, and will
              need to be updated in the General Plan once the new Airport master Plan is
              adopted.
              Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad Corridor
              A Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) Railway line runs through the
              planning area, connecting Hemet’s industrial areas to San Bernardino,
              Riverside, and points beyond. The line currently carries limited freight
              traffic; rail traffic is not a major contributor to the current community noise
              environment. However, as future growth occurs next to the railroad
              corridor and when Metrolink extends passenger service to Hemet along this
              line, potential for land use incompatibility may increase. To protect railroad
              operations, noise contours guide land use decisions in the immediate area.
              General Plan policies and programs anticipate the changing noise
              environment that will result with future growth and direct incompatible
              uses away from the railroad corridor.
              Other Noise Sources
              Other noise sources include both stationary sources (ongoing operations
              that generate noise) and temporary noise sources such as emergency
              vehicles and special events. Stationary noise sources in Hemet include
              primarily commercial and industrial activities. Because most business
              activities are low intensity and conducted indoors, noise generally is limited
              to loading dock operations, frequent truck uses, mechanical equipment, and
              outdoor paging systems. The City regulates maximum noise levels from
              commercial and industrial properties and also regulates construction activity
              to prevent disturbances at night.
              Noisy activities at industrial, commercial, recreational, and some public
              facilities (such as the outdoor play areas of schools) can also adversely affect
              adjacent sensitive land uses. Strategies for controlling stationary noise sources
              focus on two objectives: (1) preventing the introduction of new stationary
              noise sources near noise-sensitive uses and (2) preventing encroachment of
              noise-sensitive uses on stationary noise sources. The first objective can be
              achieved by applying noise performance standards to proposed stationary
              noise sources. The second objective can be met by requiring that new noise-
              sensitive uses near existing stationary noise sources include project features
              that enable compliance with noise performance standards.
C I T Y O F H   E  M    E   T     G    E  N  E  R  A L     P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                      6-39

                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
6.10.4        NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
Noise Standards
The City has developed the following noise and land use compatibility
designations: normally acceptable, conditionally acceptable, normally
unacceptable, and clearly unacceptable. Using these designations, the City
has established both interior and exterior noise standards.
Community noise is commonly described in terms of the ambient, or all-
encompassing, noise level associated with a given environment. Numerous
metrics have been developed to account for the way people perceive sound.
The most common of these descriptors are the average equivalent noise
level (Leq), the maximum noise level (Lmax), and the community noise
equivalent level (CNEL). Leq represents a measure of the average noise level
at a given location over a specified period of time. CNEL is based on a 24-
hour Leq, which weights evening and nighttime noise levels to account for
increased sensitivity of people to noise occurring during these periods.
Hemet’s Land Use Compatibility Standards are presented in Table 6.3.
These standards, which use the CNEL noise descriptor, apply to land uses
exposed to noise levels generated by transportation-related sources.
Residential uses and hotels or overnight lodgings are most sensitive to their
noise environment and thus have the lowest range of normally acceptable
noise exposure levels. Other uses, such as fairgrounds, are less sensitive and
can occur in areas with higher existing noise levels.
Land use compatibility standards for exterior and interior noise are shown
in Table 6.4. These standards are maximum interior noise levels for new
residential development. Insulation and design features must be employed
to reduce interior ambient noise levels to these levels.
The City applies a second set of standards when planning and making
development decisions to ensure that stationary noise sources (e.g., HVAC
units, industrial operations) do not adversely affect noise-sensitive land
uses. These hourly and maximum levels (expressed in Leq and Lmax) for
stationary noise sources are designed to protect noise-sensitive land uses
adjacent to stationary sources from excessive and continuous noise. Table
6.5 summarizes stationary source noise standards. These standards
represent the acceptable exterior noise levels at the sensitive receptor’s
property line.
         C  I  T Y      O  F     H  E  M   E  T     G    E N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       6-40

                                                   California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                      Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                      Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                   Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                              War r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     State St
                                                                                                                   en
                                                                                                                                                                                      Menlo Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oakland Ave
                                                                                                                                Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                 Devonshire Ave
                                                                                                                                      Myers St                                                                                                                     Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gilber t St
                                                                                                                                                                   Ave
                                                                                                                                                             a
                                            Florida Ave                                                                                                 ri d
                                                                                                                                                   Fl o                               Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave
                                                                                                              ct
                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                                                           Kirby St
                                                                                                                                     HEMET-RYAN                       LWA
                                                                                                             edu
                                                                                                                                      AIRPORT                 R AI                                                          Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                           SF
                                                                                                         A qu
               Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                       AT&
                                                                                                        iego
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Stetson Ave
                                                                                                      San
                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                                      Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thornton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Elk St
                                                                                                                                       Fisher St
                                                                                                     n    Ave                                                                                                                Chambers St
                                                                                                 tso
                                                                                                                    Warren Rd
                                                                                            St e
                                                                                                                                 Mustang Way
                                                               California Ave                                                                                                                                                                        State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   eni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                ky                                                                                              iP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ky
                                                                                                                           iP
                                                                                                                         on
                                                                                                                    ig
                                                                                                                  en
X06268298.11 098 06/11                                                                                       om
                                                                                                         D
                                                                            LEGEND
                        Sources:
                        Mead and Hunt 2003                                  Noise Contours
                        Census Tiger Line Data 2005                                                 60 CNEL                                                                                                                                          F i g u r e                       6 . 8
                        ESRI 2010
                        0      0.25   0.5     1
                                                                                                    65 CNEL                                                                     AIRPORT NOISE CONTOURS (EXISTING)
                                                  Miles                                                                                                                                               H e m e t                   G e n e r a l                                  P l a n
                                                                                         PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                            Table 6.3
                   Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Environments
                                                                     Community Noise Exposure
        Land Use Category                                                       CNEL, dBA
                                                      55          60            65     70     75      80
Residential
Transient lodging: hotels, motels
Schools, libraries, churches,
hospitals, nursing homes
Auditoriums, concert halls,
amphitheaters
Sports arena, outdoor spectator
sports
Playgrounds, neighborhood parks
Golf courses, riding stables,
Water Recreation, Cemeteries
Office buildings, business
commercial and professional
Industrial, manufacturing,
utilities, agriculture
Notes: CNEL = community noise equivalent level; dBA = A-weighted decibel.
            Normally Acceptable—Specified land use is satisfactory, based on the assumption that any
            buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise requirements
            Conditionally Acceptable—New construction or development should be undertaken only after a
            detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features are
            included in the design.
            Normally Unacceptable—New construction or development should be discouraged. If new
            construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirement
            must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
            Clearly Unacceptable—New construction or development clearly should not be undertaken.
Source:     Adapted from the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research in 2003
          C   I  T Y        O  F       H    E   M    E   T      G    E   N   E   R A L    P L A  N  2 0 3 0
                                                                    6-42

 PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                             Table 6.4
                                    Land Use Compatibility Standards for
                                             Exterior and Interior Noise
                                                                               Maximum Allowable Noise
                                                                                             (CNEL)
                                     Land Use                              Exterior (dBA)           Interior (dBA)
              Residential and mixed use with residential
                                                                                    65                       45
              component
              School classrooms                                                     65                       45
              School playgrounds                                                    70                        --
              Libraries                                                              –                       50
              Hospitals, convalescent homes—sleeping
                                                                                     –                       40
              areas
              Hospitals, convalescent homes—living areas                             –                       50
              Passive recreation areas                                              65                        –
              Active recreation areas                                               70                        –
              Commercial and industrial areas                                       70                        –
              Office areas                                                           –                       50
              Notes: CNEL = community noise equivalent level; dBA = A-weighted decibel; – = not applicable/not
              available.
              The acceptable interior noise level for other uses depends upon the specific nature of the indoor
              activity.
                                                             Table 6.5
                                   Noise Level Performance Standards for
                                        Nontransportation Noise Sources
                                                                       Daytime                     Nighttime
                      Noise Level Descriptor                     (7 a.m.–10 p.m.)              (10 p.m.–7 a.m.)
               Hourly average level (Leq)                               60 dBA                         45 dBA
               Maximum equivalent levels (Lmax)                         75 dBA                         65 dBA
               Notes: Each of the noise levels specified shall be lowered by 5 decibels for simple tone noises,
               noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for recurring impulsive noises. These noise level
               standards do not apply to residential units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial
               uses (e.g., caretaker dwellings). The noise standard is to be applied at the property lines of the
               affected land use.
C I T Y O F H  E    M    E    T      G    E    N   E    R   A L         P    L   A    N       2 0 3 0
                                         6-43

                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                         6-44
 PUBLIC SAFETY
              G OALS AND P OLICIES
              P UB LIC S AFETY
              GOAL         Reduce risks to the community from seismic activity
                           and geologic conditions, including ground shaking,
              PS-1         fault rupture, liquefaction, and landslides.
              POLICIES
              PS-1.1      Seismic Standards Strictly enforce the most recent state
                          regulations governing seismic safety and structural design
                          to minimize damage to structures from seismic or geologic
                          hazards.
              PS-1.2      Risk Reduction Reduce the risk associated with
                          structures that would likely be seriously damaged during a
                          major earthquake, such as those located in high-risk
                          seismic areas, critical or emergency facilities, and buildings
                          that do not meet current seismic codes through on-site
                          building placement, seismic retrofitting, development
                          outside of geologically hazardous zones, and other means.
              PS-1.3      Slope Stability Require adequate mitigation of potential
                          impacts from erosion, slope instability, or other hazardous
                          slope conditions for development occurring on slope and
                          hillside areas.
              PS-1.4      Subsidence Encourage and support efforts for long-term,
                          permanent monitoring of topographic subsidence in all
                          producing groundwater basins, irrespective of past
                          subsidence.
              PS-1.5      Dedicated Open Space Encourage that areas be
                          dedicated as open space when necessary and appropriate
                          to protect property, public health, and safety from hazards
                          such as earthquake fault zones or floodplains.
              PS-1.6      Alquist-Priolo Require that all new development comply
                          with the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act.
              PS-1.7      Emergency Access Seek to maintain emergency access in
                          the event of an earthquake by siting arterial roadways to
                          avoid fault zones and designing roadways to mitigate
                          damage.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T  G   E  N   E  R A L       P  L A  N     2 0 3 0
                             6-45
                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
GOAL          Reduce risk of property damage and human injury
              from flood hazards.
PS-2
POLICIES
PS-2.1       Clear Floodways Ensure that waterways used for flood
             control are kept clear of obstructions and are regularly
             maintained.
PS-2.2       Flood Area Preservation Encourage flood control
             infrastructure that does not reduce the natural character or
             limit use of the site.
PS-2.3       New Development Minimize additional flood risk
             exposure in developing areas.
PS-2.4       System Evaluation Cooperate with Riverside County
             Flood Control and Water Conservation District to evaluate
             the effectiveness of existing flood control systems and
             improve those systems as necessary to meet capacity
             demands.
PS-2.5       Master Planning Promote the timely completion of
             master drainage plans and improvement projects that
             affect the City.
PS-2.6       100-Year Flood Zone Require new construction within
             the 100-year flood zone to meet National Flood Insurance
             Program standards.
PS-2.7       Evacuation Plans Develop and maintain flood zone
             inundation evacuation plans in cooperation with the
             Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation
             District and the Hemet Fire Department.
GOAL          Protect lives and property from the potential dangers
              associated with ground transportation.
PS-3
POLICIES
PS-3.1       Safe Pedestrian Design Enhance and maintain
             pedestrian safety through the inclusion of well-designed
             streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, traffic control devices, and
             school routes throughout the City.
PS-3.2       Traffic Safety Minimize the potential for accidents
             involving railways, automobiles, pedestrians, and bicyclists
             by implementing roadway improvements identified in the
             Circulation Element, working closely with the Hemet
             Police Department, and encouraging proactive programs
             aimed at improving drivers’ behavior.
       C I T Y     O   F    H    E  M E  T     G    E  N E   R A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   6-46

 PUBLIC SAFETY
                          Protect lives and property from the potential dangers
              GOAL        associated with the use of Hemet-Ryan Airport while
              PS-4        recognizing and maintaining its function as a part of
                          Hemet’s transportation system.
              POLICIES
              PS-4.1     Land Use Compatibility Minimize the risk of potential
                         hazards associated with aircraft operations at the Hemet-
                         Ryan Airport through the implementation of the Hemet-
                         Ryan Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, and review of
                         legislative land use changes and ordinances located within
                         the Airport Influence Area by the Airport land Use
                         Commission (ALUC).
              PS-4.2     Airport Safety Zones Consult with Riverside County to
                         maintain adequate open space or compatible development
                         adjoining the Hemet-Ryan Airport as required for safety as
                         identified in the updated and adopted Hemet-Ryan Airport
                         Land Use Compatibility Plan and the Hemet-Ryan Airport
                         Master Plan.
              PS-4.3     Accommodate Regional Needs Support efforts of
                         Hemet-Ryan Airport to accommodate the present and
                         future needs of the California Department of Forestry and
                         Fire Protection’s regional air-attack base provided that the
                         safety of surrounding residents and businesses is
                         maintained, and ongoing traffic circulation is not impacted.
              PS-4.4     Project Compatibility Review As part of the City’s
                         development review process, applications for the
                         development of land located within the Hemet-Ryan
                         Airport’s areas of potential risk shall be reviewed for
                         compatibility with both the City of Hemet’s General Plan
                         and the Hemet-Ryan Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan,
                         and the Airport Land Use Planning Handbook issued by
                         the California Department of Transportation Division of
                         Aeronautics, as may be amended from time to time.
              PS-4.5     Project Suitability Review Each development application
                         shall be reviewed in light of the best and most current
                         evidence regarding airport use, noise, potential risks, and
                         safety practices, to ensure that each development is
                         suitable for its proposed location.
              PS-4.6     Project Noise Mitigation Each development application
                         shall be required to demonstrate that the project will utilize
                         construction technologies that are designed to reduce
                         interior noise in airport adjacent uses.
              PS-4.7     Avigation Easements Avigation easements shall be
                         required for all land uses in Safety Areas I, II, and III as
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N   E  R   A L     P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                            6-47

                                                                         PUBLIC SAFETY
              part of the development review process. .As appropriate,
              based on location, avigation easements may be required in
              other areas of the City or Planning Area.
PS-4.8        Project Operating Compatibility                 Development
              applications shall be required to demonstrate that the
              project is compatible with the following airport land use
              restrictions:
              a.   Any use that would direct a steady light of red, white,
                   green, or amber colors associated with airport
                   operations toward an aircraft engaged in an initial
                   straight climb following takeoff or toward an aircraft
                   engaged in a straight final approach toward a landing
                   at the Hemet-Ryan Airport, other than a navigational
                   signal light or visual approach slope indicator
                   approved by the Federal Aviation Administration,
                   shall be prohibited.
              b. Any use that would cause sunlight to be reflected
                   toward an aircraft engaged in initial straight climb
                   following takeoff or toward an aircraft engaged in a
                   straight final approach toward a landing at the Hemet-
                   Ryan Airport shall be prohibited.
              c.   Any use that would generate smoke or vapor, that
                   could attract large concentrations of birds, or that may
                   otherwise affect safe air navigation within the area
                   shall be prohibited.
              d. Any use that would generate electrical interference that
                   may be detrimental to the operation of aircraft and/or
                   aircraft instrumentation shall be prohibited.
              e. Any proposed use within the City that is 200 feet or
                   more in height shall be reviewed by the Airport Land
                   Use Commission and the FAA in regard to airport
                   safety and operational considerations.
PS-4.9        Aviation Wildlife Hazards Projects that would create a
              potential to attract hazardous wildlife to, or in the vicinity
              of, the Hemet-Ryan Airport shall be reviewed for
              consistency with the standards, practices, and suggestions
              recommended by the U.S. Department of Transportation,
              Federal Aviation Administration.
PS-4.10       Airport Expansion Consult with Riverside County to
              insure that any updates to the Airport Master Plan,
              including proposed expansion of the airport land uses or
              the runways, will not create noise and safety impacts to
              surrounding land uses or disrupt the existing and planned
              circulation system surrounding the airport.
        C I T Y      O  F      H  E  M  E  T     G   E  N  E  R   A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    6-48
 PUBLIC SAFETY
              GOAL        Protect lives and property from dangers associated
                          with the storage, use, and transport of hazardous
              PS-5        materials.
              POLICIES
              PS-5.1     Enforce Regulations Implement and enforce regulations
                         from federal and state authorities on the use, storage,
                         disposal, and transportation of hazardous materials.
              PS-5.2     Maintain Response Programs Maintain effective
                         programs for responding to hazardous material
                         emergencies.
              PS-5.3     Interagency Cooperation Continue to cooperate with
                         state, county, and other local agencies in the coordination
                         of hazardous material control, cleanup, disposal, and
                         emergency response policies and operations.
              PS-5.4     Multi-Jurisdictional Local Hazard Mitigation Plan
                         Implement goals and objectives contained in the Riverside
                         County Operational Area Multi-Jurisdictional Local Hazard
                         Mitigation Plan to reduce risks from natural and other
                         hazards and to serve as a guide for decision makers as they
                         commit resources to reducing the effect of natural and
                         other hazards.
              PS-5.5     Hazardous Material Locations Require that uses that
                         treat hazardous wastes generated off-site and that may
                         pose a significant risk to public health by using, storing,
                         transporting, or disposing of hazardous materials and
                         wastes be located in areas planned and zoned for industrial
                         use and not in proximity to residential, school, or other
                         sensitive land uses.
              PS-5.6     Development Standards Ensure that new development
                         sites have been sufficiently surveyed for contamination,
                         particularly if near existing or former toxic or industrial
                         sites; adequately remediated, if necessary, to meet all
                         applicable laws and regulations; suitable for human
                         occupation; and protected from known hazardous and
                         toxic materials.
              PS-5-7     Public Awareness Raise public awareness of the
                         appropriate manner to dispose of household hazardous
                         waste through education and/or collection events.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N  E  R   A L     P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                            6-49
                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
GOAL          Protect lives, property, and natural resources from
              the potentially disastrous effects of fire hazards.
PS-6
POLICIES
PS-6.1       Fire Protection Standards Adopt and enforce federal,
             state, and local construction and design standards
             regarding fire prevention and protection, particularly for
             high-occupancy, dependent-care, or essential facilities.
PS-6.2       Individual Fire Protection Systems Require all new
             commercial, industrial, institutional, multiple-family
             residential, and mixed-use developments to install fire
             protection systems and encourage the use of automatic
             sprinkler systems where not otherwise required by existing
             codes and ordinances.
PS-6.3       Safe Structures Continue to conduct building and fire
             code inspections and enforcement to ensure safe
             structures and the protection of land and property.
PS-6.4       Safety Exits Require all new development projects to
             incorporate adequate egress systems in their design and
             encourage existing structures to upgrade their egress
             systems.
PS-6.5       Wildland Fire Evaluation Require an evaluation of all
             new development that will be located in or adjacent to
             wildland areas to assess the development’s vulnerability to
             fire and its potential as a source of fire.
PS-6.6       Roadway Fire Buffer Coordination Coordinate with
             Riverside County to evaluate and establish a fire buffer
             program along heavily traveled roadways to prevent fuel
             buildup.
PS-6.7       Wildland Fire Protection Implement brush clearing, fuel
             modification plans, and other fire prevention programs on
             open space lands and landscape buffers that balances
             reducing the possibility for the encroachment of wildland
             fires onto inhabited areas with maintaining accessibility for
             recreational purposes.
PS-6.8       Fire Hazard Mitigation Mitigate existing fire hazards
             related to urban development or patterns of urban
             development as they are identified and as resources permit.
PS-6.9       Fire Prevention Education Continue education
             programs on preventing fires, monitor their effectiveness,
             and expand or alter the programs, as necessary.
       C I T Y     O   F     H  E   M   E  T     G   E   N E R A L       P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    6-50

 PUBLIC SAFETY
              GOAL        Ensure that an adequate service level of fire
                          protection is provided for all residents, visitors, and
              PS-7        businesses throughout the City of Hemet.
              POLICIES
              PS-7.1     Fire Service Response Assess the impacts of incremental
                         increases in community development density and intensity
                         and subsequent impacts on traffic congestion, municipal
                         infrastructure capacity, fire hazards, and emergency
                         response times. Ensure through the development review
                         process that new development and redevelopment will not
                         result in a reducing fire protection services below
                         acceptable, safe levels with adequate fire flows and
                         response time of five minutes or less for 80 percent of fire
                         and emergency calls on both a citywide and response area
                         basis.
              PS-7.2     Strategic Plan Maintain and implement a fire department
                         strategic plan to address staffing and facility needs, service
                         goals, deployment strategies, and other departmental
                         issues.
              PS-7.3     Development Impacts Require development projects to
                         contribute development impact fees, form public safety
                         districts, or other financing mechanisms based on their
                         proportional impact and on-going demand for fire
                         services.
              PS-7.4     Emergency Access Require adequate access for
                         emergency vehicles, including adequate street widths,
                         vertical clearance on new streets, and multiple points of
                         access.
              PS-7.5     Fire Protection Adequacy Maintain adequate and
                         appropriate personnel, emergency vehicles, and other
                         firefighting equipment and technology to respond to fires
                         and other disasters or emergencies.
              PS-7.6     Protect Insurance Services Office Rating Pursue
                         strategies that maintain and improve the City's Insurance
                         Services Office rating.
              PS-7.7     Mutual Aid Agreements Continue to coordinate fire
                         protection services with Riverside County, the California
                         Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, Idyllwild Fire
                         Protection District, and all other agencies and districts with
                         fire protection powers.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N   E  R  A L     P   L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                            6-51
                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
GOAL          Ensure a secure environment with minimized risk of
              crime for residents, visitors, and businesses
PS-8          throughout the City of Hemet.
POLICIES
PS-8.1       Police Services Ensure through the development review
             process that new development and redevelopment will not
             result in a reduction of law enforcement services below
             acceptable, safe levels with a seven minute average
             response time for emergency calls within urban areas, and
             a nine minute average response time for emergency calls in
             rural areas. Maintain sufficient and adequate facilities,
             personnel, and services to meet the community’s needs.
PS-8.2       Strategic Plan Maintain and implement a police
             department strategic plan to address staffing and facilities
             needs, service goals, deployment strategies, and other
             departmental issues.
PS-8.3       Development Impacts Require development projects to
             contribute development impact fees, form public safety
             districts, or other funding mechanisms based on their
             proportional impact and ongoing demand for police
             services.
PS-8.4       Emergency Communication Ensure that outlying areas
             and newly annexed areas can be served by emergency
             communication systems as new development occurs.
PS-8.5       Grants Pursue the availability of federal or state grants to
             offset required additions to law enforcement staffing
             and/or equipment.
PS-8.6       Neighborhood Watch Continue to promote the
             establishment of neighborhood and business watch
             programs to encourage community participation in crime
             prevention and increased awareness of any suspicious
             activity.
PS-8.7       Youth Programs Maintain and expand, as necessary,
             youth programs aimed at crime prevention and gang and
             drug diversion.
PS-8.8       Partnerships Continue to work with other law
             enforcement agencies, the school districts, businesses,
             nonprofit organizations, and community residents to
             enhance safety throughout the City.
       C I T Y      O  F    H  E  M   E  T    G   E  N  E   R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                 6-52

 PUBLIC SAFETY
              GOAL        Improve community safety and reduce opportunities
                          for criminal activity through appropriate physical
              PS-9        design.
              POLICIES
              PS-9.1     Defensible Space Require new developments to
                         incorporate site design that help ensure maximum visibility
                         and security for entrances, pathways, streets, sidewalks,
                         corridors, public and private open space, and parking lots
                         and structures.
              PS-9.2     Adequate Project Lighting Require appropriate lighting
                         to be incorporated that provides adequate exterior
                         illumination around commercial, business-park, public,
                         parking, and multiple-family structures.
              PS-9.3     Safety in Land Use and Design Promote land use and
                         design policies and regulations that encourage a mixture of
                         compatible land uses to promote and increase the safety of
                         public use areas and of pedestrian travel.
              PS-9.4     Crime Free Rental-Housing Programs Continue to
                         encourage residents, apartment managers, and landlords to
                         become involved in the Crime Free Rental-Housing
                         Programs as a way to reduce crime in apartment
                         communities and other rental housing.
              GOAL        Reduce impacts related to safety hazards through a
                          high level of emergency preparedness.
              PS-10
              POLICIES
              PS-10.1    Outreach Programs Support community participation in
                         safety and crime prevention through public outreach
                         programs under the police, fire, and emergencies services
                         departments.
              PS-10.2    Disaster Vulnerability Review Work with and encourage
                         essential service providers (water, sewage, electrical power,
                         communication, transportation, natural gas, and liquid fuel
                         systems) and transportation agencies to periodically
                         evaluate the vulnerability of their systems in the event of a
                         disaster.
              PS-10.3    Disaster Plans Review and consistently update the City’s
                         disaster contingency plans. Recommend that plans for
                         critical facilities and service providers cover the adequate
                         provision of emergency supplies and power supplies to
                         provide essential services.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N   E   R   A L     P  L  A N     2 0 3 0
                            6-53

                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
PS-10.4       Mutual Aid Agreements Maintain mutual aid agreements
              and communication links with federal, state, county, and
              other local agencies to respond to emergencies.
PS-10.5       Protect Critical Facilities Continue to prepare and
              implement measures to protect critical facilities from
              criminal or terrorist attacks.
GOAL           Manage noise levels through land use planning and
               development review.
PS-11
POLICIES
PS-11.1       Noise Standards Enforce noise standards to maintain
              acceptable noise limits and protect existing areas with
              acceptable noise environments.
PS-11.2       Design to Minimize Noise Encourage the use of siting
              and building design techniques as a means to minimize
              noise.
PS-11.3       Evaluate Noise Evaluate potential noise conflicts for
              individual sites and projects, and require mitigation of all
              significant noise impacts (including construction and
              short-term noise impacts) as a condition of project
              approval.
PS-11.4       Protect Noise-Sensitive Uses Protect noise-sensitive
              uses from new noise sources.
GOAL           Minimize noise conflicts from transportation sources
               and airports.
PS-12
POLICIES
PS-12.1       Traffic Noise Minimize noise conflicts between current
              and proposed land uses and the circulation network by
              encouraging compatible land uses around critical roadway
              segments with higher noise potential.
PS-12.2       Railroad Noise Minimize noise conflicts between current
              and proposed land uses and railroad corridors by
              protecting railroad corridors from encroachment of
              incompatible land uses and by adhering to the City’s noise
              standards presented in Table 6.4.
PS-12.3       Airport Noise Ensure that future development in the
              vicinity of Hemet-Ryan Airport is compatible with current
              and projected airport noise levels in accordance with the
              noise standards presented in Table 6.4.
        C I T Y     O   F    H   E   M   E  T   G  E  N  E  R   A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                  6-54

 PUBLIC SAFETY
              PS-12.4    Airport Conflicts Review and respond to proposals
                         involving new flight patterns, more intense flight
                         operations over the planning area, or relocation or
                         extension of runways at the Hemet-Ryan Airport, which
                         would create the potential for noise conflicts with sensitive
                         land uses.
              GOAL        Minimize noise conflicts with stationary noise
                          generators.
              PS-13
              POLICIES
              PS-13.1    Protect Valuable Noise Sources Protect the continued
                         viability of economically valuable noise sources such as
                         commercial and industrial facilities and the Hemet-Ryan
                         Airport.
              PS-13.2    New Sensitive Uses Restrict the location of sensitive land
                         uses near major noise sources to achieve the standards
                         presented in Table 6.4.
              PS-13.3    Prevent Encroachment. Prevent the encroachment of
                         noise sensitive land uses into areas designated for use by
                         existing or future noise generators.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E   N  E  R  A L      P  L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                           6-55
                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                         6-56
                                             CHAPTER 7                                   OPEN SPACE AND
                                                                                            CONSERVATION
                                             Preserved Open Space at Four Seasons Senior Community
The City of Hemet recognizes its role
as steward of the natural and biological
resources within its jurisdiction. The
                                             T    he purpose of the Open Space and Conservation Element is fourfold:
City intends to take an active role in           to identify the natural, open space, and environmental resources located
the management and conservation of               within the City and Planning Area;
these resources for the benefit of current
and future residents.                            to address the issues and opportunities that enable a balance between
                                                 resource conservation and long-term residential and economic growth;
                                                 to establish goals and policies that allow the City to be an active
                                                 participant in the determination of the City and Planning Area’s
                                                 environmental future; and
                                                 to respond to recent legislation concerning climate change and the
                                                 reduction of greenhouse gases (GHGs), which promotes the City’s core
                                                 value of becoming a sustainable community.
                                             7.1      S CO PE     AND C ONTEXT
                                             State law requires that an Open Space Element and a Conservation
                                             Element be included in all local government general plans. The elements
                                             have been combined for this General Plan because of the interrelationship
                                             of the goals and policies of these elements and the overlap in state
                                             requirements.
                C    I  T Y         O    F H  E  M   E  T     G   E   N  E  R  A L      P  L A  N   2 0 3 0
                                                                  7-1

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Additionally, a sustainability section has been added to the element to
comply with recent legislation concerning climate change and the reduction
of GHGs. The section discusses the City’s approach to creating a
sustainable community and to meeting reduction targets for GHG
emissions, as required by state law.
Open Space
The “Open Space” section guides the comprehensive and long-range
preservation and conservation of “open space land,” defined in California
state statute as any parcel or area of land or water that is essentially
unimproved and devoted to open space use. This portion of the element
addresses:
     open space for the preservation of natural resources, such as:
         undeveloped wilderness lands including canyons, hillsides, and
         areas with significant rock formations;
         biological resources that create habitat for endangered species and
         other wildlife; and
         lakes, creeks, and other water resources;
     open space used for the managed production of resources, such as:
         agricultural lands;
         mineral resources; and
         areas required for the recharge of groundwater basins;
     open space for outdoor recreation and scenic enjoyment, such as:
         areas of cultural resources;
         areas for recreational use and linkages; and
         trees, greenbelts, and landscaped open space; and
     open space to protect public health and safety, such as areas that
     require special management (e.g., earthquake fault zones, high fire risk
     areas, and floodplains).
Conservation
The “Conservation” section provides direction regarding the conservation,
development, and utilization of natural resources. Its requirements overlap
those related to open space, land use, safety, and circulation. This portion
of the element addresses the following:
     management of water resources;
     assessment, protection, and improvement of air quality consistent with
     regional air quality and transportation plans and reduction targets for
     GHG emissions; and
     conservation, development, and utilization of energy resources.
         C   I  T Y      O  F     H  E  M   E  T    G  E   N E   R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       7-2

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              Sustainability
              The “Sustainability” section outlines the City’s approach to reducing GHG
              emissions in response to the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, the
              Greenhouse Gas Emissions Act of 2007, the Sustainable Communities and
              Climate Protection Act of 2008, and other federal and state legislation. The
              City has threaded its sustainability goals and policies throughout the
              General Plan with a focus on energy and water conservation and reducing
              GHG emissions. These goals and policies generally fall into the following
              categories:
                   Smart Growth: Land Use and Community Design,
                   Transportation and Connectivity,
                   Water Conservation,
                   Air Quality,
                   Energy and Resource Conservation,
                   Waste Reduction, and
                   Economic Sustainability.
              7.1.1         RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS IN THE
                            GENERAL PLAN
              State planning law requires the Open Space and Conservation Element to
              be consistent with other General Plan elements. The Land Use; Circulation;
              Housing; Public Safety; Recreation and Trails; and Community Services and
              Infrastructure Elements relate most closely to the Open Space and
              Conservation Element.
              Land Use Element
              The Land Use Element provides a planned land use pattern, identifying
              residential, commercial, business park, professional office, and public land
              use designations. Public and private lands intended for conservation and
              open space are identified using the open space land use designation. These
              areas are identified in the Open Space and Conservation Element and are
              preserved for such purposes.
              Circulation Element
              The Circulation Element identifies and ensures access to open spaces and
              recreational areas requiring access. The Circulation Element assigns the
              location of streets and trail systems for pedestrians, bicyclists, and
              equestrians that provide access to open space areas.
              Public Safety Element
              The Public Safety Element addresses public health and safety within the
              Planning Area, including open space lands such as parks, trails, lakes, and
              wildland areas. Public health issues include natural and human-made
              hazards in open space.
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E   T     G  E   N E  R  A L     P   L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                   7-3

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Recreation and Trails Element
The Recreation and Trails Element identifies the parks, off-road trails, and
open space recreational areas within the City and the Planning Area. The
goals and policies for these recreational areas are consistent with the
preservation and conservation goals and polices in the Open Space and
Conservation Element.
Community Services and Infrastructure Element
The Community Services and Infrastructure Element addresses provision
of the City’s utilities: water, sewer, drainage, solid waste, power, and
telecommunications. Conservation of these utilities is a key aspect of both
elements and they include consistent goals and policies.
Sustainability Matrix
For ease of reference, Appendix A is a sustainability matrix that organizes
the City’s sustainability policies by General Plan element and category:
Smart Growth – Land Use and Community Design, Transportation and
Connectivity, Water Conservation, Air Quality, Energy and Resource
Conservation, Waste Reduction, and Economic Sustainability.
7.2       I SSUES     AND O PPORTU NITIES
The Hemet area is known for its ideal winter weather, natural beauty,
hillsides, canyons, lakes, fields, and outdoor recreational venues. One of the
best economic opportunities available to the City is the maximization of
these open space resources through careful planning, conservation, and
management to emphasize the intrinsic value of nature, demonstrate the
economic strength of green development, increase tourism, attract new
financial investment, and maintain a high quality of life for Hemet residents.
Taking advantage of this opportunity is also one of the City’s primary
challenges.
This element addresses the following issues and opportunities:
     balancing and regulating development to enable healthy economic
     growth while preserving Hemet’s natural beauty;
     evaluating open space options in conjunction with new development to
     protect irreplaceable natural resources such as hillsides, scenic vistas,
     natural vegetation, and wildlife habitat areas;
     instituting policies and practices that conserve water and energy
     resources while maintaining a high quality of life for residents and
     encouraging business growth;
     reducing air pollutants and greenhouse gas emissions without negatively
     affecting economic growth and development; and
     establishing a framework for integration and coordination of
     sustainability goals and policies throughout the General Plan.
          C   I T Y      O   F     H  E  M  E   T    G  E   N  E R   A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        7-4

              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
                                       7.3       R ELAT ED P R OGRAM S , P LANS ,                  AND
                                                 R EGULATI ONS
                                       Many plans and programs enacted through federal, state, and local
                                       legislation relate directly to the goals preserving, conserving, and managing
                                       natural resources and open space. These plans and programs are
                                       administered by agencies with powers to enforce federal, state, and local
                                       laws.
                                       7.3.1          FEDERAL REGULATIONS
                                       Clean Air Act
                                       The federal Clean Air Act forms the basis of the national air pollution
                                       control effort. Basic elements include national ambient air quality standards
                                       for major air pollutants, hazardous air pollutants standards, state attainment
                                       plans, motor vehicle emissions standards, stationary source emission
                                       standards and permits, acid rain control measures, stratospheric ozone
                                       protection, and enforcement provisions.
                                       Clean Water Act
                                       The federal Clean Water Act provides the statutory basis for the National
                                             Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, which is discussed under the
                                             Community Facilities and Services Element of the General Plan.
                                             Endangered Species Act
                                             The federal Endangered Species Act (ESA), administered by the U.S.
                                             Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), applies to federally listed species
                                             and habitat occupied by federally listed species. Federally listed species
                                             are most likely to occur within riparian habitat areas in floodplains
                                             within the Planning Area. ESA Section 9 forbids specified acts that
                                             directly or indirectly harm listed species. Section 9 also prohibits
View of Diamond Valley Lake from the         “taking” any species of wildlife or fish listed as endangered. These
Santa Rosa Mountains.                        restrictions apply to all federal agencies and all persons subject to U.S.
                                             jurisdiction.
                                       National Energy Act
                                       The National Energy Act of 1978 was a legislative response by the U.S.
                                       Congress to the 1973 energy crisis. It includes the following statutes:
                                            Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act (Public Law 95-617),
                                            Energy Tax Act (Public Law 95-318),
                                            National Energy Conservation Policy Act (Public Law 95-619),
                                            Power Plant and Industrial Fuel Use Act (Public Law 95-620), and
                                            Natural Gas Policy Act (Public Law 95-621).
                                       U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of
                                       Fish and Game
                                       Both the USFWS and California Department of Fish and Game (DFG) are
                                       charged with protecting wildlife resources. Special permits are required for
                                       alteration, dredging, or any activity in a lake or stream and for other
             C  I  T Y       O  F    H  E   M   E   T    G   E   N  E   R  A L     P   L  A N      2 0 3 0
                                                             7-5

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
activities that may affect fish and game habitat. Both agencies are also
responsible for protecting sensitive plant and animal species as described
above. Future development in Hemet that has the potential to affect
wildlife habitat will be subject to the regulations of both of these federal
and state agencies.
7.3.2          STATE REGULATIONS
California Endangered Species Act
The California Endangered Species Act (CESA) generally parallels the main
provisions of the ESA and is administered by DFG. CESA prohibits the
“taking” of listed species except as otherwise provided in California law.
Any future development or redevelopment in Hemet that has the potential
to affect wildlife will be subject to CESA restrictions.
California Energy Commission
The California Energy Commission is the state’s primary agency that
handles energy policy and associated planning issues. The commission is
responsible for:
     forecasting future energy needs and keeping historical energy data,
     licensing thermal power plants that are 50 megawatts or larger,
     promoting energy efficiency through appliance and building standards,
     developing energy technologies and supporting renewable energy, and
     planning for and directing the state response to an energy emergency.
California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the
California Legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
environmental analysis of projects that might affect the environment. The
provisions of the law and environmental review procedure are described in
the CEQA statutes and guidelines. Implementation of CEQA ensures that
during the decision making stage of development, City officials and the
general public will be able to assess the environmental impacts associated
with private and public development projects and ensure that the impacts
are appropriately mitigated.
California Green Building Standards Code
The 2010 California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen) took
effect January 1, 2011. CALGreen is the first statewide mandatory green
building code in the nation. It sets minimum standards for all new
structures as part of a broad effort to significantly reduce California’s
carbon emissions. The code has approximately 52 mandatory measures and
an additional 130 optional provisions. The code addresses compliance
verification by using the existing building code enforcement structure.
Public agencies incorporate CALGreen code provisions into their building
inspection procedures.
          C  I  T Y      O   F    H   E M   E  T     G   E   N E R A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                         7-6

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (Assembly
              Bill 1881)
              Assembly Bill (AB) 1881 took effect in 2010, updating AB 325. Principally,
              the law restricts overspraying irrigation systems, encouraging drip systems
              that are more efficient, and disallows overhead irrigation in parkway
              landscape areas that are less than 8 feet wide. The law also establishes a
              water budget for how much water may be applied to landscape areas. Cities
              and counties in California are required to either adopt the model ordinance
              or an equivalent local ordinance. The City adopted a local ordinance that is
              codified as Article XLVIII of the Hemet Municipal Code.
              Natural Community Conservation Planning Act
              DFG has identified certain species and habitat as necessary to maintain the
              continued viability of biological communities that are affected by human
              changes to the landscape. The purpose of natural community conservation
              planning is to sustain and restore these species and habitats. It is also the
              policy of the state to conserve, protect, restore, and enhance natural
              communities. The state may acquire a fee or less-than-fee interest in lands
              consistent with approved natural community conservation plans and may
              provide assistance with the implementation of those plans.
              State Water Resources Control Board
              The State Water Resources Control Board was created by the California
              Legislature in 1967. The mission of the board is to ensure the highest
              reasonable quality for waters of the state, while allocating those waters to
              achieve the optimum balance of beneficial uses. The joint authority of water
              allocation and water quality protection enables the State Water Resources
              Control Board to provide comprehensive protection for California's waters.
              Nine Regional Water Quality Control Boards (RWQCB) were created to
              develop and enforce those water quality objectives and implementation
              plans that will best protect the beneficial uses of the state's waters,
              recognizing local differences in climate, topography, geology, and
              hydrology. Hemet’s Planning Area is mostly within the jurisdiction of the
              Santa Ana RWQCB and partially within the San Diego RWQCB.
              State Water Conservation Plan – 20x2020 (SBx 7-7)
              The State Water Conservation Plan affects the supply of water and water
              agencies throughout the state. The Plan outlines two key initiatives: fixing
              the Sacramento Delta and the state’s water infrastructure, and improving
              regional water supply reliability and conservation. The Plan also mandates a
              20 percent reduction in per-capita water use by 2020.
              State Legislation Regarding Climate Change and Sustainability
              California has recently enacted legislation that requires local jurisdictions to
              develop sustainable community strategies regarding climate change and to
              ensure sustainable development. These mandates will significantly affect
              City policies and procedures.
              Assembly Bill 32, Global Warming Solutions Act
              The Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 requires the California Air
              Resources Board (ARB) to develop regulations and market mechanisms to
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E  T     G   E  N  E   R   A L    P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                  7-7

                                             OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
reduce California’s GHG emissions to their 1990 levels by 2020. Mandatory
caps on GHG emissions will begin in 2012 for significant GHG sources.
The caps will be reduced over time to meet the 2020 goals.
Senate Bill 97, Greenhouse Gas Emissions Act
The Greenhouse Gas Emissions Act of 2007 states that GHG emissions
and their impacts are appropriate subjects for CEQA analysis. Senate Bill 97
directed the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research to develop
CEQA guidelines to mitigate GHG emissions or the effects of GHG
emissions. Amendments to CEQA establishing new guidelines for GHG
emissions became effective on March 18, 2010.
Senate Bill 375, Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act
The Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008 aligns
regional transportation planning efforts, regional GHG reduction targets,
and land use and housing allocation to enhance jurisdiction’s ability to meet
AB 32 goals. SB 375 requires metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs)
to adopt a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) or Alternative Planning
Strategy, which will prescribe land use allocation in that MPO’s regional
transportation plan. ARB, in consultation with MPOs, is required to
provide each affected region with regional reduction targets for GHGs
emitted by passenger cars and light trucks in the region for 2020 and 2035.
These reduction targets will be updated every 8 years, but can be updated
every 4 years if advancements in emissions technologies affect the reduction
strategies to achieve the targets. ARB is also charged with reviewing each
MPO’s SCS or Alternative Planning Strategy for consistency with its
assigned GHG emission reduction targets. If MPOs do not meet the GHG
reduction targets, transportation projects located in the MPO boundaries
would not be eligible for funding after January 1, 2012.
7.3.3          REGIONAL PLANS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Green Coalition of San Jacinto Valley
The Green Coalition of San Jacinto Valley is working with the Cities of
Hemet and San Jacinto to achieve its mission of creating a sustainable
community for the San Jacinto Valley. The Coalition believes that a
sustainable community is a community of residents and neighbors who
work together to balance ecological, economic, and social needs to ensure a
clean, healthy, and safe environment for all members of our society and for
the next generations of the San Jacinto Valley.
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD) is a consortium
of 26 cities and water districts, including Eastern Municipal Water District
(EMWD). MWD provides drinking water to nearly 19 million people in
southern California. MWD constructed Diamond Valley Lake, a water
storage reservoir holding up to 264 billion gallons and located within the
Planning Area. Diamond Valley Lake was completed in December 1999
and filled by the Colorado River Aqueduct by 2003. While the main mission
of MWD is to provide its service area with adequate and reliable supplies of
high-quality water, MWD is a partner in the Southwestern Riverside County
Multi-Species Reserve. The reserve includes 11,000 acres surrounding and
         C   I  T Y    O   F     H   E  M  E  T    G  E   N E   R   A L    P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                      7-8

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              connecting Diamond Valley Lake with Lake Skinner via the 2,500 acre Dr.
              Roy Shipley Reserve, which MWD purchased as partial mitigation for
              Diamond Valley Lake construction.
              Regional Transportation Plan and Improvement Program (RTIP)
              The Southern California Association of Governments has adopted a
              regional transportation plan and a regional transportation improvement
              program to fund and implement the projects and programs listed in the
              regional transportation plan. These plans work together to help improve
              vehicular traffic within the region and thereby reduce air pollution.
              Riverside County Integrated Project (RCIP)
              The Riverside County Integrated Project (RCIP) is a comprehensive, three-
              part, integrated program balancing the housing, transportation, and
              economic needs of a large population with the existing environment and
              available natural resources. The RCIP accommodates continued growth by
              integrating the direction in the Riverside County General Plan with
              transportation and environmental issues. The three parts of the RCIP are
              the Western Riverside County Multiple-Species Habitat Conservation Plan
              (MSHCP); Community and Environmental Transportation Acceptability
              Process (CETAP); and the Riverside County General Plan.
              South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
              The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan mandates a variety of
              measures to reduce emissions and improve air quality. These measures
              include the requirement that each jurisdiction develop an air quality
              component within its general plan.
              Southern California Edison
              Southern California Edison (SCE) is the primary electricity supply company
              for much of southern California, including the City of Hemet. SCE’s
              environmental commitment is to provide leadership in areas that include
              renewable resources, green building, energy efficiency, environmental
              protection, resource protection, and advanced metering to automatically
              reduce power consumption in key situations.
              Southern California Gas Company
              Southern California Gas Company is the primary natural gas provider for
              much of southern California, including the City of Hemet. The gas
              company's commitment to the environment includes incorporating
              environmentally friendly practices into its facilities and daily operations;
              minimizing the impact of operations on wildlife, air, and water; investing in
              green technologies; and helping customers save energy and resources.
              Water Districts Serving the City/Planning Area
              Three water districts serve the City of Hemet and the Planning Area. The
              districts are described below and further discussed in the Community
              Services and Infrastructure Element. Figure 5-1 shows the service areas of
              each district.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G  E   N  E  R  A L     P   L  A N     2 0 3 0
                                   7-9

                                               OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
City of Hemet Water District
The City supplies potable water within a 5.25-square-mile service area
located mostly within the central part of the incorporated City. The City
relies on groundwater as its supply source, which is pumped by eleven City-
owned wells. The City plans to continue the use of local groundwater as its
primary supply source through 2030; however, the City recognizes the need
to implement water conservation measures and a combination of basin
recharge measures through both natural and artificial means.
Eastern Municipal Water District
EMWD generally serves the City south of Stetson Avenue, west of
Sanderson Avenue, and north of Menlo Avenue. EMWD’s water
conservation goal is to reduce per capita consumption by 25 percent over
the next 2 decades. To achieve that goal, EMWD promotes targeted
programs, offers rebates, educates consumers, and helps customers locate
and fix irrigation leaks. EMWD also offers recycled water services and
participates in a joint program with the US Bureau of Reclamation that
created multipurpose wetlands, which serve as both a wastewater treatment
research center and wildlife habitat.
Lake Hemet Water District
Lake Hemet Water District (LHWD) generally serves the eastern portion of
the City and Planning Area. LHWD’s water conservation goal is to reduce
per capita consumption. To achieve that goal, LHWD provides free water
audits of homes and businesses within their service area to help residents
and businesses identify ways to reduce water consumption. LHWD also
participates in MWD’s rebate program to replace nonconserving fixtures
with water-efficient items.
Southwestern Riverside County Multi-Species Reserve
The Southwestern Riverside County Multi-Species Reserve, which is under
multiple ownership, contains more than 13,500 acres of natural lands that
extends from Diamond Valley Lake to Lake Skinner between Hemet and
Temecula. Preserved in perpetuity, the reserve was formed in part as an
environmental mitigation measure for the Diamond Valley Lake project by
MWD. The reserve is home to at least eight types of habitat and up to 16
sensitive bird, animal, and plant species, including the Stephens’ kangaroo rat.
Additionally, it offers more than 10 miles of hiking and equestrian trails with
the potential for strategically extending the trail system throughout the
reserve.
Western Riverside County Multi-Species Habitat
Conservation Plan
The MSHCP is a comprehensive, multijurisdictional habitat conservation
plan (HCP) focusing on conserving species and their associated habitats in
Western Riverside County. The MSHCP is one of several large,
multijurisdictional habitat-planning efforts in southern California, with the
overall goal of maintaining biological and ecological diversity within a rapidly
urbanizing region. The MSHCP allows Riverside County and the cities within
the County to better control local land use decisions and maintain a strong
economic climate in the region while addressing ESA and CESA
         C   I  T Y      O  F    H   E  M    E  T     G   E  N E   R  A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                         7-10

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              requirements. The MSHCP is administered by the Regional Conservation
              Authority (RCA), comprised of member elected officials.
              The MSHCP area encompasses approximately 1.26 million acres, including all
              unincorporated Riverside County land west of the crest of the San Jacinto
              Mountains to the Orange County line. It includes the cities of Temecula,
              Murrieta, Wildomar, Lake Elsinore, Canyon Lake, Norco, Corona, Eastvale,
              Jurupa Valley, Riverside, Moreno Valley, Banning, Beaumont, Calimesa,
              Perris, Menifee, San Jacinto, and Hemet. The MSHCP covers multiple
              species and multiple habitats within a diverse landscape, from urban centers
              to undeveloped foothills and forests, under multiple jurisdictions. The HCP
              extends across many bioregions, including the Santa Ana Mountains,
              Riverside Lowlands, San Jacinto Foothills, San Jacinto Mountains, Agua Tibia
              Mountains, Desert Transition, and San Bernardino Mountains and establishes
              a coordinated implementation program to preserve biological diversity and
              maintain the region's quality of life. The Hemet Planning Area lies within the
              MSHCP area, and cells which have designated targets for habitat
              conservation are identified in Figure 7.1.
              Habitat Conservation Plan for the Stephens’ Kangaroo Rat in
              Western Riverside County
              The HCP for the Stephens’ Kangaroo Rat (SKR) is implemented by the
              Riverside County Habitat Conservation Agency (RCHCA). The SKR HCP
              mitigates impacts on the SKR caused by development by establishing a
              network of preserves and a system for managing and monitoring them.
              Through implementation of the SKR HCP, more than $45 million has been
              dedicated to establishing and managing the preserves, resulting in conserving
              approximately 50 percent of the SKR-occupied habitat remaining in the HCP
              area. A small portion of the Planning Area is located within the 533,954-acre
              SKR HCP area. Any proposed project located within the SKR HCP area will
              be required to comply with applicable provisions of the plan.
              7.4      O PEN S PACE
              The Hemet Planning Area is characterized by unique landforms, extensive
              biological resources, scenic vistas, agricultural land, water resources, and
              open space areas, as shown in Figure 7.1, “Natural and Open Space
              Resources.”
              7.4.1         OPEN SPACE FOR THE PRESERVATION OF NATURAL
                            RESOURCES
              The Hemet area is renowned for the expanse of lands that possess
              significant natural resources. These resources generally fall in the categories
              discussed below.
              Undeveloped Wilderness Lands
              Hemet contains and is surrounded by natural topographic beauty, as
              described by category in the following text.
              Scenic Vistas
              The San Jacinto Mountains, the San Bernardino National Forest and
              Mountains, and the San Gabriel Mountains provide a scenic background of
C I T Y O F H  E  M   E   T    G    E  N  E  R   A L     P L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                                   7-11

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
vista points that enhance the visual character of Hemet, highlight
distinguishing landmarks, and offer a sense of direction or orientation as
people move about the community. Preserving view corridors for the
enjoyment of future generations through design and development standards
is a goal of the City. As shown in Figure 7.1, large portions of the riverbed
and Bautista Canyon are within MSHCP criteria cells and targeted for
conservation.
Hillsides
Hemet contains and is surrounded by natural topographic beauty. Within
the Planning Area are hillsides and hilltops with spectacular views. Unique
landforms and hillsides include the hills at Diamond Valley Lake, Lakeview
Mountains, Santa Rosa Hills, Tres Cerritos Hills, and Park Hill.
The Lakeview Mountains are a range of low mountains encompassing
approximately 30 square miles bordering the western edge of the Planning
Area. The Lakeview Mountains reach an elevation of 2,673 above mean sea
level.
The Santa Rosa Hills, located in the southeastern section of the Planning
Area, climb to 2,333 feet above mean sea level and contain Simpson Park,
the Ramona Bowl, and opportunities for recreational hiking.
Tres Cerritos Hills are a series of three peaks located in the northwest
quadrant of the City. The hills are a well-known landmark that enhance the
visual character of the City and provide a sense of direction for residents.
Park Hill is a hilltop located outside of the Planning Area in the City of San
Jacinto. The summit climbs to 1,893 feet above mean sea level and provides
scenic vistas for Hemet residents.
Canyons
                                                                                 Domenigoni Parkway and the Santa Rosa
Two of the most significant canyons in the Planning Area are Bautista            Hills.
Canyon and Reinhardt Canyon. The canyons offer a range of biological and
agricultural resources as well as opportunities for recreation and residential
development.
West Valley
A section of the City and Planning Area is located in a flat valley that has
been identified through the MSHCP as a conservation area due to its vernal
pools and associated plants and wildlife. Generally located west of
California Avenue, east of Warren Road, south of Florida Avenue, and
north of Stetson Avenue, a portion of this land will be preserved as
permanent open space.
The San Jacinto River/Bautista Creek runs through the Bautista Canyon,
creating an extensive sphere of vegetation, habitat, and sensitive species.
Bautista Canyon is a migration corridor for birds connecting the Anza-
Borrego region to the San Jacinto Valley. The canyon and waterways also
provide linkage for bobcats and mountain lions. As shown in Figure 7.1,
large portions of the riverbed and Bautista Canyon are within MSHCP
criteria cells and targeted for conservation.
          C   I T Y      O   F    H  E  M   E  T    G   E  N  E  R   A L     P L A   N   2 0 3 0
                                                       7-12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of                                                                                                                                                           County                                                              Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto
                                                                                                                    Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Main St
                                                                                     Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                            view
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   River
                                                                                                 M oun
                                                                                                                                                                                             Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                        tain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                  Reinh
                                                                                          ardt C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Eaton Ave
                                                                                  California Ave a ny on
                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                                                          Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lyon Ave               Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                  Warr
                                                                                                                                                                           Tres                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ian
                                                                                                                                                       en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                               Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                          Cerritos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                                     Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Park Hill                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                          Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                         Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                           Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                               Myers St                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ave                                                                                                                                             Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ri    da
           Florida Ave                                                                         Florida Ave                                                                                     Flo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Acacia Ave                                                                                                          Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Buena Vista St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mayberry Ave                                       Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Meridian St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                      ct
                                                                                                                                                  ed u                        HEMET-RYAN                            AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                            R   AILW                    Kirby St                                                                                                                                                                                 Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                A qu                           AIRPORT                   SF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                  Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                    AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                               ieg o                     Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                              San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Thornton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          et   Ma
                                                                                                                                                                               Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     em
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Elk St                                                                                                                     Crest Dr                                            eH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chambers St                                                                                                                                                    Lak
                                                                                                                                                             Warren Rd    Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                         RAMONA
                                            Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BOWL
                                       s on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Riverside
                                   t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                               Ste
                                                                                                         California Ave
                                                                                         Simpson Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 en i                              State St                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           uti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     go
                                                                                                                                                                         ky                                                                                            ni P
                                                                                                                                                                       iP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SIMPSON                                                                                                      st a
                                                                                                                                                                  on
                                                                                                                                                           ni
                                                                                                                                                              g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bbe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l Rd                                            PARK                                                                                                              Ca
                                                                                                                                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                      Gi                                                                                                                                                                             ny
                                                                                                                                                Do
                                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Santa Rosa                                                                                            C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hills
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                           Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                  Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 062 01/24/2012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sources: USGS, ESRI,
                                                                                                                                                                                LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                Natural and Open Space Resources                                                                                                                                                                                 Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Existing Agriculture                                                                                                                                                                          Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mountainous Areas                                                                                                                                                                             River/Lake
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                                                      Significant Outcroppings                                                                                                                                                                      Creek/Canal
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     Riverside County TLMA 2005                                                                                                                                                    MSHCP Cells                                                                                                                                                                                   Street                                                                                                                                                                  F i g u r e        7. 1
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                     Southwestern Riverside County Multi-Species Reserve                                                                                                                                           Railroad                                                                                                                                                           NATURAL AND OPEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Soboba Tribal Lands
                     1       0.5           0                                1                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SPACE RESOURCES
                                                                                                      Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H e m e t    G e n e r a l     P l a n
                               OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Back of Figure 7.1
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E  T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                    7-14
            OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
                                     Reinhardt Canyon is a secluded “box” canyon located on the easterly side of
                                     the Lakeview Mountains in the Planning Area. The canyon is generally
                                     populated by ranches and estate properties on the canyon floor and is
                                     known as the location of the Hemet Maze Stone, a prehistoric petroglyph.
                                     A riparian watercourse runs through the area and the northern portion of
                                     the canyon is designated for habitat conservation under the MSHCP.
                                               Significant Outcroppings
                                               The Hemet area contains numerous rock outcroppings of various
                                               sizes that provide natural beauty and are a regionally unique asset.
                                               Many have been incorporated into parkland, residential
                                               developments, and open space areas. Figure 7.1 shows the
                                               locations of two of the most significant outcroppings.
                                               Vegetative Communities
                                               Hemet and the Planning Area contain several sensitive biological
                                               resources of natural vegetative communities that are unique or of
                                               relatively limited distribution in the region, and/or that create
Outcropping incorporated into the Seven        habitat for endangered and other wildlife. Native vegetation
Hills Golf Course.                             communities are concentrated within open space areas associated
                                               with playas and hillsides in the western portions of the Planning
                                               Area, as well as disturbed and undisturbed areas along the San
                                               Jacinto River. The primary sensitive communities in the Planning
                                               Area are briefly described below and mapped in Figure 7.2.
                                     Riparian Scrub, Riparian Forest
                                     Riparian areas are the green, vegetated areas on each side of streams and
                                     rivers. They serve many important functions, including purifying water by
                                     removing sediments and other contaminants; reducing the risk of flooding
                                     and associated damage; reducing stream channel and streambank erosion;
                                     increasing the duration of available water and stream flow by holding water
                                     in stream banks and aquifers; supporting a diversity of plant and wildlife
                                     species; maintaining a habitat for healthy fish populations; providing water,
                                     forage, and shade for wildlife and livestock; and creating opportunities for
                                     recreationists to fish, camp, picnic, and enjoy other activities.
                                     Alluvial Fan Sage Scrub, Riversidean Sage Scrub
                                     Alluvial scrub is considered a distinct and rare plant community found
                                     primarily on alluvial fans and floodplains along the southern bases of the
                                     Transverse Ranges and portions of the Peninsular Ranges in southern
                                     California. This relatively open vegetation type is adapted to periodic
                                     flooding and erosion. Riversidean alluvial scrub is one of the primary
                                     habitats for the endangered and protected California gnatcatcher, and has
                                     been designated by the Department of Fish and Game as a “very
                                     threatened” community.
                                     Chaparral
                                     Chaparral is a native plant community that supports a high diversity of plant
                                     and animal life. Chaparral is widely distributed on dry slopes and ridges at
                                     low and mid-elevations. Chaparral vegetation is valuable for watershed
                                     protection in areas with steep, easily eroded slopes.
          C  I  T Y     O   F      H  E   M  E   T     G   E  N  E  R  A L      P  L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                          7-15

                                             OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Coast Live Oak Woodland
The coast live oak is an evergreen oak that is highly variable and often
shrubby. It typically has a branched trunk and reaches a mature height of
33–82 feet. Some specimens may live more than 250 years.
Southern Willow Scrub
Southern willow scrub was formerly extensive along the major waterways of
southern California because it requires repeated flooding to prevent
succession to southern cottonwood-sycamore riparian forest. However, this
community is now much reduced by urban expansion, flood control, and
channel improvements.
Nonnative grasslands
Nonnative grasslands are characterized by a dense to sparse cover of annual
grasses with flowering stems. The grasslands are often associated with
numerous species of showy-flowered, native wildflowers, especially in years
of favorable rainfall. With a few exceptions, the plants are dead through the
summer-fall dry season, persisting as seeds and flowering with the onset of
late fall rains.
Wildlife Species
USFWS and DFG manage and protect wildlife species that are either listed
or are a candidate for listing as endangered or threatened. Some of the
identified species in the Planning Area include arroyo toad, mountain
yellow-legged frog, Cooper’s hawk, Least Bell’s vireo, southwestern willow
flycatcher, yellow warbler, Quino checker spot butterfly, bobcat, Los
Angeles pocket mouse, mountain lion, San Bernardino kangaroo mouse,
western pond turtle, Bell’s sage sparrow, cactus wren, loggerhead shrike,
vernal pool fairy shrimp, and Riverside fairy shrimp. Additionally, the three
habitat conservation plans in the Planning Area protect identified wildlife
species and their habitats.
Lakes, Creeks, and Other Water Resources
Water resources in Hemet and the Planning Area are described in the
following text.
Diamond Valley Lake
DVL is a made-made lake located within the
Domenigoni/Diamond valleys which features three earth fill
dams; two on either side of the valley and one on the south rim.
It took 4 years to fill the lake with water provided by the
Colorado River Aqueduct and San Diego Canal. The lake has
been stocked with several species of freshwater fish including;
Largemouth Bass, Smallmouth Bass, Bluegill, Crappie, Rainbow
Trout, Striped Bass, Channel Catfish, and Shad. It is considered
one of the best fisheries in California.
Vernal Pools
Vernal pools are seasonally flooded depressions found on              Diamond Valley Lake.
ancient soils with an impermeable layer such as hardpan,
claypan, or volcanic basalt. Vernal pools often fill and empty
          C   I  T Y    O   F    H   E   M E  T    G   E   N  E  R  A L     P L   A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                      7-16

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                           Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Jacinto
                                                                                                    Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            River
                                                                                                                                                                           Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Commonwealth Ave
                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                             Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ee
                                                                                                          Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                     Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ian
                                                                                                                                          en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                         Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                           Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                               Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                 ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                 Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kirby St
                                                                                                                                      ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                                                              HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                    ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yale St
                                                                                                                                                               AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                           SF
                                                                                                                                    A qu
                                                       Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                 AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                               ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                              San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                               Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                    Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                          ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                             Warren Rd
                                                                                                                      Ste
                                                                                                                                                          Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bautista Rd                Bautista Wash
                                                                                         California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                             go
                                                                                                                                                         ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pk
                                                                                                                                                       iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                  on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                           ni
                                                                                                                                              g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                           Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Riverside
                                       Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 053 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                   LEGEND
                                                                                                                   Vegetation Communities                                                                                                Disturbed Alluvial                                                                                                     Riparian Forest                                                                                                  Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                       Alkali Playa\Vernal Pool                                                                          Field Croplands                                                                                                        Riparian Scrub                                                                                                   Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                          Chaparral                                                                                         Grove/Orchard                                                                                                          Riversidean Alluvial Fan Sage Scrub                                                                              Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     Riverside County TLMA 2005                                                                                        Coast Live Oak Woodland                                                                           Non-native Grassland                                                                                                   Riversidean Sage Scrub                                                                                           Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                           Open Water/Reservoir/Pond                                                                                              Dairy & Livestock Feedyards                                                                                      Creek/Canal                                              F i g u r e     7. 2
                                                                                                                                       Coastal Scrub
                     1       0.5   0                             1       2                                                             Southern Willow Scrub                                                                             Residential/Urban/Exotic                                                                                                                                                                                                                River/Lake                                  VEGETATION COMMUNITIES
                                                                             Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                               OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Back of Figure 7.2
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E  T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                    7-18
        OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
                               several times during the rainy season. Only plants and animals that are
                               adapted to this cycle of wetting and drying can survive in vernal pools over
                               time. These specialized plants and animals are what make vernal pools
                               unique and a protected natural resource. Hemet’s vernal pools are located
                               on the western side of the City in a MSHCP criteria cell. Criteria cell
                               refinement will allow development on a portion of the vernal pool area in
                               exchange for long-term conservation protection on the remaining portion
                               of the area.
                                             Bautista Creek/San Jacinto River
                                             Bautista Creek/San Jacinto River drain the San Bernardino
                                             Mountains and the San Jacinto Mountains. The waterways and
                                             canyon support strong populations of foothill riparian and
                                             woodland species including arroyo toad, burrowing owl,
                                             Cooper’s hawk, San Bernardino kangaroo rat, and slender-
                                             horned spine flower.
                                             7.4.2         OPEN SPACE FOR THE MANAGED
                                             PRODUCTION OF RESOURCES
                                             In Hemet and the Planning Area, resource production activities
Orchards in Bautista Canyon.                 in open space areas include: agriculture, mineral extraction, and
                                             recharge of groundwater.
                               Agriculture
                               The agricultural industry was once an integral part of the economy and
                               culture of the San Jacinto Valley. At this time, however, there is declining
                               agricultural production in the Planning Area. The Farmland Mapping and
                               Monitoring Program, administered by the California Department of
                               Conservation, assigns one of four designations to important farmlands:
                                    Prime Farmland includes land with the best combination of physical and
                                    chemical characteristics for the production of crops. It has the soil
                                    quality, growing season, and moisture supply needed to produce
                                    sustained yields of crops when treated and managed. Such land must
                                    have been used for the production of irrigated crops within the last 3
                                    years to be so designated.
                                    Farmland of Statewide Importance is land with a good combination of
                                    physical and chemical characteristics for the production of crops. It
                                    must have been used for the production of irrigated crops within the
                                    last 3 years.
                                    Unique Farmland is land that does not meet the above criteria for Prime
                                    or Statewide Importance, but which is currently used for the
                                    production of specific high-value crops. It has the special combination
                                    of soil quality, location, growing season, and moisture supply needed to
                                    produce sustained high quality and high yields of specific crops.
                                    Examples of such crops include oranges, olives, avocado, rice, grapes,
                                    and cut flowers.
      C   I  T Y       O  F  H   E  M   E   T     G   E  N  E   R A L      P L   A  N    2 0 3 0
                                                     7-19

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
     Farmland of Local Importance is nonirrigated land that is either currently
     producing crops or has the capacity of production. This land includes
     dryland grain, dairies, and other agricultural-zoned land not included in
     the above categories. This land may be important to the local economy
     because of its productivity.
Within the City’s boundaries, Farmland of Local Importance is the
dominant category of agricultural land. The majority of the Prime Farmland
is located in Bautista Canyon, and much of it is protected as agricultural
preserves. A preservation easement held by the Wildlife Heritage
Foundation conserves 486 acres in perpetuity, of which approximately 250
acres are suitable for citrus-fruit crops. Additionally, according to the
California Department of Conservation, several Williamson Act contracts
for prime and nonprime agricultural land are located in the Bautista Canyon
area. Under a Williamson Act contract, the local jurisdiction and
landowners agree to continue agricultural activities for at least 10 years. In
return, the County agrees to assess the property at agricultural value rather
than at market value. Existing agricultural land is shown in Figure 7.1.
Mineral Resources
State law requires the General Plan to address the need for conserving
mineral resources within the Planning Area. The California Geological
Survey has prepared mineral resource reports designating the mineral
deposits of statewide or regional significance. These reports are to be used
to address mineral resources within the Planning Area. The State Geologist
has classified areas into Mineral Resource Zones (MRZ) identifying the
statewide or regional significance of mineral deposits based on the
economic value and accessibility of the deposits. Within the Planning Area,
the State has applied the MRZ-3 classification. MRZ-3 areas contain
sedimentary deposits that have the potential to supply sand and gravel for
concrete and crushed stone for aggregate. However, the City does not
consider these areas to contain deposits of significant economic value,
based on available data.
Even though the Planning Area includes no mineral deposits of statewide
or regional importance, some mineral resources have the potential for local
significance. Historically, limestone, serpentine, sand, and gravel were
mined in the Bautista Canyon, Diamond Valley, and the Salt Creek and San
Jacinto riverbeds, respectively.
The nonrenewable characteristic of mineral deposits necessitates careful
and efficient use of mineral resources to prevent the unnecessary waste of
these deposits due to careless exploitation and uncontrolled urbanization.
Effectively managing these resources will protect future development of
mineral deposit areas and guide the exploitation of mineral deposits so that
adverse effects caused by mineral extraction may be reduced or eliminated.
Recharge of Groundwater Basins
Groundwater is the supply of freshwater found beneath the Earth's surface
and is a major source of water in the Hemet area. A groundwater basin is an
area underlain by permeable materials, like alluvium, capable of storing a
substantial amount of water. The largest source of groundwater for Hemet
         C  I  T Y      O   F     H  E  M   E  T     G  E  N  E   R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       7-20

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              is the Hemet Basin, which underlies a majority of the Planning Area with
              water-bearing strata. This basin has a potential capacity of 1 million acre-
              feet (326 billion gallons), although it is not being fully replenished. As the
              Planning Area continues to grow, protecting the basin from the effects of
              development is critical, particularly given Hemet’s reliance on groundwater.
              Protecting recharge areas and conserving water are important steps to
              reducing the City’s dependence on imported water and maintaining viable
              sources of groundwater. One mechanism of protection is innovative
              infrastructure systems that try to replicate nature, and by doing so, protect
              groundwater recharge areas, conserve groundwater resources, maintain
              water quality through pollution reduction, channel drainage in
              environmentally sensitive ways, and design attractive and multi-use open
              space areas for development, recreation, and habitat. Groundwater recharge
              is further addressed in Section 7.5.1 and in the Community Services and
              Infrastructure Element.
              7.4.3        OPEN SPACE FOR OUTDOOR RECREATION AND
                           SCENIC ENJOYMENT
              The Hemet area is known for its outdoor recreational venues and
              opportunities. Diamond Valley Lake, Simpson Park, the Santa Rosa Hills,
              Bautista Canyon, and Salt Creek provide open space areas for hiking,
              cycling, horseback riding, fishing, and other outdoor activities. Parks, golf
              courses and trails provide additional open space recreational facilities. The
              Recreation Element addresses the integration of outdoor recreation and
              open space.
              The National Arbor Day Foundation program, Tree City USA, recognizes
              U.S. towns and cities that develop comprehensive urban forestry programs.
              A community must meet four standards to become a Tree City USA. These
              standards include a tree board or department, a community tree care
              ordinance, a comprehensive community forestry program, and an Arbor
              Day observance and proclamation. Hemet has been named a Tree City
              USA annually since 1987 showing that the City values its trees for their
              beauty, grace, and positive investment in a healthy future environment.
              Trees can also reduce the erosion of precious topsoil by wind and water, cut
              heating and cooling costs, moderate the temperature, clean the air, produce
              oxygen, and provide habitat for wildlife.
              A greenbelt is a largely undeveloped area of natural or landscaped land that
              surrounds and connects urban neighborhoods. Hemet’s greenbelts and
              common-use landscaped areas are intended to provide scenic enjoyment,
              off-road linkages, and buffers between urban uses to help preserve Hemet’s
              rural character. Through the incorporation of drought-resistant vegetation
              and mature shade trees into landscape designs and the revegetation of
              graded slopes, these areas provide opportunities to integrate water
              conservation, neighborhood aesthetics, energy reduction, erosion control,
              and the maximization of carbon capture and storage.
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E  T     G   E  N   E   R A L      P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                  7-21

                                             OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
7.4.4         OPEN SPACE TO PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH AND
              SAFETY
Nondevelopable open space lands are those areas in which it is unsafe or
unhealthy to develop, but which may provide opportunities for aesthetic,
cultural, or recreational uses. Within the Planning Area, nondevelopable
open space includes floodplains (San Jacinto River floodplain), drainage
swales (Bautista Wash and Salt Creek), aqueducts and flood control
channels (San Diego Aqueduct and Lake Hemet Main Canal), rock
outcroppings, steep hillsides, open space buffers between developments,
earthquake faults (San Jacinto Fault), and utility rights-of-way. The City has
an opportunity to secure joint use of both existing and planned future utility
rights-of-way owned or operated by the Burlington Northern Santa Fe
(BNSF) Railway, EMWD, MWD, and the Riverside County Transportation
Department and Flood Control and Water Conservation Districts for the
purpose of open space trails. Additionally, buffer areas and recreational use
areas provide locations for the relocation of heritage trees or the
replacement of trees removed from public right-of-way or other
construction projects.
7.5      C ONSE RVA TI ON
This section of the Open Space and Conservation Element provides
direction regarding the conservation, development, and utilization of
natural resources such as water, air quality, and energy. The element
addresses each aspect below.
7.5.1         MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES
Water is essential in both the natural and urban environments. In the
natural environment, water resources promote healthy ecosystems, provide
wildlife habitat, sustain riparian plant communities, recharge groundwater
basins, and create scenic corridors. In the urban environment, water
sustains existing communities and enables new residential, commercial, and
industrial growth. The two key issues related to water resources in the
Planning Area are watershed management and conservation.
Watershed/drainage, water supply, and the provision of water services are
discussed in detail in the Community Services and Infrastructure Element.
Watershed Management
A watershed, sometimes referred to as a water basin or drainage basin, is a
natural occurrence that replenishes groundwater resources. The Hemet
Water Department relies on local groundwater as the water supply source
for customers in its 5.25-square-mile service area. Managing the watershed
and stormwater to maximize groundwater recharge is imperative to
ensuring an adequate and affordable source of water in the future and to
meeting habitat hydration needs in biologically sensitive areas of the City.
To address these issues, the Cities of Hemet and San Jacinto, EMWD, Lake
Hemet Municipal Water District, private pumpers (agricultural users), and
the Soboba Tribe are developing a groundwater management plan for the
Hemet–San Jacinto Basin.
         C  I  T Y      O   F    H   E  M  E  T      G  E  N  E   R A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       7-22

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
             Groundwater Management Plan
             The groundwater management plan acknowledges that the community is
             using more groundwater than can be naturally replenished. Current demand
             is exceeding the safe yield of water, resulting in an overdraft (over use) that
             could eventually lower the water table beyond the reach of existing wells.
             With residential and commercial growth expected to continue, the plan
             addresses both reducing the demand and increasing the supply of
             groundwater.
             Groundwater demand is reduced through water conservation practices, the
             incorporation of new technology such as water-efficient sprinklers, and the
             use of alternative water sources such as tertiary water for agriculture and
             landscaping. Supply is addressed by recharging groundwater through
             development design and activities that reduce surface runoff, and through
             water basin management in collaboration with affected water agencies,
             cities, and the Soboba Tribe.
             Water Conservation
             Sources of water other than groundwater serving the City and Planning
             Area include the Colorado River Aqueduct, Lake Hemet, the San Jacinto
             River, and the State Water Project, a water storage and delivery system of
             reservoirs, aqueducts, power plants and pumping plants including the
             Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta (Delta). Approximately 30 percent of
             southern California’s water comes from the Delta, where the rivers of the
             western Sierra Nevada merge before heading south through the aqueduct
             system of the State Water Project. The Delta’s declining ecosystem, caused
             by a number of factors, has led to historic restrictions in water supply
             deliveries. The Bay Delta Conservation Plan is a long-term Delta habitat
             restoration program and aqueduct improvement project, which is expected
             to take a minimum of 10 to 12 years to complete. With years of low rainfall
             and the diminished supply from the Delta, these sources are also facing
             shortages. Water reserves, such as Diamond Valley Lake, have been tapped,
             with MWD reporting in 2010 its reserves were 50 percent less than 2006
             levels.
             Conservation efforts, such as water recycling and reduced use, have been
             shown to have a significant impact on water demand throughout the region.
             The City and other water suppliers in the Planning Area have implemented
             the following conservation measures:
                 Urban Water Management Plans. These plans are required by the
                  state for water agencies that supply either 3,000 customers or 3,000 acre
                  feet of water annually, which includes the City of Hemet. The plan
                  describes and evaluates the agency’s sources of water supply, methods
                  for efficient use and demand management, and an implementation
                  strategy. Actions for consideration may include demonstration
                  landscape projects, landscape retrofitting of parkways medians and
                  parks, required use of new water-efficient technology in building
                  construction, natural approaches to managing streams and creating
                  drainage infrastructure systems, and incentive programs to encourage
                  water-wise development projects. These plans have been updated in
C I T Y O F H E M E T         G E N E R A L             P L A N        2 0 3 0
                                  7-23

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
     2011 to demonstrate consistency with the state’s 20 percent
     conservation by 2020 requirement.
     Hemet’s Landscaping and Irrigation Ordinance. The ordinance
     establishes water-efficient landscape regulations that ensure that public
     agencies, nonresidential developers, multi-family residential developers,
     and homeowners install new landscapes or implement rehabilitation
     projects, use water efficiently, encourage water conservation, and
     prevent water waste.
     Eastern Municipal Water District. EMWD’s water conservation
     efforts are divided into three categories:
         Recycled Water: EMWD has a network of recycled water pipelines
         that extend for nearly 1,200 miles, supported by 35 lift (pumping)
         stations. Recycled water is available for landscaping, industrial, and
         agricultural business use. Additionally, EMWD constructed
         wetlands at the Hemet/San Jacinto Regional Water Reclamation
         Facility to demonstrate how natural processes efficiently recycle
         secondary treated wastewater. It is now an integral part of the
         treatment plant, with proven improvement in water quality. It is
         also a haven for nearly 120 species of migratory and resident
         waterfowl, shorebirds, neotropical song birds, and raptors.
         Conservation: EMWD was one of the original signatories of the
         California Urban Water Conservation Council Memorandum of
         Understanding and implements 14 conservation best management
         practices.
         Water Education: EMWD’s education program is designed for
         grades K–12, is intended to foster an understanding of water and
         wastewater, and to promote wise water use.
     Lake Hemet Water District. LHWD has imposed stage-one water
     conservation measures in its Hemet and San Jacinto service areas
     because of the continuing drought and the need to conserve local and
     imported supplies against wasteful use. The voluntary measures, which
     are intended to achieve a 10 percent reduction in water demand, are
     expected to be in force until drought conditions and water supply
     issues improve. To assist this effort, LHWD provides free water audits
     of homes and businesses within the service area to help identify ways to
     reduce water consumption and lower water costs.
7.5.2          CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT, AND UTILIZATION
               OF ENERGY RESOURCES
Energy resources provide the necessary power for Hemet’s residents;
however, many of these resources are nonrenewable, which places stress on
their long-term viability. Electricity and natural gas are the primary sources
of household energy, while fossil fuels are the primary source of energy for
most modes of transportation.
         C   I  T Y     O   F     H   E  M  E   T    G   E  N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        7-24

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              Conservation is an important component of using energy resources in an
              efficient manner. Lowering energy demand by conserving both renewable
              and nonrenewable energy is critical. Reducing energy usage is the most
              environmentally sound and cost effective way to limit the negative
              consequences of consuming nonrenewable energy resources and to protect
              the reliability of the electric power grid. Energy usage and pollutants
              resulting from the generation of energy can be reduced through innovative
              architectural design, building construction, structural orientation,
              landscaping, and use of renewable energy resources. Opportunities for
              power produced by renewable and cleaner energy sources such as wind and
              solar are becoming more available and more reliable. These resources are
              more difficult to harness, but produce no or reduced air pollutant emissions
              or hazardous waste byproducts. On September 15, 2009, Arnold
              Schwarzenegger, the Governor of California, issued Executive Order S-21-
              09, which instructed ARB, under its AB 32 authority to establish state
              regulations to ensure that all retail sellers of electricity serve 33 percent of
              their load with renewable energy by 2020.
              Energy Conservation and Renewable Energy Resources
              The City recognizes that it must collaborate with local utility companies to
              facilitate the minimization of energy consumption in the City and the
              maximization of renewable energy source development to achieve state-
              mandated renewable portfolio standards. It recently joined the Western
              Riverside Energy Leader Partnership (WRELP), a program of SCE and
              Western Riverside Council of Governments (WRCOG). WRLEP is a
              unique partnership that brings SCE and local governments together in an
              effort to make Western Riverside County a leader in energy efficiency by
              identifying opportunities to increase energy efficiency, finding savings in
              ever-tightening government budgets, and planning for new state
              greenhouse gas emissions regulations.
              Other SCE policies and programs include:
                   incentives to encourage energy conservation through rebates and
                   savings for lighting, appliances, heating and cooling, multi-family
                   housing, pools, home upgrade projects, solar leadership, and customer
                   power generation;
                   residential education programs such as Home Energy Survey,
                   Residential Energy Guide, residential tips to reduce energy usage in the
                   home, and a guide to buying an electric vehicle;
                   interactive pages on the SCE website that assist homeowners in
                   identifying “energy guzzlers” and ways to save electricity;
                   a commitment to biological and archaeological resources protection;
                   and
                   a leadership position in the development and use of renewable energy
                   resources such as wind, geothermal, solar, biomass, and hydro.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E  T     G  E  N  E   R  A L       P  L  A   N      2 0 3 0
                                  7-25

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
California Green Building Standards Code
The California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen standards) that
takes effect January 1, 2011, is the first statewide mandatory green building
code in the nation. It sets minimum standards for all new structures as part
of a broad effort to significantly reduce California’s carbon emissions.
Green design and construction practices significantly reduce or eliminate
the negative effects of new buildings on the environment and occupants in
five broad areas:
     sustainable site planning,
     safeguarding water and water efficiency,
     energy efficiency and renewable energy,
     conservation of building materials and resources, and
     indoor environmental quality.
In addition to the mandatory CALGreen standards, the City has
the option to adopt an energy efficiency standard that surpasses
the state’s basic requirements. The Tier 1 standard would require
construction to exceed Title 24 requirements by 15 percent; the
Tier 2 standard would require construction to exceed Title 24 by
30 percent. It is generally accepted that compliance with Tier 1
requirements addressing energy, water, lighting, and building
envelope is likely to be comparable to achieving Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED®) Silver certification.
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design                             The Western Science Center at Diamond
LEED is an internationally recognized green building certification Valley Lake, built in 2006, received LEED
system. The certification provides third-party verification that a        Platinum certification. It is first museum in
building or community was designed and built using strategies California to be awarded this highest
intended to improve performance. Measures of improved                     distinction from the US Green Building
                                                                          Council.
performance include energy savings, water efficiency, reduced
carbon dioxide emissions, improved indoor environmental quality,
and stewardship of resources and sensitivity to their impacts.
Developed by the U.S. Green Building Council, LEED is intended to
provide building owners and operators a concise framework for
identifying and implementing practical and measurable green building
design, construction, and operations and maintenance solutions. The
LEED rating system is point based and has four levels of certification:
Certified, Silver, Gold, and Platinum.
Solar Energy
Riverside County is becoming one of the prime areas for the use of
solar technologies due to the area’s abundant sunshine. Solar
technologies are broadly characterized as either passive solar or active
solar depending on the way they capture, convert, and distribute solar
energy. Passive solar techniques include orienting a building to the Sun,
selecting materials with favorable thermal mass or light dispersing
properties, and designing spaces that naturally circulate air. Active solar Solar panels provide energy for the
techniques include using photovoltaic panels and solar thermal Western Science Center.
         C   I T Y       O  F    H  E   M   E   T    G  E  N   E  R  A L       P   L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                       7-26

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              collectors to harness the energy. City policies encourage both techniques in
              the following ways:
                   Passive Solar: Property owners are encouraged to design existing and
                   new structures to maximize solar access by promoting passive solar
                   energy design, natural ventilation, and effective use of daylight.
                   Active Solar: Property owners are encouraged through a variety of
                   local, state, and federal incentive programs to invest in capital
                   improvements, primarily photovoltaic panels, which will generate
                   enough energy to, at least partially, meet individual property needs. In
                   2010, the Hemet Unified School District initiated an active solar
                   program to reduce energy costs and support renewable energy
                   resources.
                   Solar thermal projects (above 50 megawatts) are long-term ventures
                   requiring approvals from both the federal Bureau of Land Management
                   and the California Energy Commission before construction. In 2010,
                   four large solar energy projects (solar trough and central tower) were
                   approved in Riverside County, totaling approximately 1,800 megawatts.
                   MWD is considering a solar thermal project at its Diamond Valley Lake
                   property, located in the City and the Planning Area.
              Conserving energy and pursuing renewable energy sources can benefit
              Hemet residents and the region. Efforts to conserve nonrenewable energy
              resources are important to provide and maintain a healthy, viable
              community. In the first few years of this century, California has experienced
              times of acute electricity shortages that have negatively affected the local
              and regional economy. Energy resource conservation and the use of
              renewable resources can reduce these fiscal and economic effects, as well as
              improve air quality.
              Biomass Energy
              Biomass is a renewable energy source derived from biological material from
              living or recently living organisms such as wood, waste, (hydrogen) gas, and
              alcohol fuels. EMWD has initiated plans to construct a plant in southwest
              Riverside County that would turn discarded restaurant grease into an
              environmentally-friendly fuel to power its diesel fleet and equipment. The
              fuel is expected to emit 20 percent less unburned hydrocarbons and 12
              percent less carbon dioxide and particulate matter. The City supports and
              encourages EMWD’s efforts regarding the use of alternative energy.
              7.5.3         ASSESSMENT, PROTECTION AND IMPROVEMENT OF
                            AIR QUALITY
              The Planning Area lies within the South Coast Air Basin that is
              topographically bound by the Pacific Ocean to the west and the San
              Gabriel, San Bernardino, and San Jacinto Mountains to the north and east.
              The South Coast Air Basin includes all of the Orange County and the
              nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside, and San Bernardino
              Counties. The topography and climate of the region combine to create an
              area with high potential for air pollution. Air pollution results from naturally
C I T Y O F H   E  M  E   T     G   E  N  E  R  A L       P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   7-27

                                               OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
occurring conditions combined with the activities of residents. Natural
sources include dust from barren ground surfaces and forest fires. Human
sources include automobile emissions, fugitive dust, industrial processes,
chemical emissions from paint and similar materials, and household
cleaners.
Air pollution creates unhealthy conditions that could lead to respiratory
irritation or illness, breathing difficulties, decreased lung function, watery
eyes, coughing, or decreased tolerance for exercise. The health risks depend
on an individual’s health status, the pollutant type and concentration, and
the length of exposure to the polluted air. In a community like Hemet, with
a large elderly population and a growing youth population, the health risks
are magnified. Additionally, polluted air damages agriculture, the natural
environment, and human-made materials.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District (AQMD) regulates and
monitors three types of air pollutants: criteria air pollutants, toxic air
contaminants, and global warming and ozone-depleting gases, generally
called green house gases (GHGs). Criteria air pollutants are measured by
sampling concentrations in the ambient air, toxic air contaminants are
measured at the source and in the general atmosphere, and GHGs are not
monitored, but are subject to regulations that call for their reduction and
eventual phase out. Air quality standards have been established by the
federal government for ozone, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, sulfur
dioxide, lead, and fine and respirable particulate matter of 2.5 and 10
micrometers or less. The state Air Resources Board (ARB) has also
established standards for these pollutants (some of which are more
stringent than national standards) plus for hydrogen sulfide, sulfates, vinyl
chloride, and visibility. Additionally, the South Coast AQMD has adopted
rules that are not a part of federal or state programs. South Coast AQMD is
working with other regional and local jurisdictions to reduce air pollutants
to acceptable air quality standards and improve the impacts of air pollution
on southern California communities by the deadlines established by federal
and state regulation.
GHGs are generally defined as gases that trap heat in the atmosphere.
GHGs include carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated
gases. The human activities during which these gases are emitted include
burning, manufacturing, and transportation-related combustion of fossil
fuels. Livestock and solid waste emissions also contribute to the buildup of
GHGs. GHGs are generally considered a major cause of climate change,
which is defined as a change in the state of the climate that persists for an
extended period of time.
The California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32) was created
by the state legislature to address the threat global warming poses to the
state’s “economic well-being, public health, natural resources, and the
environment.” Among other things, the act directs ARB to “adopt a
statewide greenhouse gas emissions limit equivalent to the statewide
greenhouse gas emissions levels in 1990 to be achieved by 2020.”
Furthermore, Senate Bill 375, the Sustainable Communities and Climate
Protection Act of 2008, requires metropolitan planning organizations to
          C  I  T Y      O  F    H   E   M   E  T    G   E  N  E R   A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                        7-28

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              work with its member cities to create sustainable communities strategies in
              regional transportation plans to reduce GHG emissions.
              While recognizing that some sources of air pollution are out of the City’s
              control, the City of Hemet is committed to improving the public health and
              safety of its residents through strategies that improve air quality and reduce
              GHG emissions. Strategies include:
                    promoting increased use of public transit;
                    minimizing commuting times by developing a diverse mix of land uses,
                   attracting local employment opportunities, providing neighborhood
                   retail and services near residential uses, and increasing shopping, dining,
                   and recreational opportunities in Hemet;
                    growing a base of clean industries;
                    increasing economic vitality through higher education;
                    improving the City’s job-housing balance through the establishment of
                    business parks and local industries;
                     encouraging the use of alternative fuels;
                    improving the roadway networks to reduce traffic and vehicle idling
                    times;
                    providing a citywide system of bicycle lanes and recreational trails that
                    improve non-motorized accessibility;
                    creating safe and attractive pedestrian and bicycle facilities;
                     improving the urban forest; and
                     diversifying energy resources through the increased use of renewable
                    energy.
               The City’s approach to meeting California climate laws and regulations is
               twofold. First, as part of its Implementation Program for the General Plan
               (Chapter 12), Hemet will be preparing a Climate Action Plan. The plan will
               have two primary objectives: (1) reduce total GHG emissions in the City
               by at least 15 percent from 2010 levels by 2020 and (2) create adaptation
               strategies to address the impacts of climate change on the City, such as
               increased risk of flooding and wildfires, diminished water supplies, and
               public health. Second, the City has threaded sustainability goals and
               policies throughout the General Plan with a focus on reducing GHG
               emissions. The following Section 7.6 further addresses Hemet’s
               sustainability program.
              7.6       S USTAINABILITY              IN H EMET
              Sustainability is generally defined as any set of activities, programs, policies,
              or other efforts whose purpose contributes to addressing deleterious
C I T Y O F H   E  M   E   T    G   E  N  E   R  A L      P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   7-29

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
environmental impacts that reduce the capacity to sustain natural resources.
Throughout the General Plan, goals, policies, and implementation programs
have been designed to address climate change and sustainability. The City
has categorized its approach to sustainability into six categories: Smart
Growth: Land Use and Community Design, Transportation and
Connectivity, Water Conservation, Air Quality, Energy and Resource
Conservation, Waste Reduction, and Economic Sustainability. For easy
reference, the City’s sustainable General Plan policies are listed in Appendix
A by element and policy number and are placed into one of the six
sustainability categories as defined herein.
7.6.1          SMART GROWTH: LAND USE AND COMMUNITY                             Ten principles of smart growth:
               DESIGN
Sustainable land use and community design practices concentrate growth               Mix land uses.
in compact centers to avoid sprawl and advocates transit-oriented,                   Take advantage of compact
walkable, and bicycle-friendly land use patterns. Relevant policies                  building design.
encourage enhanced open space conservation; pedestrian-friendly,
mixed-used, and in-fill developments; the restoration of the historic                Create a range of housing
                                                                                     opportunities and choices.
downtown center; and the redevelopment of deteriorating areas to more
sustainable development. The model also discourages noncontiguous                    Create walkable
(leapfrog) development.                                                              neighborhoods.
                                                                                     Foster distinctive, attractive
Hemet’s sustainable land use and community design goals and policies                 communities with a strong
are primarily located within the Land Use Element, the Community                     sense of place.
Design Element, the Historic Resources Element, the Housing Element,                 Preserve open space,
and the Open Space and Conservation Element. These goals and polices                 farmland, natural beauty, and
include:                                                                             critical environmental areas.
     establishing land use patterns and development standards that                   Strengthen and direct
                                                                                     development toward existing
     incorporate “smart growth” tenets;
                                                                                     communities.
     creating walkable neighborhoods and connections to open space;                  Provide a variety of
                                                                                     transportation sources.
     preserving significant historic buildings and neighborhoods;                    Make development decisions
                                                                                     predictable, fair, and cost
     protecting environmentally sensitive habitats and species;                      effective.
                                                                                     Encourage community and
     strengthening     and     directing  development      toward    existing        stakeholder collaboration in
     communities;                                                                    development decisions.
     revitalizing the downtown core through design, intensity, and              Source: Smart Growth Network, a
     pedestrian-scale; and                                                      partnership of the Environmental
                                                                                Protection Agency and several non-
     facilitating the revitalization of older, deteriorating neighborhoods      profit and government organizations
     through rehabilitation, recycling of underutilized properties,
     incentives, and redevelopment.
In December 2010, the City of Hemet was designated the Inland Empire’s
“most walkable community” by Walk Score, an online site that helps gauge
the pedestrian friendliness of neighborhoods and encourages walkable
cities. Points were awarded to residential neighborhoods based on the
proximity of nearby amenities such as stores and schools. Hemet’s
          C   I  T Y    O    F     H   E M  E   T    G   E  N  E  R   A L     P L   A   N      2 0 3 0
                                                        7-30

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              traditional grid system of streets and location of commercial nodes near
              residential neighborhoods assisted in achieving the top designation.
              7.6.2          TRANSPORTATION AND CONNECTIVITY
              Transportation and connectivity refers to policies that decrease vehicle
              miles traveled; encourage the use of alternative forms of transportation;
              encourage the use of alternative fuel or lower emission vehicles; and
              increase connectivity between residential neighborhoods, schools, shopping
              areas, and employment centers. Additionally, the precept addresses the
              management of transportation systems to improve efficiency through more
              effective utilization of facilities.
              Hemet’s transportation and connectivity goals and policies are primarily
              located within the Circulation Element; the Land Use Element; the
              Community Design Element; and the Recreation Element. General
              concepts include:
                   increasing the capacity, safety, and accessibility of streets through the
                   Complete Streets Program;
                   providing for the expanded use of Neighborhood Electric Vehicles;
                   accommodating a low-speed travel culture in Hemet to reduce GHG
                   emissions while encouraging a healthier level of community interaction;
                   providing expanded and safe facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists, and
                   recreationalists;
                   creating walkable neighborhoods through appropriately scaled and
                   designed developments and associated infrastructure;
                   facilitating access to and use of public transportation systems; and
                   establishing development standards that encourage the siting of
                   employment and commercial centers along transportation corridors and
                   activity centers.
              7.6.3          WATER CONSERVATION
              Water conservation refers to policies that conserve and protect water
              resources. Hemet’s goals and policies regarding the supply, distribution, and
              conservation of water are located within the Open Space and Conservation
              Element and the Community Services and Infrastructure Element.
              Preservation and conservation of water resources will continue to be a
              significant issue throughout the planning period. General concepts include:
                   managing the City’s watershed and use of groundwater to reduce
                   demand, increase supply, and ensure that water use does not exceed the
                   safe yield of groundwater; and
                   implementing a variety of water conservation measures.
C I T Y O F H  E   M   E   T     G   E  N  E    R  A L    P   L A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    7-31

                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
7.6.4         ENERGY, AIR QUALITY, AND RESOURCE
              CONSERVATION
Energy and resource conservation refers to policies that conserve and
preserve open space and natural resources; reduce energy use; promote the
production of clean energy resources; protect the air from air pollutants;
and decrease Hemet’s GHG emissions. This precept requires the
participation of a wide range of participants: residents, businesses, schools,
industries, transportation users and providers, developers, builders,
innovators, conservationists, utility providers, and government.
Hemet’s energy and resource conservation goals and policies are primarily
located within the Open Space and Conservation Element, Community
Services and Infrastructure Element, and Community Design Element.
General concepts include:
    preserving natural resources;
    managing agriculture, minerals, and groundwater recharge basins;
    establishing and protecting outdoor recreation venues and scenic vistas;
    implementing energy conservation measures;
    facilitating renewable energy development and use;
    encouraging building orientations and landscaping that enhance natural
    lighting and sun exposure;
    implementing CALGreen building standards and facilitating LEED
    certifications to help reduce the negative effects of new buildings on
    the environment; and
    addressing sources of air pollution to reduce unhealthy conditions for
    residents and damage to agriculture, the natural environment, and
    human-made materials.
7.6.5          WASTE REDUCTION
Waste reduction refers to household solid waste recycling; commercial and
industrial recycling; waste reduction targets; and use of recycled materials
for City use and for community facilities and infrastructure projects. State
law mandates specific per-capita disposal targets for each jurisdiction based
on demographics and industrial bases.
The City of Hemet currently operates its own refuse and recycling division,
the Integrated Waste Management Division, but is exploring contracting
with a private company. The City’s waste reduction goals and policies are
primarily located within the Community Services and Infrastructure
Element and focus on the following areas:
         C   I  T Y    O   F    H    E  M   E  T    G   E  N  E  R  A L     P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       7-32

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
                   complying with California statewide waste reduction mandates,
                   promoting the use of recycling and recycled materials in development
                   projects, and
                   promoting the use of recycling and recycled materials in City
                   operations.
              7.6.6         ECONOMIC SUSTAINABILITY
              Sustainable economic policies support an equitable housing-jobs balance;
              promote environmental justice in land use decisions, promote sensitive use
              of cultural and open space facilities; ensure economic opportunities for all
              segments of the community; and attempt to balance potential impacts of
              global warming measures, which could affect the lives of residents and the
              livelihood of businesses. The City’s economic goals and policies, which are
              primarily located in the Land Use Element, the Community Design
              Element, and the Open Space Element, include:
                   establishing incentives for job creation;
                   enhancing opportunities for sustainable tourism;
                   creating public gathering spaces; and
                   encouraging sensitive, adaptive reuse of historic and culturally sensitive
                   structures where the original use is no longer feasible.
              7.6.7         SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN WEST HEMET
              West Hemet, an approximately 5,400-acre area that extends into the City’s
              sphere-of-influence on its western edge, presents a challenging opportunity
              to balance growth with natural resource protection. This primarily
              underdeveloped section of the City and Planning Area contains 1,600 acres
              of sensitive biological habitats and is primarily located within a 100-year
              floodplain with minimal flood control. A large portion of the area cannot
              be developed until habitat preservation and major flood-control solutions
              are addressed.
              Within this area, the City has the opportunity to create innovative
              infrastructure systems that try to replicate nature, and by doing so, protect
              groundwater recharge areas, conserve groundwater resources, maintain
              water quality by reducing pollution, and channel drainage in
              environmentally sensitive ways. The City can promote the design of
              attractive and multi-use open space areas for development, recreation, and
              habitat. The Urban Land Institute, Orange County/Inland Empire, Edge
              Development Initiative Council in 2010 identified 4 focus areas for
              sustainable infrastructure in West Hemet:
                   Stormwater Through groundwater recharge, biofiltration, and habitat
                   hydration, stormwater can be safely conveyed to benefit the local
                   community. Implementing a stormwater management approach that
                   uses open “naturalized” planted channels and treatment detention
C I T Y O F H   E  M   E  T    G    E  N  E  R   A L      P  L A   N     2 0 3 0
                                   7-33

                                          OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
basins wherever possible can reduce costs, add amenity value, and
perform water quality and groundwater recharge functions.
Recycling Water Expanding existing recycled water systems into West
Hemet will alleviate the strain on potable water and mitigate the ever-
rising cost of water.
Energy By developing a “smart grid” approach to power system
development with linkages to alternative energy sources, West Hemet
can become less dependent on conventional forms of energy and
potentially become more self-reliant.
Transportation West Hemet has the opportunity to develop
a three-phased plan to implement transportation systems in
“steps” to coincide with demand and revenues. The plan
would integrate intercommunity shuttles, bicycle paths, and
“complete” or “green” streets as development occurs.
Complete streets include pedestrian travel, event spaces,
canopy shade trees, pervious pavements or pavers, and other
features that enable multipurpose use and value. Complete
streets are discussed in detail in the Circulation Element.
                                                                 View from Simpson Park.
     C  I  T Y      O  F     H    E  M  E  T     G   E  N E R A L    P   L  A N     2 0 3 0
                                                    7-34

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              G OALS AND P OLICIES
              O PEN S PACE    AND     C ONSERVATION
              GOAL        Preserve and protect critical open space and natural
                          resources.
              OS-1
              POLICIES
              OS-1.1     Development         Proposals       Require     development
                         proposals to identify significant biological resources and
                         to provide mitigation, including the use of adequate
                         buffering and sensitive site planning techniques, selective
                         preservation, provision of replacement habitats, and
                         other appropriate measures as may be identified in
                         habitat conservation plans or best practices related to
                         particular resources.
              OS-1.2     Vernal Pools Preserve the integrity of the vernal pool
                         complex by ensuring adequate hydration, providing
                         appropriate conservation buffers, and the preservation of
                         native plants, in accordance with the requirements of the
                         Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan.
              OS-1.3     Wetland Habitats Require project applicants to conserve
                         wetland habitats along the San Jacinto River, the Upper
                         Salt Creek watershed, and elsewhere as identified where
                         conservation serves to maintain watershed processes that
                         enhance water quality and contribute to the hydrologic
                         regime, and comply with Clean Water Act Section 404.
                         Identify and, to the maximum extent possible, conserve
                         remaining upland habitat areas adjacent to wetland and
                         riparian areas that are critical to the feeding, hibernation,
                         or nesting of wildlife species associated with these wetland
                         and riparian areas.
              OS-1.4     Resource Protection in Development Design Require
                         appropriate resource protection measures to be
                         incorporated within specific plans and subsequent
                         development proposals. Such requirements may include
                         the preparation of a vegetation management program that
                         addresses landscape maintenance, fuel modification zones,
                         management of passive open space areas, provision of
                         corridor connections for wildlife movement, conservation
                         of water courses, rehabilitation of biological resources
                         displaced in the planning process, and use of project
                         design, engineering, and construction practices that
                         minimize impacts on sensitive species, MSHCP
                         conservation areas, and designated critical habitats.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N  E  R  A L      P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                            7-35
                                         OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
OS-1.5       Restriction of Use As needed to protect resources, limit
             recreational use in open space areas where sensitive
             biological resources exist.
OS-1.6       Habitat Conservation Plans Coordinate with Riverside
             County and other relevant agencies to implement the
             Western Riverside County Multiple-Species Habitat Conservation
             Plan, the Habitat Conservation Plan for the Stephens’ Kangaroo
             Rat in Western Riverside County, and any other applicable
             habitat plan.
OS-1.7       Wildlife Movement Corridor Continue efforts to
             establish a wildlife movement corridor in areas such as the
             San Jacinto River corridor, Santa Rosa Hills, Lakeview
             Mountains, and the open space areas surrounding
             Diamond Valley Lake. As applicable, new development in
             these areas shall incorporate such corridors. To minimize
             impediments to riparian wildlife movement, new roadways
             over ravines, arroyos, and drainages shall maintain wildlife
             corridors by incorporating bridges or culverts, where
             practical.
OS-1.8       Local Resource Preservation Maintain and enhance the
             natural resources of the Santa Rosa Hills, Tres Cerritos Hills,
             Salt Creek, Bautista Canyon, San Jacinto River/Bautista
             Creek, Reinhardt Canyon, Lakeview Mountains, Diamond
             Valley Lake, and all other waterways, ecosystems, and critical
             vegetation to ensure the long-term viability of habitat, wildlife,
             and wildlife movement corridors.
OS-1.9       Partnerships Support efforts of local, state, and federal
             agencies and private conservation organizations to
             preserve, protect, and enhance identified open spaces and
             natural resources.
              Conserve open space areas and hillsides to provide
GOAL          for a balance of recreation, scenic enjoyment,
OS-2          development, and protection of natural resources
              and features.
POLICIES
OS-2.1       Development Design Encourage the use of clustered
             development and other site planning techniques to
             maximize the preservation of permanent open spaces.
OS-2.2       Resource Conservation Conserve view corridors and
             ridgelines, the San Jacinto River and Mountains, slopes,
             significant rock outcroppings, historic and landmark trees,
             and other important landforms and historic landscape
             features through the development review process.
       C I T Y     O    F   H    E M   E  T    G    E   N   E  R   A L       P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   7-36

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              OS-2.3     Greenbelts Use natural, undeveloped greenbelts as buffers
                         between developments and on the edges of the City to
                         preserve the rural and diverse character of Hemet.
              OS-2.4     Landscaping Guidelines Require developers and
                         residents to incorporate native drought-resistant vegetation
                         and shade trees into landscape designs to conserve water,
                         improve comfort, augment neighborhood aesthetics,
                         reduce energy use from operation of buildings, and
                         maximize carbon capture and storage.
              OS-2.5     Revegetation Require vegetation of graded slopes
                         concurrent with project development to minimize erosion
                         and maintain the scenic character of the community.
              OS-2.6     Open Space Accessibility As appropriate, create,
                         enhance, or improve accessibility to, visibility of, or
                         recreational opportunities in natural and open space areas.
              OS-2.7     Nature Education Identify and develop appropriate
                         natural habitat areas for low-impact hiking and nature
                         education.
              OS-2.8     County Hillside Development Coordinate with
                         Riverside County on the development of hillside and other
                         sensitive areas outside of the City jurisdictional boundaries
                         in the Planning Area and Hemet’s sphere of influence.
              GOAL        Protect prime agricultural land from conversion to
                          urbanized use for areas shown as agriculture on the
              OS-3        Land Use Map.
              POLICIES
              OS 3.1     Conservation of Agricultural Land Support conservation
                         of the remaining productive and prime agricultural lands in
                         the Planning Area by encouraging their preservation,
                         honoring the preservation easements that conserve Bautista
                         Canyon land in perpetuity, and seeking opportunities for
                         additional preservation easements.
              OS 3.2     Riverside County Agricultural Land Coordinate with
                         Riverside County to address the preservation of agricultural
                         resources outside of the City’s jurisdictional boundaries.
              OS-3.3     Land Use Compatibility Recognize and protect areas of
                         agricultural production from the encroachment of
                         incompatible land uses and establish appropriate buffers,
                         disclosures, easements, and mitigation measures, as
                         warranted.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E   N  E  R  A L      P  L   A   N     2 0 3 0
                           7-37

                                          OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
OS-3.4       Conservation Easements Secure scenic, resource, or other
             open space conservation easements, where feasible and
             suitable, as a means for protecting prime farmland located
             adjacent to residential areas and where the property does
             not quality for inclusion in an agricultural preserve program.
              Ensure that the process and manner of locating and
GOAL          extracting mineral resources in the City and
OS-4          Planning Area does not cause impacts to
              surrounding areas.
POLICIES
OS-4.1       Surface Mining and Reclamation Act Require that the
             operation and reclamation of surface mines be consistent
             with the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act
             (SMARA) and City and County zoning provisions.
OS-4.2       Protect Mineral Resources Protect and conserve mineral
             resource deposits in designated areas to ensure that such
             deposits are available for future use.
OS-4.3       Minimize Long-Term Impacts Ensure that surface
             mining operations are designed to maintain the integrity of
             significant viewsheds, hillsides, and aesthetic resources as
             designated by the City.
OS-4.4       Minimize Operational Impacts Ensure the compatibility
             of surface mining operations with surrounding properties
             and environmental resources.
OS-4.5       Restoration and Reuse Provide for the restoration and
             reuse of the surface mining site upon completion of the
             extraction and production activities in a manner that is
             sensitive to and compatible with the character and integrity
             of adjacent land uses and the natural environment.
GOAL          Conserve and protect surface water, groundwater,
              and imported water resources.
OS-5
POLICIES
OS-5.1       Natural Approaches Use natural approaches to the
             maximum extent possible to manage streams and create
             drainage infrastructure systems to protect groundwater
             recharge areas, conserve groundwater resources, maintain
             water quality through pollution reduction, channel drainage
             in environmentally sensitive ways, and design attractive and
             multi-use open space areas for recreation and habitat.
       C I T Y     O   F     H   E  M   E  T     G   E  N   E  R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                    7-38
 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              OS-5.2     Protection of Groundwater Resources Identify and
                         protect the area’s waterways and groundwater resources
                         from depletion and sources of pollution in cooperation
                         with local water districts, Riverside County Flood Control
                         District, the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control
                         Board, or other appropriate agencies.
              OS-5.3     Development Design Encourage the efficient use of water
                         resources by residential, commercial, and industrial users by
                         requiring development project proposals to incorporate best
                         management practices into their designs, including the use
                         of new technology in development design.
              OS-5.4     Reclaimed Water Use reclaimed water to irrigate parks,
                         golf courses, public landscaped areas, and for other
                         feasible applications as service becomes available from
                         local water providers.
              OS-5.5     Water Efficient Landscaping Require new landscape
                         installations or rehabilitation projects by public agencies,
                         nonresidential developers, multi-family residential
                         developers, and homeowners to use water efficiently,
                         encourage water conservation, and prevent water waste.
              OS-5.6     Water Management Strategy In cooperation with local
                         water suppliers, adopt and implement a comprehensive
                         water management strategy that specifies the City’s role in
                         the conservation and groundwater recharge effort.
              OS-5.7     Regional Planning Participate in regional water resource
                         management planning to facilitate the long-term availability of
                         clean water resources for Western Riverside County.
              OS-5.8     Educational Outreach Support and engage in
                         educational outreach programs with local water suppliers
                         and other agencies that promote water conservation,
                         drought-tolerant landscapes, and widespread use of water-
                         saving technologies.
              GOAL        Conserve energy resources through the use of
                          available technology and conservation practices.
              OS-6
              POLICIES
              OS-6.1     CALGreen Standards Encourage the efficient use of energy
                         resources by residential, commercial, and industrial users by
                         requiring project proposals to incorporate energy-efficient
                         products and techniques into their designs in accordance with
                         adopted California Green Building Standards Code standards
                         and other development standards.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N   E  R A L       P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                            7-39

                                         OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
OS-6.2       City Incentives Through incentives such as expedited
             review of development projects, promote nonrequired
             alternative energy practices and Leadership in Energy and
             Environmental Design (LEED) certifications.
OS-6.3       Federal, State, Utility Company Incentives Encourage
             homeowners, business owners, and other energy users to
             use incentives offered by federal, state, and utility
             companies; to identify voluntary retrofit opportunities and
             funding options that increase building energy performance;
             and to reduce energy consumption.
OS-6.4       Public Sector Development and Practices Require
             Redevelopment Agency–funded projects, public sector
             projects, and publicly owned institutions and facilities to
             use systems, methods, and practices that promote energy
             conservation.
OS-6.5       Clean Energy Support the use and production of clean
             energy resources through green technology and programs
             that promote wind, solar, renewable, biomass, and
             cogenerating energy resources, where compatible with
             adjacent land uses.
OS-6.6       Solar Energy Encourage existing or new structures to
             maximize solar access by promoting passive solar energy
             design, natural ventilation, effective use of daylight, an on-
             site solar generation.
OS-6.7       Recycling Promote the use of recycling and recycled
             materials in development projects and consumable products.
GOAL          Improve air quality and seek to reduce green house
              gas emissions.
OS-7
POLICIES
OS-7.1       Development Design and Practices Reduce the amount
             of air pollution emissions from mobile and stationary
             sources, and enhance the South Coast Air Basin by using
             best management practices in development proposals and
             project implementation.
OS-7.2       Public Transportation Pursue expansion of the public
             transportation system, as well as bicycle and pedestrian
             trails, that are linked to the regional transit network, to
             reduce vehicle trips.
OS-7.3       Alternative Vehicles Promote the use of fuel-efficient
             and low-emissions vehicles, including neighborhood
             electric vehicles (NEVs).
       C I T Y      O  F     H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N   E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   7-40

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              OS-7.4     Municipal Fleet Manage the municipal fleet to achieve
                         the highest possible number of fuel-efficient and low
                         emissions vehicles commercially available.
              OS-7.5     Trip Reduction Encourage a mix of housing types that
                         are affordable to all segments of the population and are
                         near job opportunities to further reduce vehicle trips.
              OS-7.6     Transportation Trip Management Encourage employers
                         to implement transportation demand management (TDM)
                         measures to reduce trips and vehicle miles traveled.
              OS-7.7     Clean Technologies Encourage businesses to use clean,
                         innovative technologies and promote the use of alternative
                         clean-fueled vehicles, new transportation technologies, and
                         other alternatives to the combustion engine for City
                         vehicles and individual use.
              OS-7.8     Green Building Techniques Encourage green building
                         techniques that improve indoor air quality, energy
                         efficiency and conservation in buildings, and utilization of
                         renewable energy sources.
              OS-7.9     Stationary Source Pollution Continue to minimize
                         stationary source pollution through the following:
                              Ensure that industrial and commercial land uses are
                              meeting existing South Coast Air Quality Management
                              air thresholds by adhering to established rules and
                              regulations.
                              Encourage the use of new technology to neutralize
                              harmful criteria pollutants from stationary sources.
                              Reduce exposure of the City’s sensitive receptor s to
                              poor air quality nodes through smart land use decisions.
              OS-7.10    Sensitive Receptors Locate sensitive receptors (i.e.,
                         residences, playgrounds, childcare centers, athletic
                         facilities, churches, long-term health care facilities,
                         rehabilitation centers, convalescent centers, and retirement
                         homes) away from significant pollution sources to the
                         maximum extent feasible.
              OS-7.11    Fugitive Dust Reduce the amount of fugitive dust
                         released into the atmosphere by construction and
                         demolition, materials handling, paved roads, unpaved
                         roads, and stock piles through development standards and
                         compliance with CEQA regulations.
              OS-7.12    Best Management Practices Ensure all applicable best
                         management practices are used in accordance with South
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E    N  E  R  A L      P   L A   N    2 0 3 0
                           7-41

                                          OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
             Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) to
             reduce emitting criteria pollutants during construction.
OS-7.13:     Partnerships Continue to work with the WRCOG
             Regional Air Quality Task Force to implement regional
             and local programs designed to meet federal, state, and
             regional air quality planning requirements.
OS-7.14      Public Education Protect the air from contamination by
             working with South Coast Air Quality Management
             District and other interested organizations to elevate
             public awareness regarding air pollution sources and
             pollutant reduction initiatives.
OS-7.15      State Updates Consult and coordinate with State resource
             and emergency management agencies regarding updates to
             climate change science and development of adaption
             priorities.
              Promote practices that fulfill present and future
GOAL          housing and economic needs while not harming
OS-8          natural resources, depleting renewable energy
              resources, or disrupting environmental systems.
POLICIES
OS-8.1       Comprehensive Approach Coordinate policies and
             implementation measures of the various elements of the
             General Plan to ensure a comprehensive approach to
             reducing greenhouse gas emissions and to establish the
             basis for a sustainability plan.
OS-8.2       Land Use Planning Encourage new and infill
             development that provides employment opportunities for
             Hemet residents, is located near activity centers or along
             transportation corridors, and incorporates off-road trails
             for pedestrians and cyclists to reduce the length and
             number of vehicle trips.
OS-8.3       Mixed Use Development Support mixed-use
             commercial-residential development in accordance with
             the Land Use Element as an opportunity to improve the
             City’s current jobs-housing ratio and work-live balance.
OS-8.4       Local Employment Continue to create local employment
             opportunities by maintaining an adequate supply of
             designated commercial and industrial land, in accordance
             with the Land Use Element.
OS-8.5       Jobs/Housing Balance Improve the City’s jobs-housing
             balance by encouraging the development, expansion, and
             retention of business.
       C I T Y     O   F    H    E  M   E  T   G   E  N   E R  A L    P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                  7-42

 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
              OS-8.6     Vehicle Miles Traveled Cooperate with regional, state,
                         and federal agencies to reduce vehicle miles traveled and
                         consequent emissions through job creation.
              OS-8.7     Innovative Practices Encourage the efforts of utility
                         companies, water companies, private businesses, and other
                         persons or organizations in their efforts to institute
                         sustainable practices in their operations.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E  N  E   R  A L       P  L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                           7-43
                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
        This page intentionally left blank.
C I T Y  O  F    H   E   M  E   T     G   E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                         7-44
                                           CHAPTER 8 RECREATION AND TRAILS
Hemet desires to create a city rich
with parks and recreation
opportunities that will enhance the
lives of current residents and visitors
and remain an asset for future
generations. The Recreation and
Trails Element establishes the
framework to integrate these
resources        and         encourage
partnerships with other private and
public organizations.
                                           T-Ball Opening Day Ceremonies
                                           T      he purpose of the Recreation and Trails Element is to describe the
                                                  current parks and recreational resources available in the City of Hemet
                                                  and the Planning Area, acknowledge deficiencies in the provision of
                                                  these resources, establish goals and objectives to enhance the public’s
                                           ability to access and enjoy these resources, and present an implementation
                                           strategy to meet the element’s goals and objectives.
                                              Recreation is an optional element permitted under California planning
                                              law. It is included in this General Plan to demonstrate the importance the
                                              City places on achieving an exceptional quality of life for its residents.
                                              Recreational and outdoor activities provide many tangible and intangible
                                              benefits for residents of all ages and interests. The City is committed to
                                              ensuring that a diverse array of opportunities is available to meet the
                                              needs of all persons regardless of socioeconomic status, physical
                                              capabilities, or age.
                 C   I  T Y        O   F H  E   M   E   T     G  E   N  E  R  A L     P   L A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                                 8-1

                                                           RECREATION AND TRAILS
8.1       I SSUES     AND O PPORTU NITIES
Several important recreational issues and opportunities are confronting
Hemet:
Changing Demographics On average, Hemet’s population is
older, with a higher median age than Riverside County as a whole.
This specialized demographic has resulted in a greater need for
recreation and cultural facilities that support the lifestyles of the
area’s large and well-established retirement population in addition to
its growing family population. Facilities and activities must be
cooperatively designed to accommodate the needs of all residents.
Shared Management of Parks and Recreation Services The
provision and management of local parks and recreational services is
shared between the City and Valley-Wide Recreation and Park
District (Valley-Wide). The City does not have a recreation Walkers and Soccer Players at Mary Henley
department, although it does lease the Simpson Center to the Park
YMCA for recreation, classes, health care, and referral services available to
residents of all ages and economic means. The shared management of parks
and recreational services requires coordination between the two
organizations to cover needed services and facilities; however, it also
provides an opportunity to maximize available financial and personnel
resources.
Increasing Demand for New Facilities and Services The influx of
families seeking housing opportunities and a safe community has increased
pressures on the City, Valley-Wide, and other organizations to keep up with
the demand for recreation services and cultural activities that target children
and youth. The population increase also provides opportunities to expand
cultural and artistic experiences as new residents begin participating in and
providing leadership in community activities and organizations.
Community Cohesion Local recreational activities can bring together
diverse segments of the community who find value and interest in the same
activities and sports events. Sports and recreational activities promote
teamwork and good sportsmanship.
Conservation-Oriented Park Design One of the best
economic opportunities available to the City is the maximization
of its open space and outdoor recreational resources. Both the
City and the Planning Area contain significant natural assets and
features. Where appropriate, these resources could be
incorporated into park design, thus ensuring their preservation
and creating renowned park facilities. Additionally, new park
design could contain sustainable infrastructure such as naturalized
stormwater management, water recycling, alternative energy
sources, and integration into off-road trail systems and other Stoney Mountain Park
transportation networks. Valley-Wide has already incorporated
conservation measures into its park design specifications.
          C  I T Y      O  F     H   E  M E   T    G   E   N  E   R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       8-2

            RECREATION AND TRAILS
                                       Financial Challenges Changes in the economy over the past several years
                                       at the local, regional, and national levels have created new challenges in the
                                       provision, operation, and maintenance of adequate parks and recreation
                                       programs. To keep pace with the needs of residents, the City has
                                       recognized a need to not only continue its coordination efforts with Valley-
                                       Wide, but to also form partnerships with other public and private sector
                                       entities to achieve its goals. For example, private parks and developer-
                                       provided amenities within housing developments can supplement publically
                                       provided and managed facilities. A multipronged approach fosters
                                       unprecedented opportunities for discussions on strategic planning,
                                       efficiency improvements, priorities, and sustainable implementation
                                       measures. In the face of challenging fiscal times, it is important to recognize
                                       the importance of community volunteerism to offset financial and resource
                                       challenges while simultaneously engendering a spirit of “community pride”
                                       and “ownership” in the quality of our region.
                                       8.2       R ELAT ED P R OGRAM S , P LANS                   AND
                                                 R EGULATI ONS
The City of Hemet is home to           The provision of adequate parks and recreational facilities as well as art,
numerous national recreation events    music, and cultural activities is a concerted effort between the private and
such as the Tinsel Triathlon and       the public sectors and between individual and group interests. The
the Hemet Double Century bike          following key regulations, organizations, and programs may affect decision
ride. Both of these events are among   making:
the largest of their kind in the
nation and serve to illustrate         National Recreation and Parks Association The National Recreation
Hemet’s attraction for recreational    and Park Association (NRPA) is a membership organization that focuses
lifestyle activities and the City’s    on advancing parks, recreation, and environmental conservation efforts that
desire to promote a healthy            enhance the quality of life for all people. The NRPA provides many services
community concept throughout the       related to parks and recreation, including the development of youth
21st century                           programs, parks and recreation career information, safety, and education.
                                       The NRPA also publishes national guidelines for developing and
                                       conserving parks and recreation.
                                       California Subdivision Map Act (Quimby Act) Section 66477 of the
                                       Government Code provides local jurisdictions with the authority to acquire
                                       parklands in association with new land divisions. This provision of state law
                                       allows a city, by ordinance, to require the dedication of land, dedication of
                                       improvements, payment of an in-lieu fee, or any combination of these
                                       items, for park and recreational purposes as a condition of approving a
                                       subdivision map. These provisions are included in Chapter 70 Subdivisions,
                                       Article 5, of the Hemet Municipal Code.
                                       Riverside County Regional Park and Open Space District Trail
                                       activities are managed by the Natural and Cultural Resources Division of
                                       the Riverside County Regional Park and Open Space District. The County
                                       is in the process of making revisions to its general plan’s Circulation
                                       Element. The changes update policies concerning trails and bikeways, revise
                                       the countywide trail map, and revise area plan trail maps. The City of
                                       Hemet is cooperating with the effort by ensuring that City trails connect
                                       with regional trails.
          C    I   T Y      O   F    H   E  M   E  T     G   E   N E  R   A L      P L  A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                             8-3

                                                               RECREATION AND TRAILS
Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District The Valley-Wide Recreation
and Park District was formed on July 27, 1972, to provide recreation and
park services to residents within an 800-square mile area that includes
Hemet, San Jacinto, Valle Vista, Sage, Aguanga, Winchester, Menifee, and
French Valley. Valley-Wide is funded by four sources of revenue: property
tax, program fees, benefit assessments, and grants. In addition to owning
and operating parks and ball fields within Hemet, Valley-Wide has worked
cooperatively with the City on the construction, renovation, or maintenance
of City-owned parks including the construction of Mary Henley Park, the
renovation of the Santa Fe Ball Fields, the scheduling of shuffle board
courts, and the fertilization of lawn bowl courts. Valley-Wide also provides
a variety of recreational programs available to Hemet residents including
classes, sports activities, day camps and preschool, and trips and excursions.
City of Hemet Measure C On June 7, 1988, Hemet voters approved a
measure to require updating the City’s General Plan to incorporate
performance measures related to traffic, drainage facilities, water storage
and distribution facilities, park and recreational facilities, police services, fire
services, and sanitary sewers. These performance standards were
incorporated into the 1992 General Plan as a component of the Public
Services and Facilities Element. They are incorporated by into the various
goals, policies, and implementation programs within General Plan 2030 and
are attached as Appendix G.
8.3       P ARKS      AND R EC REAT ION F ACILITIES
The City has a continuing goal to establish and maintain a system of park,
recreation, and open space lands of sufficient size and in the appropriate
locations to serve the needs of Hemet residents of all ages and physical
capability. The facilities comprise public parks, private parks and recreation
facilities, golf courses, joint use facilities with the Hemet Unified School
District, and special use parks that offer a range of amenities and
recreational activities. An inventory of the parks is provided in Tables 8.1
and 8.2. A map of existing park locations is provided in Figure 8.1.
An adequate parks system benefits a city in several ways, as summarized
below from a publication of The Trust for Public Land, entitled,
“Measuring the Economic Value of a City Park System”:
Health Value Parks provide health value with opportunities for exercise and
a more active lifestyle, which reduces obesity and its many effects, and
promotes good health. Research suggests that access to parks can help
people increase their level of physical activity through amenities such as ball
fields; playgrounds; trails for walking, jogging, and biking; tennis courts;
basketball courts; and horseshoe pits.
Community Cohesion Parks provide opportunities for community cohesion
with structured activities such as sports leagues and informal interactions at
playgrounds and park benches. Studies have shown that the more webs of
human relationships a community has, the stronger, safer, and more
successful it is. Parks provide opportunities for people of all ages to
interact, communicate, compete, learn, and grow.
          C   I T Y      O   F    H  E   M   E  T     G    E   N  E  R   A L       P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                          8-4

         RECREATION AND TRAILS
                                                Table 8.1
                                         Inventory of City Parks
                        Location of Park in                                                 City1          VW2
    Name of Park                                              Amenities
                              Hemet                                                        Acreage       Acreage
Mini Parks                                                                                       2.75 acres
Rodeghier Green     Northeast corner of Acacia Landscaped area; bench.                      0.25             –
                    and Palm
Spencer Park        Palm, south of Stetson     Landscaped area; picnic area.                0.50             –
Welch Green         Northwest corner of        Landscaped area; seating area.               1.00             –
                    Florida and Palm
Cawston Park        Cawston at Devonshire      Landscaped area; picnic area; toddler        1.0.0            –
                                               playground.
                                                                    Total Mini Parks        2.75            0.0
Neighborhood Parks                                                                                26 acres
Weston Park         700 East Florida           Playground; basketball court;                 4.0             –
                                               restroom; landscaped area;
                                               shuffleboard courts.
Santa Fe Ball Field 252 S. Santa Fe            Softball field; radio controlled               –             5.0
                                               racetrack.
Bill Gray Park      25330 Lake                 Ball field; two half-court basketball          –             5.0
                                               areas; play area; picnic area.
Oltman Park         Cawston at Eaton           Dog park; landscaped trail; gated             6.0             –
                                               playground.
Stoney Mountain     Inglestone at Cinnabar     Basketball court; playground; covered         6.0             –
Park                                           picnic area; short trail; beautiful large
                                               rock outcropping.
McSweeny Park       McSweeny Parkway at        Under construction                            5.0
                    Village Loop
                                                         Total Neighborhood Parks            21.0          10.0
Community Parks                                                                                   98 acres
Gibbel Park         2500 W. Florida            Two lighted tennis courts; baseball          11.0             –
                                               field; half-court basketball; large play
                                               area; picnic area; restroom; lawn
                                               bowling and large turf area;
                                               horseshoe pits; Veterans Memorial.
Searl Youth Sports  1001 N Buena Vista         Three lighted baseball fields; lighted         –            11.0
Park                                           soccer field; picnic area; snack bar;
                                               community building with restrooms.
Mary Henley Park    801 S. Kirby               Half-court basketball area; play area        16.0             –
                                               with restrained swing; picnic area;
                                               restroom; large turf area.
        C  I  T Y   O   F    H   E   M  E  T    G   E   N   E   R  A L        P  L    A  N   2 0 3 0
                                                    8-5

                                                                        RECREATION AND TRAILS
                                                             Table 8.1
                                                   Inventory of City Parks
                                   Location of Park in                                                   City1         VW2
      Name of Park                                                          Amenities
                                          Hemet                                                        Acreage       Acreage
Brubaker Park and               Park: 3703 W. Harrison       Brubaker Park: A basketball court,           60.0           –
Hemet Youth Baseball            Fields: Cawston at           play area, and picnic area are
Fields                          Mustang Way                  developed on 5 acres.
                                                             Youth Baseball Fields: A dozen
                                                             baseball fields of various sizes are
                                                             operated by Hemet Youth Baseball.
                                                             Passive Use: The remainder of the
                                                             acreage is open space preserved for
                                                             passive use.
                                                                          Total Community Parks           87.0          11.0
Regional Parks                                                                                               604.5 acres
Valley-Wide Regional            901 West Esplanade, San      Three lighted baseball fields; six            –            36.0
Park and headquarters           Jacinto                      lighted tennis courts; six soccer
for the Valley-Wide                                          fields; picnic area; play area; batting
Recreation and Park                                          cages; volleyball court; horseshoe
District3                                                    pits; fitness trail; gymnasium;
                                                             multipurpose room; snack bar.
Diamond Valley Lake             1801 Angler                  Existing 35 acres: aquatic center;            –            85.0
Community Park                                               eight lighted ball fields; three soccer
                                                             fields; two pickle ball courts; play
                                                             areas; restrooms.
                                                             Planned 50 acres: five soccer fields;
                                                             four basketball courts; six tennis
                                                             courts; seven volleyball courts;
                                                             picnic areas; fitness trails;
                                                             undeveloped open space.
Simpson Park                    28505 Rawlings               Wilderness park; sheltered picnic           483.5           –
                                                             area; hiking and off-road cycling
                                                             trails; restroom
                                                                             Total Regional Parks        483.5         121.0
                                                                SUBTOTAL PARK ACREAGE                   594.25         142.0
                                                                      TOTAL PARK ACREAGE                       736.25
1 Owned and managed by the City of Hemet
2 Owned and managed by Valley-Wide (VW) Recreation and Park District
3.Not located in the City of Hemet
            C    I  T Y        O   F     H  E  M    E  T      G     E   N  E  R    A L      P  L   A N     2 0 3 0
                                                                    8-6

           RECREATION AND TRAILS
                                                  Table 8.2
                                 Inventory of Planning Area Parks
  Name and Type of   Location of Park
                                                       Amenities                Acreage        Ownership
         Park            in Hemet
Valle Vista Park,   25175 Fairview       Basketball court; play area; picnic        5.0   Valley-Wide
Neighborhood Park                        shelter; restroom; horseshoe pits;               Recreation and Park
                                         community center.                                District (Valley-Wide)
Louis Jackson Park, 43935 Acacia         Three baseball fields; two lighted        10.0   Valley-Wide
Community Park                           softball fields; play area; large
                                         picnic area; community center.
Exchange Club Park, Mayberry at          BMX track; soccer field; day care          8.0   Valley-Wide and
Community Park      Fairview             center.                                          Hemet Unified
(planned)                                                                                 School District
Maze Stone Park,    Lakeview             Open space area that contains the          5.0   Riverside County
Special Use Passive Mountains            Maze Stone, a prehistoric
Park                                     petroglyph and a California State
                                         Historical Landmark.
                                                         TOTAL ACREAGE             28.0
                                Tourism Economy Parks play a role in a city’s tourism economy. Parks and
                                recreational venues attract tourists, who may stay overnight, dine, or shop,
                                and who share their positive experiences with their friends and
                                acquaintances, who become new tourists. The Hemet area has stellar parks,
                                trail systems, outdoor venues, museums, and ecological reserves that
                                provide outstanding opportunities for economic development through
                                tourism. The forming of partnerships between the City, Valley-Wide,
                                Diamond Valley Lake, the Hemet–San Jacinto Chamber of Commerce, the
                                Hemet Unified School District, and other interested parties will help ensure
                                the success of tourism-oriented events and programs.
                                Property Values Studies indicate that parks have a positive impact on
                                residential property values. People are willing to pay more to live near a nice
                                park or in a community with parks that offer natural beauty and views as
                                well as direct use value. Economists call this phenomenon “hedonic value.”
                                Hedonic value for parks is generally judged by two factors: quality of the
                                park and distance to the park. A community with many excellent parks
                                offers a higher quality of life for its residents.
                                Stormwater Management Parkland reduces stormwater runoff, thereby
                                reducing stormwater management costs by capturing precipitation and/or
                                slowing runoff. When rainwater flows off roads, sidewalks, and other
                                impervious surfaces, it causes temporary flooding and picks up pollutants
                                that enter the stormwater drainage system. Large, pervious surface areas in
                                parks allow precipitation to infiltrate and recharge the groundwater,
                                providing conservation of water resources and reducing the costs of
                                managing and treating stormwater runoff.
         C   I  T Y O   F    H   E   M  E   T      G   E   N    E  R    A L  P   L   A  N  2 0 3 0
                                                       8-7

                                                           RECREATION AND TRAILS
Clean Air Parks contribute to clean air through the removal of air pollution
by vegetation. Air pollution is a significant and expensive urban problem,
injuring health and damaging structures. Trees and shrubs remove air
pollutants such as nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone
and some particulates. Leaves absorb gases, and particulates adhere to the
plant surface, at least temporarily. Vegetation in parks plays a role in
improving air quality and reducing pollution costs.
8.3.1          PUBLIC PARKS BY CLASSIFICATION
Park facilities in the Hemet area range from less than an acre to
483 acres at Simpson Park. Depending on size and/or special
purpose, each park offers differing levels of recreational
amenities, from passive to active to wilderness to open space.
Table 8.1 lists City parks by classification and ownership. Valley-
Wide Regional Park is included in the Hemet park inventory
because it is a regional park located on the boundary of the City
with a service area that includes Hemet residents. Table 8.2
inventories Planning Area parks.
The parks are classified by size, use, and ownership, as described
in the text immediately below:                                       Spencer Park
Mini Parks Mini parks, also known as pocket parks, are generally
smaller than 2 acres and contain passive facilities, such as small
landscaped spaces with benches and picnic tables, and buffering
from adjacent urban land use activities. These parks are intended
to serve the immediate neighborhood within a one-quarter-mile
radius of the park. Mini parks in Hemet consist of Rodeghier
Green, Spencer Park, Welch Green, and Cawston Park.
Neighborhood          Parks       Neighborhood      parks    satisfy
nonprogrammed recreational needs and include passive open
space, active play areas, and limited practice and play fields.
Neighborhood parks are typically between 5 and 10 acres. Oltman Park
Neighborhood parks service an area of approximately one-half
mile. Neighborhood parks in Hemet consist of Weston, Santa Fe
Ball Fields, Bill Gray, Oltman, and Stoney Mountain Parks.
Community Parks Community parks serve a broader purpose
than neighborhood parks, accommodating more structured
activities with lighted athletic complexes and group picnic areas as
well as passive parkland. Community parks are intended to serve
the recreational needs of several neighborhoods and generally
have a service area of up to 2 miles. Community parks are
generally between 20 and 30 acres. Hemet’s community parks
were primarily built at a time when the City demographics favored
an older population; therefore, the parks are undersized for the Swing for paraplegic youth at Mary Henley
current demographics and the active park amenities are deficient. Park
Community parks in Hemet consist of Gibbel, Searl Youth Sports,
Mary Henley, and Brubaker Parks and Hemet Youth Baseball
Fields.
          C  I  T Y      O  F     H  E  M   E  T   G   E   N E  R   A L    P   L  A N   2 0 3 0
                                                       8-8

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                                Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Jacinto
                                                                                                        Beech St                                 Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 River
                                                                                                                                                                                Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                 California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                  Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                              Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                         Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ian
                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                      Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ve
                                                                                                                                                              Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St                                                                                                                            Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                    Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                      ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                     Florida Ave                                                                                            Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                        Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                       Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kirby St
                                                                                                                                          ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                                                   HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                         ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                    AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                       Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                           Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                      AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                    ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                  San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                       ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Elk St                                                                                                                                                                              me
                                                                                                                                                                    Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                         Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                               eH
                                                                                                                               ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                 Lak
                                                                                                                                                  Warren Rd
                                                                                                                           Ste
                                                                                                                                                               Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                             California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  go
                                                                                                                                                              ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pk
                                                                                                                                                            iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                       on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                   g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                            e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                     Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Recreation/QP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                Diamond Valley Lake
                                                            West                                                                                                                                                                                                                     State St
                                                        Recreation/QP
                                                            Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 066 01/24/2012
                                                                                                               LEGEND
                                                                                                                                         Golf Courses                                                                             Welch Green Park                                                                       Valle Vista Park                                                                      Gibbel Park                                                                                             Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                         Schools                                                                                  Cawston Park                                                                       McSweeny Park                                                                             Searl Youth Sports Park                                                                                 Simpson Park
                                                                                                                                         Existing Parks                                                                                                                                                              Stoney Mountain Park                                                                      Brubaker Park                                                                               SPECIAL USE PASSIVE PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
                                                                                                                      Potential Recreation/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Maze Stone Park
                     Sources:                                                                                         Quasi-Public/Cultural                                                                                       Weston Park                                                                        Oltman Park                                                                               Mary Henley Park
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                 MINI PARKS                                                                                                         Bill Gray Park                                                COMMUNITY PARKS                                                                                REGIONAL PARKS                                                                                                                                 F i g u r e     8 . 1
                     1       0.5   0                                 1       2
                                                                                                                                         Rodeghier Park                                                                           Santa Fe Ball Field                                                                Future Exchange Club Park                                                                 Valley Wide Regional Park                                                                                                                  PARKS
                                                                                 Miles                                                   Spencer Park                                                                                                                                                                Louis Jackson Park                                                                        Diamond Valley Lake Community Park                                                                             H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                       RECREATION AND TRAILS
Back of Figure 8.1
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   8-10
             RECREATION AND TRAILS
                                   Regional Parks Regional parks generally provide facilities for a wide range
                                   ofB sports and recreational activities including field sports, volleyball,
                                   swimming, tennis, basketball, fitness activities, hiking or cycling trails, and
                                   play. Regional parks are generally 40 acres or larger and may include a
                                   community center or gymnasium for indoor activities. They are intended to
                                   satisfy recreational needs citywide or regionally. The three regional parks
                                   that serve Hemet are Simpson Park, Valley-Wide Regional Park, and
                                   Diamond Valley Lake Community Park. Valley-Wide Recreation and Park
                                   District manages Valley-Wide Regional and Diamond Valley Lake
Diamond Valley Lake Community      Community Park. Simpson Park, the City’s premier regional park, is
Park Aquatic Center                described in detail in Section 8.3.2.
                                   Planning Area Parks Located outside of the City’s boundaries, but within
                                   the Planning Area, are two parks owned and managed by Valley-Wide: Valle
                                   Vista Park and Louis Jackson Park. Additionally in the Planning Area is
                                   Maze Stone Park, located west of Hemet in the Lakeview Mountains of
                                   unincorporated Riverside County. It is a passive, special-use park. The
                                   park’s purpose is to preserve, protect, and interpret the prehistoric
                                   petroglyph known as the Hemet Maze Stone. Refer to Section 9.4.2 for
                                   more information about the Maze Stone. Details about the Planning Area
                                   parks are shown in Table 8-2.
Valle Vista Park
                                   8.3.2          SIMPSON PARK
                                   Simpson Park is a 483-acre wilderness park located in the Santa Rosa Hills.
                                   It is named after James Simpson, mayor of the City of Hemet from 1950 to
                                   1966, and councilmember from 1947 to 1948. The park is regionally known
                                   for its vistas and for its current and potential hiking and off-road biking
                                   trails. Scattered throughout Simpson Park are numerous single-track trails
                                   of various lengths and levels of difficulty that link to trails in the Santa Rosa
                                   Hills. Many of these trails have been mapped and ranked by regional cycling
                                   organizations. Current and proposed trails are further discussed in Section
                                   8.4. The City is working with private organizations and other public
                                   agencies to connect the park with regional biking trails within
 Hiking trails in Simpson Park     unincorporated Riverside County. The community involvement in
                                   maintaining trails and preserving the environment has been a fundamental
                                   aspect of the park’s success over the last 20 years.
                                   8.3.3 DIAMOND VALLEY LAKE RECREATION/EDUCATION
                                             AREA
                                   Owned and managed by MWD, the Diamond Valley Lake
                                   Recreation/Education Area covers 6,500 acres of land and water, which
                                   includes the reservoir/lake, conservation areas, active recreation facilities,
                                   museum facilities, areas for passive recreation, campgrounds, and restricted
                                   commercial uses in four general areas: Diamond Valley Lake; Diamond
                                   Valley Lake Park/East Recreation Area; West Recreation Area; and a
 Mountain biking at Simpson Park   portion of the Southwestern Riverside County Multi-Species Reserve. The
                                   Reserve surrounds the lake and connects it on the south to Lake Skinner.
                                   Figure 8.2 shows the DVL Recreation/Education Area. Each of the
                                   components is briefly described below.
            C   I  T Y     O   F H  E   M   E  T     G   E  N  E  R  A L      P  L    A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                        8-11

                                                           RECREATION AND TRAILS
Figure 8.2. Diamond Valley Lake Recreation/Education Area
Diamond Valley Lake Diamond Valley Lake is a regional storage reservoir
that holds enough water to meet the area’s emergency and drought needs
for 6 months. The lake is an important component in MWD’s water supply
plans for southern California. Although body contact with the water is
prohibited, the lake has become an active and popular shoreline and boat
fishing venue stocked with many varieties of coldwater (e.g., trout) and
warmer water (e.g., bass) fish. MWD is establishing a substantial trail system
that will allow visitors to hike and bike through the hills surrounding the
reservoir, and eventually through the multispecies reserve. Currently open is
the 21.8-mile Lakeview Trail for cyclists and hikers, the 5.9-mile North Hills
Trail for hikers and equestrians, and a shorter looping hiking trail for
viewing seasonal wildflowers located with the reserve. The City is working
with MWD and other organizations to connect its trails to the Diamond
Valley Lake trail system.
Diamond Valley Lake Park Specific Plan/East Recreation Area
The Diamond Valley Lake Park Specific Plan provides for a variety of
recreation-related land uses on approximately 538 acres located within the
City of Hemet in the East Recreation Area. The specific land area is divided
into six planning areas. As of 2010, only Planning Area 1 and approximately
half of Planning Area 2 had been developed. A new land use plan may be
proposed in the future for the undeveloped planning areas; however, the
current vision is described below:
         C   I T Y      O  F    H   E  M   E  T    G    E  N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       8-12

 RECREATION AND TRAILS
                    Planning Area 1: Consists of approximately 22 acres and includes the
                    visitor center, the Western Science Center museum and research
                    facility, and park entry signage.
                    Planning Area 2: Consists of an 85-acre regional park operated by
                    Valley-Wide and named the Diamond Valley Lake Community Park.
                    Approximately 40 acres have been developed, including an aquatic
                    center and other recreational amenities as described in Table 8.1.
                    Planning Area 3: Plans include a recreation lake (body contact) and day-
                    use park encompassing approximately 266 acres in the center of the
                    specific plan area.
                    Planning Area 4: Plans designate approximately 58 acres for additional
                    recreation-related uses such as campgrounds, lodges, a golf course,
                    restricted commercial, an expansion of Diamond Valley Lake
                    Community Park, parking, or similar uses.
                    Planning Area 5: Plans envision a 40-acre outdoor education facility
                    oriented toward youth and intended to provide a camplike environment
                    for groups of young people.
                    Planning Area 6: Plans for the approximately 34-acre area include
                    recreational-related uses such as a golf course, restricted commercial, a
                    special events area, campgrounds, and hiking trails.
              West Recreation Area This area is located between Winchester Road and
              the west dam face outside of the City’s current jurisdictional boundaries.
              MWD is considering a number of potential uses for this currently
              undeveloped area including regional recreational uses such as campgrounds,
              hiking and cycling trails, restricted commercial, and renewable energy
              production. There is also an existing area developed with equipment and
              utilities supporting the operation of the lake/reservoir.
              Southwestern Riverside County Multi-Species Reserve The reserve
              consists of 14,000 acres surrounding and connecting Diamond Valley Lake
              with Lake Skinner via the 2,500-acre Dr. Roy E. Shipley Reserve purchased
              by MWD as partial mitigation for the project. A portion of the reserve is
              located within the DVL Recreation/Education Area: it surrounds the lake
              and extends to approximately 100 feet above the Lakeview Trail and
              includes a 500 and 1,000 foot wide wildlife corridor at the base of the West
              and East Dam, respectively. The reserve is cooperatively managed by
              MWD, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the California Department of
              Fish and Game, the Riverside County Regional Park and Open-Space
              District, and the Riverside County Habitat Conservation Agency. Trail
              systems or other means of public access require the approval of each of
              these agencies, but present an opportunity for passive recreation and the
              interpretation of natural resources that are unique to Hemet and western
              Riverside County. The reserve is home to at least eight types of habitat and
              up to 16 sensitive bird, animal, and plant species. Three types of habitat
              dominate: Riverside coastal sage scrub, nonnative grasslands, and chaparral.
C I T Y O F H  E   M    E   T     G  E  N   E   R A L    P   L  A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    8-13

                                                             RECREATION AND TRAILS
Smaller habitats include coast live oak woodland, southern willow scrub and
live oak, and cottonwood willow riparian forests.
8.3.4          RECREATIONAL SERVICES
Recreational services in Hemet are currently shared between the City,
Valley-Wide, and Hemet Youth Baseball. Facilities and services offered and
managed in the City by the three organizations are outlined below:
Simpson Center The James Simpson Memorial Center and
Senior Wing is a neighborhood center that has been operated
by the City since 1978. The center offers a variety of services
and activities including blood pressure checks, immunizations,
education about nutrition, support groups, a blood bank, a
paralegal, AARP mature driving classes, and senior resource
and referral. Additional activities are exercise classes, movies,
crafts, games that provide opportunities for interaction and
fun, and beginning in 2011, a veteran’s resource center. In
2011, the City entered into a contract with the YMCA to run
the programs at the Center and expand services and programs
for all age groups.                                                    Dancing on Recycled Tires at Simpson Center
Hemet Youth Sports The City, with assistance from Valley-Wide,
developed a dozen baseball fields at Brubaker Park. The City continues to
maintain the fields. Hemet Youth Baseball provides the scheduling and the
management of the fields. Other youth sports organizations, such as the
American Youth Soccer Organization (AYSO) also operate in the valley
and provide programs at city park and school facilities.
Classes and Excursions Valley-Wide offers a variety of classes and sports
activities to Hemet residents at its regional park facility and at the four
parks it operates in Hemet. Residents may also participate in excursions
offered by Valley-Wide.
Hemet Police Activities League Hemet Police Activities League (PAL) is
a joint program with Valley-Wide dedicated to building the bond between
“cops and kids.” Hemet PAL offers a variety of activities by
providing video games, a movie room, a computer, board games,
pool and ping pong tables, field trips, and a boxing program.
Police department employees provide the supervision and
leadership.
Coordination and management of services and facilities between
the three organizations is a constantly evolving effort.
Jurisdictional authority and management of parks and
recreational services is an issue that will be addressed in the City’s
park and recreation master plan.
                                                                        Four Seasons Golf Course
 8.3.5         OTHER PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES
In addition to public parks and special use parks, there are other
public and private recreational amenities in the City that enrich
the quality of life of residents and visitors, as noted below.
          C  I  T Y      O   F    H   E   M  E   T    G   E  N  E  R   A L     P   L A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                         8-14

 RECREATION AND TRAILS
                        Golf Courses There are nine golf courses in the Planning Area: four nine-
                        hole courses and five 18-hole courses (Table 8.3). The courses serve the
                        retirement community and the increasing number of younger residents
                        moving to the area. Additionally, the public courses are components of
                        country/golf clubs that provide enhanced amenities such as driving ranges,
                        golf shops, restaurant facilities, and banquet facilities. The location of each
                        of the golf courses is shown in Figure 8-1.
                                                  Table 8.3
                                     Golf Courses in the Hemet Area
                       Name                                  Location                 Type        Holes
      Arroyo Fairways                           42751 E. Florida Avenue            Private      9
      Colonial Country Club                     601 N. Kirby Street                Private      18
      Diamond Valley Country Club               31220 Sage Road                    Public       18
      Echo Hills Golf Course (closed 2010)      545 E. Thorton Avenue              Private      9
      Hemet Golf Club                           7375 World Cup Avenue              Public       18
      Hemet West Mobile Estates                 5001 W. Florida Avenue             Private      9
      Panorama Village Golf Course              1401 Teakwood Place                Private      9
      Seven Hills Golf Course                   1537 S. Lyon Avenue                Public       18
      Soboba Springs Country Club               1020 Soboba Road, San Jacinto      Public       18
                        Private Parks and Amenities Private parks and recreational amenities are
                        generally located within a planned community or subdivision, are owned
                        and operated by a homeowners association or other private entity, and are
                        geared toward the interests of the residents. Golf, putting greens,
                        shuffleboard facilities, pools, community centers, and passive open space
                        are common examples of amenities. Communities with private amenities
                        include Peppertree, Sweeny Ranch, Seven Hills, and Willowwalk.
                        School Facilities The Hemet Unified School District provides recreational
                        uses at each of its schools such as ball fields and playgrounds. The City has
                        both current and potential park facilities located adjacent or close to
                        schools. Opportunities exist to expand the joint use of school-city facilities
                        to create additional or better designed parks and recreational amenities to
                        better serve the community.
                        Parkways and Trails The City has adopted development standards for
                        scenic highway parkways, applied to specified streets within the City. The
                        scenic highway parkways have wide, landscaped setbacks and meandering
                        sidewalks that provide a pleasant location for walking, jogging, or biking.
                        Existing and proposed trail systems are further addressed in Section 8.4.
                         8.3.6        PARKLAND NEEDS AND SERVICE AREAS
                        By initiative in 1988 (Measure C), the City established a park ratio of 5.0
                        acres of developed parkland for every 1,000 residents. The City has met this
                        standard citywide with the provision of regional parks. However, a
C I T Y    O   F     H   E   M  E   T    G   E  N   E   R  A L      P L  A   N      2 0 3 0
                                            8-15
                                                              RECREATION AND TRAILS
community is best served when there are numerous mini, neighborhood
and community parks serving residents within walking distance of their
homes, generally a radius of one-half to 2 miles. A shortage of public
neighborhood and community parkland coverage exists throughout the City
and Planning Area. In addition, the size and design of the community parks
is insufficient to adequately meet the community needs of a younger
population. Parkland coverage in the unincorporated areas of Riverside
County east of the City is also deficient, which means that these residents
are relying on City parks to serve their park and recreational needs, placing
further pressure on park maintenance and service.
The neighborhood and community parkland acreage shortage has caused
selected facilities and parks to be overused. Additionally, as the
demographics in the City change and lifestyles evolve, park facilities need to
be regularly refurbished to meet the needs and choices of residents. For
example, younger families increase the need for play grounds, sports fields,
rollerblading and skateboarding facilities, and rock climbing equipment.
Ideally, parks and public spaces should be multigenerational and serve the
needs of all ages. Valley-Wide is looking for a site in the Hemet area to
construct a skate park or “skateable art” area. Skateable art is a small area
incorporated into an existing park or green belt that serves as both an
attractive amenity and a safe venue for skating.
Park and Recreation Master Plan To address the parkland shortages and
evolving parkland needs, periodically updating the City’s park and
recreation master plan is necessary. Issues to be considered in the master
plan update include:
     establishing priorities for the allocation of limited resources,
     establishing a plan showing how the balance of park types will be met
     in accordance with the park standard,
     creating park designs that meet changing demographics,
     incorporating water conservation standards, the preservation of
     significant natural resources, and a tree replacement policy,
     identifying financing mechanisms,
     exploring the use of joint use facilities with the Hemet Unified School
     District,
     determining appropriate service coordination with Valley-Wide,
     recognizing that community members and organizations have a
     tradition of volunteerism and could be considered as a potential
     resource to offset financial and staffing constraints in the development
     and maintenance of specific park or trail areas, and
         C   I  T Y      O   F     H  E   M   E  T    G   E   N E   R A L    P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                         8-16

 RECREATION AND TRAILS
                  evaluating the best administrative structure for parks and recreation
                  within the City including establishing an implementation system for
                  ongoing and future projects and programs.
              8.4      O FF -R OAD T RAILS
              The Hemet area is rich with existing and potential recreation trails for
              walking, jogging, biking, and horseback riding. The value and strengths of a
              community-based trail system include:
                  promoting Hemet’s identity as a location for outdoor activities and a
                  community that values health and fitness;
                  providing opportunities to link with the Riverside County Regional
                  Trail System and the Diamond Valley Lake trail system, including the
                  proposed “Pines to Vines” trail concept that links the Idyllwild
                  mountain community to Temecula Wine Country;
                  endorsing exercise and fitness by offering a positive approach to avoid
                  inactivity and obesity, particularly for young residents;
                  encouraging the preservation of open space and rural areas for safe and
                  accessible recreational activity;
                  offering practical and natural connections to the Ramona Bowl,
                  Simpson Park, Diamond Valley Lake, and Salt Creek;
                  cultivating appreciation of the natural setting and environmental beauty
                  of the Hemet area; and
                  fostering community involvement in the support, development, and
                  maintenance of the trail system to reduce the costs to the public sector
                  and ensure its viability.
              8.4.1        OFF-ROAD TRAILS BY CLASSIFICATION
              The off-road recreational trails in the Hemet area are classified below by
              use. On-road bicycle trails that are frequently located next to or on the
              outer edge of roadways are a component of the Circulation Element
              (Chapter 4); therefore, are not discussed in this element. They are, however,
              often integrated into the off-road recreation trail system and serve as
              important cycling commuter routes to shopping, schools, and parks.
              Open Space Trails Open space trails are unpaved trails located primarily
              in the Santa Rosa hills and Simpson Park for recreational hiking and
              mountain bike riding. The trails are generally 2–4 feet wide with 2-foot
              buffers on either side as described in Table 8.4. Local cyclists have mapped
              some of the 11 miles of trails in the hillsides. These trails would link to the
              Riverside County regional trail system and the City trail system to enable
              nonvehicular access.
C I T Y O F H  E  M   E  T     G   E  N   E  R  A L       P  L A   N    2 0 3 0
                                  8-17

                                                             RECREATION AND TRAILS
                                                      Table 8.4
                              Master Plan for Off-Road Trails in the Hemet Area
                             Status in Open                Multi-
          Location                            Equestrian                                       Description
                               2010    Space                Use
City Trails
Salt Creek Trail           Planned                           X      Off-road trail that runs along Salt Creek and connects to
                                                                    the County Regional Trail System on the west and Pepper
                                                                    Creek Trail on the east. Phase 1 is a two-lane paved
                                                                    bikeway. Phase 2 is an adjacent pedestrian trail. No
                                                                    equestrian trail.
Pepper Creek Trail         Planned                           X      Off-road trail that runs along Pepper Creek and connects
                                                                    to Salt Creek Trail on the west and the County Regional
                                                                    Trail System on the east.
Avery Canyon Trail         Planned                           X      On-road trail that runs along Gibbel Road through Avery
                                                                    Canyon and connects to Salt Creek Trail on the west and
                                                                    the County Regional Trail System on the east.
West Hemet Trail           Planned                           X      Off-road and on-road trail that connects to the City of San
                                                                    Jacinto at State Street, runs along Esplanade Avenue to
                                                                    Warren Avenue, south along Warren Avenue, around the
                                                                    west side of Diamond Valley Lake and south toward the
                                                                    City of Murrieta.
Simpson Park and Santa     Partially     X                          Unpaved trails for hiking and mountain cycling in a
Rosa Hills Trails          Completed                                primarily open space area with views of the surrounding
                                                                    mountains and lakes.
California Street Trail    Partially              X                 Trail runs north along California Street from Florida
                           Completed                                Avenue into Reinhardt Canyon.
McSweeny Farms Trail       Partially              X                 Trail runs through and around the existing McSweeny
                           Completed                                Farms subdivision with plans to connect to the North Hills
                                                                    Trail.
Diamond Valley Lake Trails
North Hills Trail          Partially              X                 The 2.5 mile trail runs south of Domenigoni Parkway from
                           Completed                                the western side of the reservoir to Searl Parkway. There
                                                                    are trailhead facilities at each end of the trail. Future plans
                                                                    connect it to the McSweeny subdivision on the east and the
                                                                    County regional equestrian trail on the west.
Lakeview Trail             Completed                         X      The 21.8-mile Lakeview Trail circumvents DVL for
                                                                    pedestrians and cyclists.
Wildflower Trail           Varies;       X                          The wildflower trail is a seasonal series of loop hiking trails
                           Seasonal                                 located within the Reserve. It is not shown on Figure 8.3.
Reserve Trails             Under         X                          Trail through the Multi-Species Reserve to Skinner Lake. It
                           Discussion                               is not shown on Figure 8.3.
Riverside County Trails
Riverside County Regional Partially                          X        Existing and planned trail system that functions as a
Trail System. Planned      Completed                                  regional connector designed to interface with local and
trails to the Hemet Area                                              community trail systems across the County from Idyllwild
include:                                                              to the Temecula wineries and other points of interest.
    Bautista Canyon Trail                                             Consists of Class 1 (off-road), Class 2 (on-road, striped
    “Pines to Vines” Trail                                            lane), and Class 3 (on-road, shared use) trails. These trails
    West Hemet Trails                                                 are not shown on Figure 8.3
            C  I  T Y      O  F      H E  M  E  T     G   E  N    E   R   A L         P   L   A    N     2 0 3 0
                                                         8-18

                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                 Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San Jacinto
                                                                                                          Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  River
                                                                                                                                                                                 Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          West Hemet Trail                                                                                                               Commonwealth Ave
                                                                                   California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                   Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                                Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                           Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ian
                                                                                                                                                en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ve
                                                                                                                                                               Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                     Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                       ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Kirby St
                                                                                                                                            ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Y
                                                                                                                                                                    HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                          ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                     AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 SF
                                                                                                                                          A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                       AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                     ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                                    San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                     Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                          Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                                     on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    p er Cre ek Tra
                                                                                                                                ts                                                                                                                            Chambers St
                                                                                                                                                   Warren Rd
                                                                                                                            Ste
                                                                                                                                                                Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BOWL                                il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                               California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   go
                                                                                                                                                               ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pk
                                                                                                                                                             iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                        on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                 ni
                                                                                                                                                    g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                             e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                              il                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A v e ry
                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                        Salt Creek Tra
                                                                                                                                      Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca n yo
                                                                                                                 ail                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n Tr a il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                              a il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bau
                                                                                        s T r                  r                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ista
                                                                                 H i ll                      T
                                                                            rt h
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C re
                                                                                                           w
                                                                         No                            vi e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ek
                                                                                                La k e                                                                                                                                               Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                                 Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cactus Valley Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Note: These trails are subject to change to correspond to the
X06268298.11 065 01/24/2012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            County's "Pines to Vines" trail system or other factors.
                                                                                                                                                                      LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                      Recreational Trails                                                                                      Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                      Multi-Use (Future)                                                                       Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                      Multi-Use                                                                                Street
                     Sources:
                                                                                                                                                                                      Equestrian (Future)                                                                      Railroad
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                        Equestrian                                                                               Creek/Canal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F i g u r e     8 . 3
                     1       0.5   0                              1            2                                                                                                      Open Space (Future)                                                                      River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RECREATIONAL TRAILS
                                                                                   Miles                                                                                              Open Space                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                                 RECREATION AND TRAILS
Backside Recreational 8.3 Trails Map
       C  I  T Y      O   F    H  E  M E T G  E  N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                             8-20
             RECREATION AND TRAILS
                                       Multiple Use Trails Multiple use off-road trails are designed to allow
                                       walkers, joggers, and bicycle riders to share the trail. These trails are
                                       generally built in phases, as funding permits, with the highest demand use
                                       being accommodated first. Phase 1 of the proposed Salt Creek Trail is being
                                       designed as a two-way bicycle trail on a separate right-of-way to enable its
                                       linkage to the proposed Riverside County Regional Trail System. Phase 2 is
                                       an adjacent pedestrian path. Tables 8.4 and 8.5 describe the location and
                                       design standards for the trails, respectively.
Open Space Trail in Simpson Park       Equestrian Trails Equestrian trails are trails specifically designed for use
                                       by horseback riders. In the Hemet area, equestrian trails are located along
                                       California Street and the Four Seasons community into Reinhardt Canyon,
                                       at Diamond Valley Lake (North Hills Trail), and at the McSweeny Farms
                                       subdivision located on the east side of State Street, south of Domenigoni
                                       Parkway, as described in Tables 8.4 and 8.5 and shown in Figure 8.3.
                                       Equestrian trails are generally separated from jogging trails for safety and
                                       maintenance reasons. MWD maintains trailhead facilities at both ends of
                                       the 2.5 mile North Hills Trail.
                                                                Table 8.5
                                        Suggested Standards for Trail Development
                           Standard              Open Space           Equestrian                Multi-Use
                  Minimum Width (one-way)           2-4 feet              8 feet                    --
                  Minimum Width (two-way)               –                10 feet                8–15 feet
                  Surface                     Unpaved; minimize      Hard-packed;       Hardened: concrete, asphalt,
                                                     erosion           no paving          or decomposed granite
                  Shoulder                          0–2 feet              2 feet                  2 feet
                                       Riverside County Regional Trail System Riverside County established a
                                       new trail classification, Class 1 Bike Path/Regional Trail (Combination
                                       Trail) that functions to describe a regional connector trail that links all of
                                       the major water bodies in western Riverside County and makes taking
                                       advantage of this system for long one-way or loop-type trips easier for long-
                                       distance users. The new classification will include a combination of existing
                                       and new linkages, easements, and connections. This type of trail is designed
                                       to interface with local and community trail systems across the County,
                                       allowing local access to a regional system. The regional trail will eventually
Equestrian Trail at the Four Seasons   connect Idyllwild to the Temecula wineries to Lake Elsinore to Riverside to
Community                              Oak Glen and other regional destinations and linkages. The City’s trail
                                       system is designed to link to the Riverside County Regional Trail System.
                                       Table 8.4 outlines the master plan for off-road trails in the City and
                                       Planning Area. The trails are also mapped in Figure 8.3 with linkages shown
                                       to the Riverside County Regional Trail System, the City’s trail system, and
                                       the Diamond Valley Lake trail system.
            C   I   T Y      O  F    H   E  M  E   T      G   E  N E  R   A L     P   L A  N    2 0 3 0
                                                             8-21

                                                          RECREATION AND TRAILS
8.4.2         OFF-ROAD TRAIL DESIGN STANDARDS
Suggested standards for off-road trail development are shown in Table 8.5.
Trail design standards will be further considered in the City’s update to the
park and recreation master plan. The multi-use trails are intended to be
incorporated into the Riverside County Regional Trail System; therefore,
standards will be modified accordingly. On-road bicycle standards are
established in the Circulation Element (Chapter 4).
         C  I  T Y     O   F    H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N  E   R A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                      8-22

 RECREATION AND TRAILS
              G OALS AND P OLICIES
              R ECREA TI ON    AND    T RA IL S
                 GOAL     Provide an appropriate range of active and passive
                          parkland facilities to meet park acreage standards
                 RC-1     and the recreational needs of residents.
              POLICIES
              RC-1.1     Diversity of Parks Develop a high-quality network of
                         parks and open spaces that meet the needs of families,
                         young adults, adults, seniors, children, and disabled
                         individuals.
              RC-1.2     Park Standard Require adequate open space in new
                         development for both passive and active recreation.
                         Achieve and maintain a standard of 5 acres of parkland per
                         1,000 residents in the City.
              RC-1.3     Park Distribution Develop, upgrade, and rehabilitate
                         parks in a manner to ensure neighborhood needs are met
                         by neighborhood parks, community needs by community
                         parks, and citywide needs by regional parks.
              RC-1.4     Park Prioritization Prioritize the acquisition and
                         development of parks and recreational facilities in
                         neighborhoods where a shortage of parkland exists.
              RC-1.5     Conversion of Marginal Land Require the utilization
                         and maintenance of stormwater basins and undevelopable
                         areas of any project (e.g., utility easements, undersized lots)
                         for recreational uses such as tot lots, picnic areas,
                         community gardens, or passive open space, as feasible.
              RC-1.6     Park and Recreation Master Plan Maintain a
                         comprehensive park and recreation master plan that
                         identifies park, recreation, and trail needs and
                         requirements. The master plan shall also identify an
                         administrative system for ongoing programs and
                         maintenance, promote a hierarchy of parks, establish an
                         allocation plan showing how a balance of park types will
                         be achieved, establish types, locations, and development
                         standards for recreational trails, and identify potential
                         financing mechanisms.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E  N  E  R  A L      P   L    A  N    2 0 3 0
                            8-23
                                                       RECREATION AND TRAILS
              Increase the amount and diversity of recreation areas
   GOAL       and facilities within the City through the
  RC-2        development process, multi-agency partnerships,
              and the use of creative funding strategies.
POLICIES
RC-2.1       Development Standards Require developers of new
             residential developments to provide on-site recreational
             amenities commensurate with the size of the project or
             contribute in-lieu fees for the development of facilities in
             accordance with the nexus standard.
RC-2.2       Concurrent Development Require that development of
             recreation facilities occur concurrent with other residential
             development in an area.
RC-2.3       Quimby Act Continue to implement the Quimby Act to
             provide park dedication and in-lieu fees for community
             recreational facilities.
RC-2.4       Specific Plan Requirement Require a parks and
             recreation component in specific plans for new residential
             developments that:
                  identifies public and private park sites in accordance
                  with approved service standards;
                  defines park types, design guidelines, landscape
                  standards, and user demand;
                  integrates parks with neighborhood centers and
                  schools;
                  physically links parkland to residential areas and
                  facilities through an integrated system of green spaces
                  and the City’s off-road and on-road trail system;
                  defines design standards and programming needs
                  consistent with the demographic trends of the City;
                  and
                  incorporates principles of energy, water, and natural
                  resources conservation.
RC-2.5       Acquiring or Accepting Parkland Establish the
             following criteria for acquiring or accepting parkland and
             recreational facilities:
                  the City’s need based on current and projected user
                  demands,
                  the proximity of existing recreation and sports
                  facilities,
       C I T Y      O   F     H  E    M E  T    G   E  N  E  R   A L    P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   8-24

 RECREATION AND TRAILS
                              the preservation of natural resources and historic and
                              cultural areas,
                              the capability of the proposed site to accommodate
                              the recreational needs of the population being served
                              with a minimum of 5 acres,
                              the capability of the proposed site to accommodate
                              energy and water conservation principles, and
                              the commitment of the developer to ensure the park is
                              completed (e.g., a master developer bond).
              RC-2.6     Benefit Assessment Districts Promote the creation of
                         benefit assessment districts and property owner
                         associations for park and trail development and
                         maintenance.
              RC-2.7     Diamond Valley Lake Recreation Area Coordinate with
                         the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California,
                         Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District, and Riverside
                         County to encourage development of a comprehensive
                         program for recreation and to support commercial
                         facilities at Diamond Valley Lake.
              RC-2.8     Community Facilities Integrate community facilities
                         such as community centers, auditoriums, day care centers,
                         and other public and quasi-public uses into or adjacent to
                         park facilities, as appropriate.
              RC-2.9     Joint Use Agreements Pursue joint use agreements with
                         the Hemet Unified School District, Valley-Wide
                         Recreation and Park District, and Metropolitan Water
                         District of Southern California to address the provision of
                         park facilities, the type and use of facilities, liabilities, and
                         other jurisdictional and user responsibilities.
              RC-2.10    Partnerships Establish partnerships with private sector
                         agencies and groups to facilitate private investment in
                         parks and facilities, and with public sector agencies such as
                         Valley-Wide Recreation and Park District, the Hemet
                         Unified School District, sports organizations, the
                         Metropolitan Water District of Southern California,
                         Riverside County, and the City of San Jacinto to promote
                         joint sponsorship of facilities, activities, events, and
                         projects.
              RC-2.11    Funding Sources Pursue all forms of federal, state,
                         county, corporate, private foundation and endowment
                         support, volunteer groups, and partnerships with Valley-
                         Wide Recreation and Park District, sports organizations,
                         and Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, to
                         assist in the acquisition, development, programming,
                         operations, and maintenance of park and recreation
                         facilities to insure long term fiscal sustainability of
                         recreation facilities.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G  E    N   E  R  A L     P   L  A N     2 0 3 0
                           8-25
                                                       RECREATION AND TRAILS
   GOAL       Create and maintain a parkland system that is
              identifiable, safe, and accessible to all users.
  RC-3
POLICIES
RC-3.1       Park Siting Situate community parks along major arterials
             and ensure adequate parking. Site neighborhood parks in
             high visibility areas on local or collector streets within the
             neighborhoods they serve and foster pedestrian access.
RC-3.2       Park Design Design new parks and facilities consistent
             with modern safety and accessibility design codes and
             practices.
RC-3.3       Anti-Crime Design Design park and recreation facilities
             and restrooms to discourage the potential for illicit and
             illegal activities.
   GOAL       Design and manage a parkland system that is
              compatible with adjacent land uses.
  RC-4
POLICIES
RC-4.1       Park Design Design new parks and redesign existing
             parks to ensure that site activities, such as sports fields,
             nighttime lighting and parking areas, do not adversely
             affect adjacent land uses.
RC-4.2       Accessibility Provide well-designed and easily accessible
             linkages to pedestrian and bike trails to encourage park
             users to access the park by nonvehicular means.
RC-4.3       Historical Structures Consider the use of the park system
             to preserve structures of historical significance by
             acquiring, siting, and reusing in an appropriate manner at a
             public park or recreation facility.
              Design and manage a parkland system that respects
   GOAL       the features of the natural environment and
  RC-5        incorporates conservation features into park design
              and operations.
POLICIES
RC-5.1       Open Space Corridors Maintain open space corridors
             containing watercourses, riparian habitat, floodplains,
             wetlands, grasslands, and other natural resource areas as
             integral components of an open space system that is part
             of a continuous community.
       C I T Y      O   F     H  E  M  E  T      G  E  N   E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   8-26
 RECREATION AND TRAILS
              RC-5.2     Open Space Buffers Provide open space buffer land in
                         areas where development or recreational uses abuts
                         important or ecologically sensitive natural resource areas in
                         order to protect those resources and reduce potential
                         adverse impacts from development.
              RC-5.3     Environmentally Sensitive Design and Landscaping
                         Require that new parks be sited and developed in an
                         environmentally sensitive manner with drought-tolerant
                         landscaping, recycled water for irrigation, and natural
                         drainage courses that recharge groundwater.
              RC-5.4     Conservation Areas Develop passive recreational
                         facilities in conservation areas for natural resources (e.g.,
                         Simpson Park and the vernal pool complex), including
                         nature interpretation areas, bird watching, wildlife
                         photography areas, and similar facilities, where such
                         activities can be reasonably provided in accordance with
                         established environmental protections and habitat
                         agreements.
              RC-5.5     Sustainable Recreation Promote water, energy, and
                         resource conservation and best practices in the design,
                         operation, and maintenance of new and existing parks,
                         trails, and recreational facilities.
              RC-5.6     Replacement Trees Maintain an attractive and
                         comfortable park environment by replacing any mature
                         tree removed from a park setting with a California-friendly
                         or shade tree of similar size and shape or with smaller trees
                         at a 2:1 ratio, as reasonably feasible.
                          Establish and maintain a public trail system that
                 GOAL     provides residents and visitors with safe, useable,
                 RC-6     and attractive hiking, cycling, and equestrian
                          opportunities, linking areas within the City.
              POLICIES
              RC-6.1     Trail Development Develop and maintain an off-road
                         trail system in open space areas, greenways, and
                         conservation corridor areas that provide recreational
                         opportunities while protecting significant plant and animal
                         species and other environmental resources.
              RC-6.2     Development Requirement Require new development
                         to provide trails in accordance with the City’s recreation
                         and park master plan, specific plan requirements, and the
                         policies of the General Plan.
              RC-6.3     Trail Design and Connections Design trails for a variety
                         of uses: open space, equestrian, multiple use, and bicycle,
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G   E   N  E  R   A L     P    L  A  N  2 0 3 0
                            8-27

                                                      RECREATION AND TRAILS
             as conditions allow. Require that trail designs integrate
             with the existing and planned Riverside County Regional
             Trail System and the Diamond Valley Lake Trail System,
             as appropriate.
RC-6.4       Trail Safety and Maintenance Work with Riverside
             County, Diamond Valley Lake (i.e., the Metropolitan
             Water District of Southern California), hiking and cycling
             organizations, and other interested parties to maintain the
             trail system for safety and enjoyment.
RC-6.5       Simpson Park Promote the use of Simpson Park as a
             regional off-road cycling venue and consider year-round
             access as safety and fire hazard conditions permit.
RC-6.6       Partnerships and Funding Opportunities Facilitate
             partnerships with other agencies, organizations, and
             volunteer groups to secure grants, donations, and funding
             for the design, implementation, and maintenance of trail
             systems.
       C I T Y      O   F   H   E   M  E  T    G   E  N  E  R  A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                  8-28
                                         CHAPTER 9                            HISTORIC RESOURCES
Historic resources give a city its own
unique identity, charm, stability,
and orientation. These resources are
valuable and irreplaceable. When
well-preserved and maintained they
provide the community with a sense
of permanence and place, which
fosters civic pride and stewardship
among its residents and businesses.
                                         Hotel Mayberry (later Hotel Hemet) was constructed in 1894 on Florida Avenue
                                         between Harvard Street and State Street.
                                         T     he purpose of the Historic Resources Element is to acknowledge
                                               Hemet’s proud and unique history; to describe historical resources in
                                               the Planning Area; to establish goals and objectives for preserving
                                               historic resources and promoting an appreciation of Hemet’s history;
                                         and to present an implementation strategy to meet the Element’s goals and
                                         objectives.
                                         Historic preservation is an optional element permitted under California
                                         planning law. This topic is included in the General Plan to demonstrate the
                                         importance of historic preservation to the City, as stated in Hemet’s Vision for
                                         the Future. The Element establishes an approach to preservation that heeds
                                         Hemet’s key values. The Element complements the City’s other planning
                                         activities by requiring that subsequent ordinances, zoning, specific plans,
                                         subdivision regulations, and redevelopment and building codes are
                                         consistent with its provisions. With the adoption of the Historic Resources
                                         Element, historic preservation goals and policies have the same standing as
                                         the goals and policies in any of the mandated General Plan elements.
               C   I  T Y        O   F H  E   M   E  T    G    E  N  E   R  A L     P  L   A   N     2 0 3 0
                                                              9-1

                                                                HISTORIC RESOURCES
9.1       I SSUES     AND O PPORTU NITIES
Hemet celebrated its Centennial Year in 2010 with events and publications
designed to educate residents about the City’s proud heritage and to
recognize its historic resources. Support for preservation in the community
is the foundation upon which a comprehensive preservation program can
be built. The Centennial provided an opportunity for the City to work with
the local heritage organizations to address preservation issues. Three key
issues are:
     Elevating the community’s awareness of historic preservation.
     With the rapid increase in population over the past decade, many
     residents have not learned about Hemet’s rich history; and therefore,
     do not yet value its preservation. Increasing the public’s general
     understanding of Hemet’s heritage will increase its appreciation for the
     built environment as a tangible reminder of the community’s history,
     encourage adaptive reuse of historic structures, and enable heritage
     tourism initiatives.
     Deferred property maintenance. Some of Hemet’s older
     neighborhoods are experiencing neglect and disrepair, which negatively
     affects the visual image of the City, reduces property values, and
     discourages economic reinvestment. At present, no mechanism
     encourages the restoration of heritage properties or provides
     alternatives to their demolition. New incentives, regulations, and
     development standards based on General Plan goals and policies will
     create new avenues for the care of historic resources.
     Seismic Retrofitting. The California Building Code requires all
     unreinforced masonry buildings to be retrofitted to meet current
     seismic safety standards. A number of unreinforced masonry buildings
     exist in Hemet, particularly in the downtown area, that warrant
     preservation through retrofitting..
9.2       R ELAT ED P R OGRAM S , P LANS ,                AND
          R EGULATI ONS
The identification and protection of historic resources is supported by
federal and state regulation as briefly described below. The Historic
Resources Element and the implementing historic resources ordinance,
when adopted, will provide supplemental local regulation. Available
programs and salient organizations are identified and defined below.
National Historic Preservation Act The National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA), which was most recently amended in 1992, created the
framework for preservation activity in the United States. The NHPA
redefined and expanded the National Register of Historic Places, which had
been established by the Historic Sites Act of 1935; created the position of
State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) to administer state preservation
programs; established the Certified Local Government Program; and set up
the Historic Preservation Fund to fund the provisions of the NHPA.
          C  I  T Y      O F    H    E   M E  T     G  E   N E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       9-2

           HISTORIC RESOURCES
                                                 National Environmental Policy Act The intent of the National
                                                 Environmental Policy Act is to protect the natural and built
                                                 environment, including historic properties, from adverse effects
                                                 resulting from federal actions. Before a federal agency may
                                                 proceed with a proposed action, it must first perform an
                                                 environmental assessment to determine whether the action could
                                                 have any significant effect on the environment. If it is determined
                                                 that the action may have an effect on the environment, the agency
                                                 must prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS), which
Stillman and Jennie White, c. 1910 on South      identifies all environmental impacts resulting from the action and
State Street.                                    lists mitigation measures and project alternatives that avoid or
.                                                minimize adverse impacts.
                                      California Environmental Quality Act The California Environmental
                                      Quality Act (CEQA) was enacted in 1970 and was most recently modified
                                      in 1998. The basic purpose of CEQA is to inform governmental decision
                                      makers and the public about the potential significant adverse effects, if any,
                                      of proposed activities and projects. It also provides opportunities for the
                                      public and for other agencies to review and comment on draft
                                      environmental documents. As environmental policy, CEQA requires that
                                      environmental protection be given significant consideration in the decision
                                      making process. Historic resources are included under environmental
                                      protection. Thus, any project or action that constitutes a significant adverse
                                      effect on a historic resource also has a significant effect on the environment
                                      and shall comply with the State CEQA Guidelines.
                                      Tribal Consultation (2004 Senate Bill 18) California Senate Bill (SB) 18
                                      states that prior to a local (city or county) government’s adoption of any
                                      general plan or specific plan, or amendment to general and specific plans, or
                                      a designation of open space land proposed on or after March 1, 2005, the
                                      city or county shall conduct consultations with California Native American
                                      tribes for the purpose of preserving or mitigating impacts to Cultural
                                      Places. A Cultural Place is defined as:
                                           Native American sanctified cemetery, place of worship, religious or
                                           ceremonial site, or sacred shrine (PRC Section 5097.9), or;
                                           Native American historic, cultural, or sacred site, that is listed or may
                                           be eligible for listing in the California Register of Historic Resources
                                           pursuant to Section 5024.1, including any historic or prehistoric ruins,
                                           any burial ground, or any archaeological or historic site (PRC Section
                                           5097.995).
                                      The intent of SB 18 is to establish meaningful consultation between tribal
                                      governments and local governments (“government-to-government”) at the
                                      earliest possible point in the planning process so that cultural places can be
                                      identified and preserved and to determine necessary levels of confidentiality
                                      regarding Cultural Place locations and uses. According to the Government
                                      Code (GC) Section 65352.4, “consultation” is defined as:
                                                The meaningful and timely process of seeking, discussing, and considering
                                                carefully the views of others, in a manner that is cognizant of all parties’
          C   I T Y     O    F     H   E   M   E   T      G   E   N  E  R   A L     P  L  A   N      2 0 3 0
                                                              9-3

                                                                               HISTORIC RESOURCES
          cultural values and, where feasible, seeking agreement. Consultation between
          government agencies and Native American Tribes shall be conducted in a way
          that is mutually respectful of each party’s sovereignty. Consultation shall also
          recognize the tribes’ potential needs for confidentiality with respect to places that
          have traditional tribal cultural significance.
State Historic Building Code The State Historic Building Code (SHBC)
amplifies the regulations of the California Building Code to provide for the
special treatment of qualified historic buildings. The SHBC recognizes and
endorses the need, on a case by case basis, to find and adopt reasonable
alternatives or reasonable levels of equivalency for situations where strict
compliance with established statues or regulations would negatively affect
an historic resource’s appearance or jeopardize its economic viability. A
"qualified historical building" is defined as any building, group of buildings,
district, site or object that is listed by any level of government as having
historic importance.
State Historic Preservation Officer The SHPO is responsible for
operating and managing the California Office of Historic Preservation
(OHP) and planning for long-range preservation. The California Governor
appoints the SHPO in consultation with the State Historical Resources
Commission and the Director of the California Department of Parks and
Recreation.
California Office of Historic Preservation The OHP is a division of the
California Department of Parks and Recreation. The mission of the OHP is
“to preserve and enhance California's irreplaceable historic heritage as a
matter of public interest so that its vital legacy of cultural, educational,
recreational, aesthetic, economic, social, and environmental benefits will be
maintained and enriched for present and future generations.”
Mills Act Property Tax Abatement Program The Mills Act is a state-
authorized program that grants participating local governments (cities and
counties) the authority to contract with owners of qualified historic
properties who actively participate in the restoration and maintenance of
their historic properties while receiving property tax relief.
Historic Resources Ordinance Every local government in California has
the authority to adopt a local ordinance that provides regulations applicable
to historic properties. The ordinance addresses the specific types of historic
resources, populations, development pressures, and local issues relevant to
the residents and property owners of the City. Ordinances typically include:
     a provision for creating a local historic preservation body (e.g., Planning
     Department, Planning Commission, a separate Historic Commission)
     and the responsibilities and powers given to that body;
     an explanation of the criteria used to determine what properties can be
     designated under the ordinance and the process for such designations;
     a provision for granting economic hardship waiver;
          C   I  T Y        O   F      H   E   M    E  T      G    E   N   E   R   A L       P  L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                                   9-4

 HISTORIC RESOURCES
                   a requirement that property owners maintain resources designated
                   under the ordinance and guidelines for that maintenance.
              Historic Resources Survey Historic resources surveys are performed to
              identify, record, and evaluate historic properties within a community,
              neighborhood, project area, or region. Surveys also assist in identifying
              resources worthy of designation in a local register of historic resources, the
              California Register of Historical Resources, or the National Register of
              Historic Places, as well as properties potentially eligible for federal tax
              benefits or other state and local preservation incentives. A survey of
              Downtown Hemet was completed in 1982 by the Riverside County Historic
              Commission of the Riverside County Parks Department under the
              supervision of Stephen Becker, Historian.
              Historic Resources Inventory or Register A historic resources inventory
              is generated from survey data. The inventory is generally adopted as the
              City’s local register of historic resources. Properties listed on the local
              register are generally eligible for specified incentives and are required to
              meet specified standards of preservation and maintenance. Based on the
              1981–82 survey, the Inventory of Historic Resources for Downtown Hemet was
              created and submitted to the OHP in 1983, and is included as Appendix B.
              9.2.1         LOCAL RESOURCE ORGANIZATIONS
              The City of Hemet is fortunate to have had the Hemet Heritage
              Foundation as a resource during the writing of the Historic Resource
              Element. The Heritage Foundation was formed with the 2009 merging of
              the Hemet Area Museum Association, Save Our Station, and the Hemet–
              San Jacinto Valley Historical Society. Documents, publications, and
              photographs prepared by members involved in these organizations and the
              foundation itself provided useful background data and references for the
              Element. The City would like to continue to work with the Hemet Heritage
              Foundation and other interested parties in historic preservation and
              educational efforts.
              9.3       P RE HISTORICAL O VERVIEW                    AND
                        R ESOURCE S
              Undeveloped land in the Hemet area has a fairly high potential to contain
              prehistoric resources that warrant protection. The Western Science Center
              at Diamond Valley contains nearly 1 million fossils and artifacts uncovered
              from more than 337 local prehistoric sites, with predominance from the
              Diamond Valley Lake site.
              9.3.1         PALEONTOLOGICAL SITES
              One of the most common animals excavated from the Diamond Valley
              Lake site was the extinct American mastodon (Mammut americanum). In
              North American paleontology, mastodons are thought to have been
              solitary, forest-dwelling browsers. The abundance of mastodons in the
              fossil record from the site suggests that during the last Ice Age, the area was
              more wooded or forested than it is today. The best known mastodon found
              at Diamond Valley Lake is Max, the largest mastodon found in the Western
C I T Y O F H   E  M   E  T    G   E   N  E  R  A L      P  L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                   9-5

                                                                 HISTORIC RESOURCES
United States. Other fossils in the Western Science Center’s
collection are Xena, a 10,000-year-old Columbian mammoth, and
an unnamed 7-foot-tall giant ground sloth. Radiometric dating of
the uncovered fossils confirms an age range of less than 13,000
years ago to more than 60,000 years ago for these fossils
In addition to its museum function, the Western Science Center
provides research and curation labs that serve as a significant
regional resource for research and advanced educational training.
The facility is climate controlled, equipped with security safeguards,
and was designed as a repository for paleontological and Exhibit               at the Western Science Center at
                                                                       Diamond Valley .
archaeological materials.
9.3.2          ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
Prehistoric archaeology is the study of the past before recorded history.
Without written records, researchers use excavation, geologic and
geographic surveys, and other scientific analysis to reveal and interpret the
nature and behavior of preliterate cultures. Potential archaeological sites in
the Hemet area include indigenous residential bases with house features,
human burials and cremations, pictograph and petroglyph panels, storage
features, stone tools, and stone artifacts. The best known prehistoric
archaeological discovery in the Hemet area is the Hemet Maze Stone,
described below.
The City recognizes and appreciates the importance of safeguarding these
culturally sensitive sites. Figure 9.1 demonstrates the relative
cultural resource sensitivity in the Planning Area showing the areas
where new archaeological discoveries are most likely.
Hemet Maze Stone A prehistoric petroglyph named the Hemet
Maze Stone is located west of Hemet in Reinhardt Canyon within
the Lakeview Mountains. On April 16, 1956, it was donated, along
with 5.75 acres of land, to Riverside County by Mr. and Mrs. Rodger
E. Miller. It is California State Historical Landmark No. 557.
                                                                       Hemet Maze Stone Reinhardt Canyon.
9.4 H ISTORI CAL O VERVIEW A ND
R ESOURCE S
The presence of reliable water sources and a fertile valley floor have always
made the Hemet area a desirable place to live. This overview touches on a
few of the historic highlights of Hemet’s past.
9.4.1          INDIGENOUS RESIDENTS
The Cahuilla are a tribe of Native Americans that have inhabited inland
areas of Southern California for more than 2,000 years. The first known
contact of the Cahuilla with Europeans was in 1774 when Juan Bautista de
Anza passed through the southwest looking for a trade route between
Sonora Mexico and Monterey in Alta California. California State Historical
Landmark No. 104 located at the Ramona Bowl recognizes the site of the
Indian Village of Poceha, which was one of seven Indian villages forming
         C   I   T Y      O  F     H   E  M   E  T   G  E   N  E R  A L      P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                                        9-6

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                                                                                   County                                                               Popp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                            Cottonwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Jacinto
                                                                                                     Beech St                                Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Jacinto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             River
                                                                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonwealth Ave
                                                                              California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                              Cawston Ave
                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ee
                                                                                                           Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                      Warr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Edith Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ian
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                            Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oakland Ave                                                                                                                                                     Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                          Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St                                                                                                                           Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            Devonshire Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Myers St                                                                                                                       Florida Ave                                                                                Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ave                                            Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gilbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                  ri   da
           Florida Ave                                                  Florida Ave                                                                                           Flo                                    Acacia Ave                                                                                                                            Acacia Ave                                                                                                       Acacia Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marshall Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mayberry Ave                                                                                                                                      Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lyon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Meridian St         Soboba St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fairview Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kirby St
                                                                                                                                       ct
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                               HEMET-RYAN                             LWA
                                                                                                                                     ed u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yale St
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                          R AI                                                    Johnston Ave                                                                                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                            SF
                                                                                                                                     A qu
                                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  AT &
                         Riverside
                                                                                                                                ieg o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stetson Ave                                                                                       Stetson Ave
                                                                                                                               San                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                          County
                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Thornton Ave                                                                                                                                                                      ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elk St                                                                                                                                                                             me
                                                                                                                                                                Fisher St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                     Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crest Dr                                              eH
                                                                                                                           ts   on                                                                                                                       Chambers St                                                                                                                                                Lak
                                                                                                                                              Warren Rd
                                                                                                                       Ste
                                                                                                                                                           Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                                    RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOWL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bautista Rd              Bautista Wash
                                                                                          California Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en i                             State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County
            Simpson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              go
                                                                                                                                                          ky                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                        iP                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIMPSON
                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                               g                                                                                                                                                                                                    bel                                         PARK
                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gib
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                 Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bau t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Girard St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ista
            Domenigoni Pky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Newport Rd
                                                                                                                                            Diamond Valley Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 State St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Riverside
                                        Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cactus Valley Rd
X06268298.11 055 01/24/2012
                                                                                                                                               LEGEND
                                                                                                                                               Archeological Sensitivity                                                                        Hemet City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                   Low                                                                          Planning Area
                     Sources:                                                                                                                                      Medium                                                                       Street
                     Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                     Applied Earthworks 2010                                                                                                                       High                                                                         Railroad
                     ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creek/Canal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F i g u r e     9 . 1
                     1       0.5   0                              1       2                                                                                                                                                                     River/Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CULTURAL RESOURCE SENSITIVITY
                                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H e m e t   G e n e r a l     P l a n
                                           HISTORIC RESOURCES
Back of Figure 9.1
        C  I T Y   O F H E M E T G E   N E R A L P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                   9-8
 HISTORIC RESOURCES
              the large settlement of Pahsitnah that existed near water springs on the
              southern hills west of Ramona Bowl.
              During the late 1700s, Spanish Franciscans began establishing missions in
              California. Although no missions were established in Riverside County, the
              area fell under the control of Mission San Luis Rey de Francia in present-
              day Oceanside, northern San Diego County. In the 1820s, an adobe mission
              outpost known as Casa Loma was built on a small hill just north of the
              modern intersection of the Ramona Expressway and Warren Road. The
              padres assimilated the indigent population into mission life. The local
              Indians became known as “Luiseño” due to their early relationship with
              Mission San Luis Rey, but with separate tribe identifications: the Cahuilla,
              the Soboba, and the Pechanga.
              The San Jacinto Valley was the trading area for the Soboba and Cahuilla
              Indians. The Temecula Valley was the trading area for the Pechanga
              Indians. The tribes currently maintain separate reservations. The Santa Rosa
              Band of Cahuilla Indians is a federally recognized tribe whose reservation is
              located in the Santa Rosa Mountains to the south of the City
              On June 19, 1883, the Soboba Indian Reservation was established by a
              Presidential Executive Order that set aside 3,172 acres of land for the
              Soboba Band of Luiseño Indians for their permanent occupation and use.
              Located at the foothills of the San Jacinto mountain range, a portion of the
              reservation's western boundary along the San Jacinto River is located within
              the City’s Planning Area. In 2003, the Soboba opened a cultural center that
              contains Native American resources and research materials with a focus on
              Soboba and Luiseño culture.
               The Pechanga Indian Reservation was established in the Temecula Valley
              by Executive Order of the President of the United States on June 27, 1882.
              The Pechanga Tribe opened a cultural center that acts as a repository for
              the tribe's cultural heritage through the preservation of oral histories,
              archival materials, and objects of cultural, historical, and artistic significance
              to the Pechanga people.
              9.4.2        WATER, AGRICULTURE, AND THE RAILROAD: THE
                           START OF THE CITY
              Growth in the San Jacinto Valley was relatively slow until the arrival of
              reliable water sources, which coincided with the arrival of the California
              Southern Railroad. On January 27, 1887, San Francisco paint merchant
              William F. Whittier and builder Edward L. Mayberry formed the Lake
              Hemet Water Company and the Hemet Land Company. The Hemet Land
              Company purchased 6,000 acres of sloping land with the goal of
              subdividing the land, guaranteeing water by the Lake Hemet Water
              Company, and selling irrigated parcels to farmers and town merchants. The
              Lake Hemet Dam was constructed in the 4,300-foot-high Hemet Valley
              across a 40-foot-wide gorge located between two high bluffs. The dam
              contains water from a branch of the San Jacinto River called the South
              Fork. Mayberry and his crew placed the first stone for the Lake Hemet
              Dam on June 6, 1891. When this arched masonry structure was completed
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E  T     G   E   N E  R  A L       P   L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                   9-9

                                                                  HISTORIC RESOURCES
in 1895 at a height of 122.5 feet, it was the largest solid masonry dam
in the nation—a title that would remain until the construction of
Roosevelt Dam in Arizona in 1911. During construction, the water
from Lake Hemet began to be distributed through flumes, ditches,
and later pipes to farmers who grew alfalfa, citrus, apricots, potatoes,
olives, walnuts, and other crops. In 1923, the Lake Hemet Dam was
raised to a height of 135 feet.
In 1886, almost a year before Mayberry and Whittier formed the
Hemet Land Company, the directors of the Fairview Land and
Water Company (FL&WC) subdivided 3,000 acres (located east of
the Hemet lands) and called it Florida. An agreement was made with
Mayberry and Whittier that the Fairview directors would own the
rights to North Fork and Strawberry Creek waters of the San Jacinto
River. At the same time, Mayberry and Whittier retained South Fork
water rights. In 1895, the U. S. Post Office denied the use of a state's
name for a town or community, so the Fairview directors changed
their name from Florida to Valle Vista. In 1902, Whittier purchased
the FL&WC, giving him control of North Fork and Strawberry
Creek waters, as well as South Fork waters held back by the Lake Lake Hemet Dam.
Hemet Dam. Figure 9.2 is the map Whittier drew of the Hemet Land
Company and FL&WC.
Whittier and Mayberry planted 2,500 acres of their land with a
variety of crops to demonstrate what could be grown in the area.
The water system was the main contributor to the valley's
development as an agricultural area. The second factor was access
to the railway system for the distribution of goods. Served by a
railroad spur from Perris beginning in 1888, Hemet became a
trading center for the San Jacinto Valley's agricultural industry. The
Hemet area grew to include 5,000 acres of apricot groves. In
addition to farming, new canning houses and packing companies
were established expanding employment opportunities. Hemet’s Apricots in Bloom c. 1925.
hot, dry climate was perfect for drying apricots and peaches.
Another successful crop was roses. By 1927, the Howard Rose
Company was producing nearly 2 million roses annually. Hemet
remained an agricultural and farm community for decades.
Beginning in the 1920s, the growing and selling of turkeys brought
Hemet national recognition. In 1936, turkey farmer Jay C. Loomis
started the Utility Turkey Show at his warehouse on North Harvard
Street. The show grew so large and popular that the State of
California assumed management in 1947, renamed it Farmers Fair,
and moved it to a 30+-acre location at Palm Street and Florida
Avenue. In 1987, Farmers Fair was moved to Lake Perris to become
the Southern California Fair.
The early 1900s were an active time as Hemet solidified as a Orange Packing House, c. 1904
community. Electric power and telephone lines were installed, Corner of Florida Avenue and Inez Street.
sidewalks were built in the downtown area, the H.E. Bothin
Mansion was constructed on the top south side of Park Hill, the
         C   I T Y      O  F     H    E M   E   T    G    E  N E  R  A L P L A N   2 0 3 0
                                                         9-10

         HISTORIC RESOURCES
                                    Hemet–San Jacinto Gas Company was formed for in-home and business
                                    heating, an Andrew Carnegie library opened in 1913, and a new Santa Fe
                                    Depot opened at the corner of Florida Avenue and State Street in 1914.
   Figure 9.2 Lands of the Hemet Land Company and the Fairview Land and Water Company, 1902.
                                              Mayberry died in 1902, but Whittier remained active in the
                                              community until his death in 1917. He continually promoted his
                                              vision of the ideal community. Whittier was strongly committed
                                              to providing educational opportunities for Hemet children.
                                              Hemet Elementary School opened in 1893. Both Whittier and
                                              Mayberry were instrumental in convincing the Riverside County
                                              Board of Education to build the valley’s first high school in
                                              Hemet in 1894. In 1910, Hemet’s second high school was built at
                                              the intersection of Devonshire Avenue and Santa Fe Street, where
                                              it educated area youth until the early 1970s when it was
                                              demolished and a new high school was constructed on Stetson
                                              Avenue at Stanford Street.
Hemet High School 1910
Devonshire Avenue at Santa Fe Street.
                                              In 1883, activist and author Helen Hunt Jackson visited the
                                              Hemet-San Jacinto area with Abbot Kinney, a well-known
                                              conservationist and land developer. At the time, Jackson was
                                              traveling throughout Southern California to document the
       C    I T Y      O   F     H    E M   E   T    G   E  N  E  R  A L     P L  A  N    2 0 3 0
                                                        9-11

                                                                 HISTORIC RESOURCES
mistreatment of Indian groups following the secularization of the mission
system. During her visit, Jackson documented the plight of a group of
Soboba Indians and hired a law firm to protect their land rights. Jackson
eventually used information gathered during her visit to write her famous
novel, Ramona. Subsequently, local residents decided to promote the region
to tourists by creating a dramatic play based on novel. Audiences viewed
the first staging of the Ramona Pageant in 1923, with subsequent
performances every spring in the Ramona Bowl Amphitheater. Today, the
Ramona Pageant is known as the longest running outdoor play in
California.
9.4.3         COMMUNITY TRANSITION: FROM AGRICULTURE TO
              RETIREMENT COMMUNITY TO FAMILY SUBURB
The character of Hemet underwent a significant change in the early 1960s Helen Hunt Jackson
with the onset of large-scale residential development, largely in the form of c. 1850s–1860s.
retirement communities and mobile home parks. Sierra Dawn Estates,
California’s first “mobile home subdivision” in which individual lots were
sold, was established when Merlyn “Mack” McIntyre converted 240 acres
of his farm to an upscale residential park for retirees that included four
recreation centers, all with swimming pools, and a social/activities director.
The popularity of the park was partially due to its
advertising by Art Linkletter of national television fame,
who referred to Hemet as the “Foothills of Heaven.”
The park marked the beginning of Hemet’s transition
from an agriculture-based to a retirement-based
economy. Drawn by the success of Sierra Dawn, many
new senior parks opened in Hemet. Hemet became
nationally known as a desirable retirement community
with the population growing from 5,416 in 1960 to 23,211
in 1980. The seniors brought their lifetime savings with
them, catapulting Hemet into “one of the richest cities in
the United States with a ‘Bank on Every Corner,’”
according to the Wall Street Journal. The growth in the
retirement population prompted new industrial and
business growth. Mobile home manufacturing plants, such
as Skyline Homes, opened in Hemet. New recreational
amenities, banks, and other senior-oriented businesses and
services kept pace with the increase in population.
In the 1980s, subdivisions of single-family homes began to
sprout up from former ranch land with a subsequent
expansion of retail. The local economy began another
transition to a family-oriented commuter-based economy
with growth driven by externally earned income. The City
experienced steady growth in the 1990s with housing starts
skyrocketing in the early 2000s. By 2010, 78,657 people
lived in Hemet. Hemet today retains much of its
retirement orientation, but is also becoming home to Entrance to Sierra Dawn Estates.
significant numbers of younger families drawn to good
schools and relative affordability.
         C  I  T Y      O   F     H E   M  E  T     G  E  N  E   R  A L     P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                      9-12

          HISTORIC RESOURCES
                                     9.4.4        NOTABLE HISTORIC RESOURCES
                                     Several historic structures and sites in the Hemet area warrant recognition:
                                               Historic Santa Fe Depot The first Hemet Railroad Depot was
                                               constructed at the southeast corner of Latham Avenue and Santa
                                               Fe Street in 1893 by the Santa Fe Railroad Company with the
                                               financial assistance of William F. Whittier. It burned down in
                                               1897 and a second depot was constructed on the same site in
                                               1898 with passenger and freight facilities. In 1914, a new
                                               passenger room was built about 100 yards southwest at the
                                               intersection of State and Inez Streets and Florida Avenue. To save
                                               money, Santa Fe put the freight house on wheels, rolled it down
                                               the track, and attached it to the new passenger room. This hybrid
Restored Santa Fe Depot at State Street and    depot eventually fell into disuse. Santa Fe considered demolishing
Florida Avenue.                                the facility, but agreed in 1987 to sell the depot to an organization
                                               of private individuals, City and County government officials, and
                                               community groups and businesses named Save Our Station, which
                                               spent 10 years restoring the facility.
                                     Restoration of the depot was completed in 1998. The Hemet Museum
                                     opened in the century-old freight house. Operated entirely by volunteers,
                                     the museum focuses on local history and features photographs and artifacts
                                     of old Hemet and the Ramona Pageant, as well as Native American artifacts
                                     and agricultural displays. The passenger room was leased to a coffee
                                     house/restaurant business.
                                                          Meier House By the beginning of the 20th century,
                                                          Hemet’s downtown streets were crowded with shoppers
                                                          who could purchase almost everything they needed,
                                                          except for lumber. The only lumber company in the
                                                          area was operated by Martin Meier, a German
                                                          immigrant who had settled in the San Jacinto Valley in
                                                          1883. William F. Whittier, Hemet cofounder, used his
                                                          money and his land to entice Meier to close his business
                                                          in San Jacinto and reopen in Hemet, which he did in
                                                          1902 with a new lumber yard on North State Street,
                                                          south of Devonshire Avenue. In 1908, Meier
                                                          constructed an elegant home with gingerbread trim and
                                                          gable woodwork on the east side of State Street, south
 Meier Home, c. 1908.                                     of his business. The Meier family lived in the home until
                                                          Martin’s death in 1937. In the early 1980s, the Welch
                                                          Construction Company purchased the home, restored it,
                                                          and was presented the Valley Beautiful Award in 1985.
                                                          The house is a stellar example of adaptive reuse because
                                                          it continues to be used for commercial purposes today.
                                     Hemet Stock Farm In 1902, Hemet cofounder William F. Whittier began
                                     breeding Standardbred trotters in Hemet. By 1909, he had built barns,
                                     paddocks, a grandstand, and a half-mile, 30-foot-wide race track at his stock
                                     farm. Standardbreds are a breed of horses best known for their ability to
                                     race in harness at a trot or pace instead of under saddle at a gallop. One of
                                     the farm’s horses, Wilbur Lou, won the 1910 Pacific Breeder’s Stake with a
         C  I  T Y     O    F     H    E  M  E  T     G    E  N   E  R  A L      P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                                                          9-13

                                                                HISTORIC RESOURCES
time 3½ seconds faster than the world record.
The following year, he won the 1911 California
State Fair Futurity. The Hemet Stock Farm
instantly became not only a nationally known
trotting race venue, but a place for motorcycle
and automobile races, airplane landings, and early
motion picture settings. After Whittier died, the
farm became a popular and active locale for
breeding and training Thoroughbred racehorses.
In 2003, the opening scene of the motion picture
“Seabiscuit” was filmed at the Hemet Stock Farm.
                                                     Hemet Stock Farm, c. 1912
The Hemet Stock Farm is currently a privately The 300-seat grandstand faces west.
owned 36-acre site that is listed on state and local
inventories as a resource that appears eligible for listing on the National
Register of Historic Resources. The site provides both historic character
and adaptive reuse potential. Original structures and amenities include the
racetrack, the grandstand, paddocks, corrals, and a two-story cottage. The
cottage was built in 1888 by Hemet cofounder Edward L. Mayberry as a
bunkhouse on property he owned north of Park Hill. In the mid-1890s, he
relocated the building to a lot on Latham Avenue. In 1909, Whittier moved
it to the Hemet Stock Farm and added a wide porch, where the bunkhouse
was used as an office and later a manager’s house. As of 2010, the cottage is
the oldest building in the City of Hemet.
Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd Hemet cofounder
William F. Whittier decided at the turn of the century that he
needed to attract a “higher quality” class of settlers to Hemet to
realize his municipal dreams. He entered into a contract with a
London real estate agent, and from 1903 to 1906 a significant
number of English families migrated to Hemet., Because of the
climate, many of the settlers did not stay, but enough remained to
form the nucleus of a colony named the Hemet English Colony.
Members of the English Colony were primarily Episcopalians who
formed the Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd. Whittier Recently Renovated 1911 Church of the Good
donated two lots on Juanita Street for the church building, but the Shepherd on Acacia Avenue at Carmalita
parish wanted to build their church on Acacia Avenue. Whittier Street.
exchanged the Juanita Street lots for two lots on the northeast
corner of Acacia Avenue and Carmalita Street, where the parish
built a church that reflected the history of California, a Spanish-
Mission design. On April 16, 1911, the parish held its first services
in the new building.
Historic Downtown Hemet Cofounders Whittier and Mayberry
envisioned a Hemet that would attract families who would each
purchase 5 to 20 acres of land for cultivation into successful
agricultural enterprises. In addition to soliciting land buyers,
Whittier and Mayberry also facilitated the construction of a few
downtown buildings that would appeal not only to prospective land
buyers, but would serve as an enticement to new retail merchants. North Harvard Street, 1907
The Santa Fe Depot was completed in 1893; Mayberry constructed The view faces south; Hotel Hemet is on
Hotel Mayberry, later called Hotel Hemet, in 1894; and in 1895, Florida Avenue.
         C  I  T Y      O  F     H  E  M   E  T    G  E   N  E  R  A L      P  L A N    2 0 3 0
                                                     9-14

           HISTORIC RESOURCES
                                     Whittier raised the curtain on the 500-seat opera house. In 1899, Whittier
                                     started the Bank of Hemet in one of his Harvard storefront buildings, and
                                     in 1908 constructed a building for the bank on the northeast corner of
                                     Florida Avenue and Harvard Street. Other commercial enterprises began
                                     opening, such as Gibbel Hardware and the Farmers and Merchants Bank.
                                     Almost all of the initial businesses originated on North Harvard Street,
                                     which became the main commercial center of Hemet until the 1920s.
                                     Although not all of the original buildings remain today, Harvard Street and
                                     the surrounding downtown area with its rich and broad heritage warrants
                                     historic consideration and preservation.
                                                   Weston Park In 1913, Dr. John B. Weston, a retired
                                                   physician and surgeon, moved his family to Hemet from
                                                   Minnesota. He immediately made such a community presence
                                                   that he was elected to the City Council in 1914. After 7 years
                                                   of service on the City Council, and 6 years as Mayor, Dr.
                                                   Weston resigned. He left a gift of 5 acres located at the
                                                   northeast corner of Florida Avenue and Thompson Street for
                                                   a park. To finance construction of the park, in 1926 residents
                                                   passed Ordinance 142 that allowed for the collection of a 15
  Weston Park, Built 1930
  Florida Avenue at Thompson Street.
                                                   cent property tax on each 100 dollars of assessed valuation.
                                                   On September 22, 1930, Weston Park was officially dedicated
                                                   by the City Council.
                                                   Ramona Bowl The Ramona Bowl is a natural amphitheatre
                                                nestled in a canyon in the Santa Rosa Mountains. It is a
                                                nationally known cultural venue and California State Historic
                                                Landmark No. 1009. In the early 1920s, the local chamber of
                                                commerce, which became the Ramona Pageant Association,
                                                bought 160 acres in and around the canyon to create the bowl.
                                                The Ramona Pageant was first staged here in 1923. The first
                                                concrete seats were installed in 1926, the first permanent
                                                buildings were constructed in 1936, the first sound system was
1936 Seating Arrangement at the Ramona Bowl.    installed in 1965, and a new stage was built in 1988. The venue is
                                                currently used for concerts, weddings, graduations, and theatre
                                                performances as well as the Ramona Pageant.
                                     The Ramona Pageant was designated as the California State Outdoor Play
                                     by Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 5, the Assembly concurring, on
                                     March 19, 1993. The pageant is based on a book written by Helen Hunt
                                     Jackson in 1884 that documented the plight of local Native Americans. The
                                                         popularity of the historical fiction novel, Ramona, brought
                                                         attention to the region.
                                                         Hemet Elementary School Hemet’s first grammar
                                                         school, a two-room building, was constructed on
                                                         Alessandro Street, opening in 1893 with one teacher and
                                                         20 students. By the mid-1920s, even though an annex
                                                         building had been added, the facility could no longer
                                                         accommodate the needs of the community. Hemet
                                                         Elementary School opened in 1927, where it served
  Hemet Elementary School, Built 1927                    students until 2009 when it was declared unsafe for use
  Kimball Avenue at Santa Fe Street.
          C  I  T Y       O  F     H  E   M  E  T     G    E  N  E  R   A L     P   L   A   N   2 0 3 0
                                                          9-15

                                                                   HISTORIC RESOURCES
because of a soil subsidence problem. Potential options for its use or
adaptive reuse are being considered.
Hemet-Ryan Airport In 1940, to prepare for possible involvement in the
European war, the U.S. War Department decided to establish pilot training
schools across the country and hired civilians to teach primary flight
training. T. Claude Ryan, who designed the Spirit of St. Louis airplane and
opened the Ryan School of Aeronautics in San Diego, was asked to start a
training program in Southern California. He chose to establish a facility in
Hemet for three reasons: unpopulated areas, little or no fog, and many acres
of open land for a main airfield and auxiliary fields for practicing takeoffs
and landings. Eventually five hangars and 55 barrack buildings were
constructed and 8,907 army cadets were trained to fly. Pilots
who graduated from the Ryan School were sent to Randolph
Field in Texas where they learned fighter techniques. The first
class that graduated from Ryan and then Randolph were sent to
the Philippines; all 15 died defending the islands when Japan
attacked. The Ryan School of Aeronautics ceased operations in
December 1944 and the facility was given to Riverside County
where it has been used for crop dusting, aerial tankers fighting
fires in the mountains, and private use.
In 1957, the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) began operations for
loading air tankers at Ryan Field, joined by the California Ryan School of Aeronautics 1941.
Division of Forestry in 1959. Ryan Field is one of 19 tanker
bases strategically located throughout California. It is strategically located in
consideration of the climate, weather, fuels, geography, and fire occurrence.
The base still provides some initial-attack aircraft service for more than
17,000 square miles of lands that are federally, state, and privately owned.
Up until 1998, Ryan was statistically the busiest air tanker base in the
United States, delivering an average of 1.5 million gallons of retardant
annually. These statistics have dropped dramatically since USFS relocated to
the recently vacated March and Norton Air Force Base facilities.
The Patterson House The Patterson House is located in
the community of Winchester. The home was built in 1891
by John and Maria Patterson, who had traveled from
Yountville to their new community. As they passed through
Los Angeles, Maria gathered pepper tree seeds, which she
planted at the house. Some of these trees are still standing
today. The Patterson family, which eventually grew to
include five children, became very influential in Winchester’s
growth and prosperity. John Patterson was a major property
owner, a blacksmith, a tinsmith, a general store owner, part-
owner of the local brickworks, a farmer, a board member of
the first creamery in the area, and a board member of the
                                                                   Patterson House, Winchester, Built 1891.
San Jacinto and Pleasant Valley Irrigation District. Daughter,
Tilla Patterson Hudson, was a railroad station agent for the
Santa Fe Railroad in Winchester from the day it opened in 1890 until the
day it closed in 1930. She was also a Wells Fargo agent for 28 years, a
Riverside County librarian when the library books were sent by train to
local communities, and an officer of the Winchester Woman’s Club.
          C  I T Y      O   F    H  E  M  E   T     G    E  N   E  R   A L      P L  A  N      2 0 3 0
                                                        9-16

 HISTORIC RESOURCES
              The house and grounds were granted to the Winchester Historic Society of
              Pleasant Valley by Ed and Mary Kinney in 1994. On July 8, 2000, the
              Patterson House Museum was dedicated with a granite marker put in place
              by the Native Daughters of the Golden West. The marker sits atop a
              pedestal constructed with bricks from the Miller Building and the Patterson
              House.
              Historic Resources Survey/Inventory In 1981, the Riverside County
              Historic Commission of the Riverside County Parks Department initiated a
              survey Hemet’s historic structures. The survey developed into a historic
              resources inventory that was filed with the California Office of Historic
              Preservation (OHP) in 1983. The OHP is a division of the California
              Department of Parks and Recreation. The mission of the OHP is “to
              preserve and enhance California's irreplaceable historic heritage as a matter
              of public interest so that its vital legacy of cultural, educational, recreational,
              aesthetic, economic, social, and environmental benefits will be maintained
              and enriched for present and future generations.” The City’s historic
              inventory became a part of the statewide Historic Resources Inventory
              (HRI) in the California Historic Resources Information System. The HRI
              database is maintained and managed by eleven independent regional
              information centers under contract to OHP. The Eastern Information
              Center (EIC) located at the University of California, Riverside, maintains
              the Historic Data File for Riverside County, which includes the Hemet
              inventory. Appendix B is the 1983 inventory filed with OHP as updated by
              EIC.
              In 2005, based on the 1983 inventory, the Hemet–San Jacinto Valley
              Historical Society identified eight neighborhoods in which a concentration
              of homes and businesses older than 50-years-old are located. These
              neighborhoods are described in detail in the General Plan’s Cultural Resources
              Technical Background Report and include:
                   Park Hill and Northeast Hemet,
                   Northeast Central Hemet,
                   Northwest Hemet,
                   Central Hemet and Hemet Fairgrounds,
                   Fruitvale,
                   Southeast Central Hemet,
                   Southwest Central Hemet,
                   Hemet Downtown
              These studies and inventories have helped the City to identify an area in
              Downtown Hemet that the City considers its historic core. The general
              boundaries of this area have been mapped in Figure 9-3, along with the sites
              of the notable historic resources discussed in Section 9.4.4. Located within
              this “Downtown Historic Core” are many of the City’s oldest and most
              significant historic structures, each of which warrants consideration before
              demolition or significant remodeling.
C I T Y O F H  E   M  E   T    G    E  N   E  R   A L      P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                   9-17

                                                                                                                                   Cottonwood Ave
                                                                Beech St                               Warren Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Main St
 LEGEND                                                                                                                            Esplanade Ave
        Downtown Historic Core
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Commonwealth Ave
         Demolition Review Area
                                         California Ave
                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
                                                                                                                                                                        Eaton Ave
                                                                                                                                     Cawston Ave
                                                                                                       Rd
 Significant Historic Resources
                                                                      Los Rancherias Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave            Palm Ave
                                                                                                 Wa rr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    State St
        Hemet-Ryan Airport                                                                            en
                                                                                                                                                                        Menlo Ave                                                                                                                                         Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rk
        Hemet Stock Farm                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oakland Ave
                                                                                                                   Rose Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yale St
        Meier House
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Girard St
                                                                                                                                                   Devonshire Ave
                                                                                                                       Myers St
        Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Florida Ave
                                                                                                                                                     Ave                                           Elk St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gilbert St
        Weston Park                                                                                                                     rid a
                                    Florida Ave                                                                                     Flo                                 Acacia Ave                                                                                                                         Acacia Ave
        Hemet Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mayberry Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Buena Vista St   San Jacinto St
        Hemet Depot and Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Whittier Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                        Lyon Ave
                                                                                                  ct
                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                             Kirby St
                                                                                                                     HEMET-RYAN             LWA
                                                                                                edu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yale St
                                                                                                                                       RA I
        Patterson House Museum
                                                                                                                      AIRPORT        F                                                                      Johnston Ave
                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                               A qu
          Winchester Rd
                                                                                                                                AT&
                                                                                          San
        Maze Stone                                                                                                                                                                                          Stetson Ave                                                                                    Stetson Ave
         California State Historic Landmark                                                   Dieg
                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                                                        Sanderson Ave
         No. 557 Hemet Maze Stone
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thornton Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Elk St
                                                                                                                       Fisher St
        Ramona Bowl
                                                                                                 ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Crest Dr
                                                                                           o   nA                                                                                                            Chambers St
                                                                                      ts
         California State Historic Landmarks
                                                                                                       Warren Rd
         No. 104 Site of Indian Village of Pochea                                 Ste
         No. 1009 Site of the Ramona Pageant
                                                                                                                   Mustang Way                                                                                                                                                               RAMONA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BOWL
                                                     California Ave                                                                                                                                                                 State St
X06268298.11 067 04/11                                                                                                                                                                    D om
                                                                                                                                                                                              eni
                                                                                                                                                                                                 go
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                          Sources:
                          Census Tiger Line Data 2005
                          ESRI 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              F i g u r e                    9 . 3
                          0   0.25 0.5                    1                                                                                                                                                   NOTABLE LOCAL HISTORIC SITES
                                                              Miles                                                                                                                                                     H e m e t                               G e n e r a l                                P l a n
 HISTORIC RESOURCES
              Historic Home Plaque Program In 2005, the Hemet–San Jacinto Valley
              Historical Society and the City initiated a program to recognize well-
              maintained historic homes. Owners of designated homes receive an
              honorary plaque and acknowledgment of their efforts to preserve the
              distinguishing characteristics of a local historic resource.
              Historic Resources Ordinance The City intends to adopt a historic
              resources ordinance that, among other things, establishes demolition and
              development policies for historic resources. However, until that ordinance
              is adopted, the City will review demolition and development proposals for
              their impact on historic resources if the sites are:
                        located within the Downtown Historic Core area or otherwise
                        mapped in Figure 9-3; or
                        listed on the Eastern Information Center Historic Data File (1983
                        historic resources inventory) attached as Appendix B; or
                        structures over 50 years old or otherwise noted as historically
                        significant to the City of Hemet.
              9.4.5          OVERVIEW OF HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL STYLES IN
                             HEMET
              “Style” in architecture is a convenient classification system used to identify
              a building and place it in a historic context. Style is determined by the
              assemblage of architectural details, features, and building forms that were
              used at a particular period of time to give a building a certain look or
              recognizable character. Style is essentially visual and has no necessary
              relationship to the function of a building—churches, businesses, and
              residences may all be of the same architectural style. Some of the styles
              were a reflection of social movements, while others appear to have been
              more the product of changing fashion. Terminology of styles varies
              depending frequently on whether the user is describing the time period in
              which a structure was built such as Victorian or Colonial, or its features
              such as Queen Anne or hipped-roof cottage. The identifying names used in
              these guidelines are those used commonly by architectural historians today.
              The architectural descriptions in this document are solely intended to
              provide a general stylistic framework on which to identify the exterior
              features of a residential or commercial structure.
              Victorian Period Homes (1880–1910): Victorians generally have a steeply
              pitched roof of irregular shape, usually with a dominant front facing gable;
              patterned shingles, cutaway bay windows, and other devices used to avoid a
              smooth-walled appearance. A full or partial front porch generally extends
              along one or more sides of the house. An example is the home built in 1908
              by Martin Meier, located on North State Street.
              Spanish Revival (1890–1940): The Spanish Revival style was inspired by a
              broad spectrum of both Old (Spain) and New (Mexico) World Spanish
              buildings. An identifying feature is a low pitched red tiled roof, usually with
              little or no eave overhang. A prominent arch is typically placed above the
C I T Y O F H   E   M  E   T    G    E  N  E   R  A L     P  L   A  N     2 0 3 0
                                    9-19

                                                                  HISTORIC RESOURCES
door or principal window or beneath the porch roof. The façade is
normally asymmetrical and typically covered with stucco of cement mortar
applied over wooden lath. An example is this commercial structure on
Harvard Street.
Provincial Revival (1893–1940): This style of home is loosely based on a
variety of late Medieval English prototypes, which are united by an
emphasis on steeply pitched gables. Relatively uncommon before World
War I, the style exploded in popularity during the 1920s and early 1930s.
The homes show endless variations in overall shape, roof form and façade
materials. The Tudor style is perhaps the best known of the Provincial
Revival variations. Several Provincial Revival homes are located in the
downtown area. The example shown here was built in 1929 on State Street.
Craftsman Bungalow (1905–1930) and Vernacular Bungalow:
Craftsman houses were inspired primarily by the work of two California
brothers, Charles Greene and Henry Greene, who practiced architecture
together in Pasadena from 1893 to 1914. About 1903 they began to design
Craftsman-type bungalows that were given extensive publicity in
architecture and home improvement magazines, thus familiarizing the rest
of the nation with the style. Craftsman Bungalows have a low-pitched,
gabled roof (occasionally hipped) with a wide, unenclosed eave overhang.
The roof rafters were usually exposed with the ends sometimes cut into
decorative shapes. Decorative beams commonly extended from the wall to
the roof edge under the gables and sloping edges of the roof. One-story
vernacular examples that do not contain all of the identifying features of a
Craftsman Bungalow are often simply called bungalows. Bungalows are the
most common type of historic house in Hemet. The example shown here
was built in 1911 at the site of a demolished high school on Buena Vista
Avenue. Materials from the school were used to construct the home.
Farmhouse: Farmhouse is a term used more often to describe function.
Very simply put, homes built on agricultural lands were called farmhouses.
They were built out of necessity: to house and protect the inhabitants who
either owned or worked the farm. The style evolved from the characteristics
of the place, people, climate, and materials available in the particular region
where it was located. As a community based in agriculture, there are a few
farmhouses remaining in the Planning Area, such as this one on Palm
Avenue.
Infill Design Neighborhoods, particularly within the downtown area,
which contain numerous historic structures, offer the community a glimpse
into the Hemet of yesteryear. To preserve that heritage and neighborhood
character, it is important that new homes and buildings built on infill lots be
designed sensitively by identifying the historic style of the area and keeping
new buildings in the same architectural context using scale and visual image.
Infill design policies are established in the Community Design Element of
this General Plan
         C   I  T Y     O   F     H  E  M   E  T    G   E   N  E  R  A L      P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                       9-20

 HISTORIC RESOURCES
              G OALS AND P OLICIES
              H IST ORI C R ESOURC ES
                           Identify, maintain, protect, and enhance elements of
              GOAL         Hemet’s cultural, historic, social, economic,
              HR-1         architectural, agricultural, archaeological, and scenic
                           heritage.
              POLICIES
              HR-1.1      Preservation Encourage the preservation and re-use of
                          historic structures, landscape features, roads, landmark
                          trees, and trails as well as public access to significant scenic
                          vistas, viewpoints, and view corridors.
              HR-1.2      Appreciation Promote an understanding and appreciation
                          of Hemet’s history and built environment.
              HR-1.3      Incentives Provide incentives wherever possible to
                          protect, preserve, and maintain the City’s heritage by
                          offering alternatives to demolition and encouraging
                          restoration and rehabilitation. Where feasible, allocate
                          resources and/or tax credits to prioritize the retrofitting of
                          irreplaceable historic structures.
              HR-1.4      Demolition         Alternatives       Require     development
                          applications that include the demolition of structures older
                          than 50 years or are listed in the Eastern Information
                          Center Historic Data File for Riverside County, to
                          consider alternatives to demolition such as architecturally
                          compatible rehabilitation, adaptive reuse, and relocation.
              HR-1.5      Neighborhood Character Encourage retention of the
                          character of existing historic structures and design
                          elements that define the built environment of the City’s
                          older neighborhoods.
              HR-1.6      Use/Adaptive Re-use Encourage retention of structures
                          in their original use or reconversion to their original use
                          where feasible. Encourage sensitive, adaptive re-use where
                          the original use is no longer feasible.
              HR-1.7      Historic Design Encourage the incorporation of historic
                          design features, as well as safety, when street or other
                          public improvements are proposed in older neighborhoods
                          and districts.
              HR-1.8      Historic Building Code Utilize use of the California
                          State Historic Building Code to facilitate the proper
                          restoration and rehabilitation of historic structures.
C I T Y O F H  E M   E T G    E  N   E  R   A L      P  L  A   N    2 0 3 0
                             9-21

                                                             HISTORIC RESOURCES
HR-1.9       Public Buildings and Sites Maintain and improve City-
             owned or City-funded historic buildings and sites in an
             architecturally and environmentally sensitive manner.
GOAL          Preserve        significant        archeological        and
              paleontological resources in areas under the City’s
HR-2          jurisdiction, to the greatest extent possible.
POLICIES
HR-2.1       Consultation Consult with the Soboba Band and any
             other interested Indian tribes to identify and appropriately
             address cultural resources and tribal sacred sites through
             the development review process. Require a Native
             American Statement as part of the environmental review
             process of development projects with identified cultural
             resources.
HR-2.2       Monitoring Require monitoring of new developments
             where resources or potential resources have been
             identified in the review process
HR-2.3       Evaluation Resources found prior to or during site
             development shall be evaluated by a qualified archaeologist
             or paleontologist, and appropriate mitigation measures
             shall be applied before resumption of development
             activities. Development project proponents shall bear all
             costs associated with the monitoring and disposition of
             cultural resources management within the project site.
HR-2.4       Preferred Repository To the extent practicable and
             appropriate, newly uncovered non-Native American
             archeological and paleontological resources shall be
             transferred to the Western Science Center of Diamond
             Valley for cataloguing, study and, if appropriate, display.
GOAL          Foster increased community awareness                    and
              appreciation of Hemet’s unique heritage.
HR-3
POLICIES
HR-3.1       Program Coordination Coordinate with community
             organizations, local Indian tribes, property owners,
             educational institutions, and other governmental agencies
             to facilitate Hemet’s historic preservation program.
HR-3.2       Activities/Events Encourage and promote activities and
             events designed to educate the community about the
             history of the Hemet area and the recognition of local
             historical and cultural resources.
       C I T Y      O   F    H   E  M  E  T     G   E  N  E  R   A L     P L A N 2 0 3 0
                                                   9-22

