                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                         Public Health and Safety Element
   10.0 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ELEMENT
   The Public Health and Safety Element contains provisions that relate to the protection of life, health,
   and property from natural hazards and man-created hazards. Government Code Section 65302(g)
   requires the adoption of a Safety Element to protect the public from unreasonable risks associated
   with natural and man-made hazards. The Element is designed to identify areas where private and
   public decisions on land use need to be sensitive to hazardous conditions caused by slope instability,
   seismic activity, flood, fire, noise, and/or wind. It also considers a man-made threat to the
   community’s well being, the airport influence area. It further serves to inform individuals, firms, and
   public agencies of the City’s policies on the type of land use permitted, how and where to build public
   facilities, and which type of public services should be provided.
   The Public Health and Safety Element is divided in six major sections as follows:
   x    Geotechnical Hazards;
   x    Flooding Hazards;
   x    Slope Failure Hazards;
   x    Fire Hazards;
   x    Hazardous Waste and Materials; and
   x    Emergency Preparedness.
   10.1 GEOTECHNICAL HAZARDS
   The northern portion of the Planning Area is located within the San Bernardino Valley, which is
   essentially a sediment-filled basin bounded by the San Andreas Fault on the northeast, the San
   Jacinto Fault on the southwest, and a series of northeast-trending faults on the southeast. The
   southern portion of the Planning Area is characterized by hills that have been uplifted and are
   currently dissected by active drainage, creating the badlands topography from which this terrain
   received its name.
Chapter 10.0                         Public Health and Safety Element                                    10-1

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                            Public Health and Safety Element
   Soils in the area range from gravelly loam to sandy loam. The soils on the alluvial valley floors and
   fans are well drained and very deep. The soils in the southern foothills are moderately deep to deep
   and overlay sandstone and shale on the hills.
   Earthquakes in Southern California occur as a result of movement between the Pacific and North
   American plates. Faults of the San Andreas system are used to mark the boundary between the
   plates, but the deformation, faulting and associated earthquakes occur in a broadly distributed zone
   that stretches from offshore California to Nevada.
   The faults considered most significant, though not necessarily located within the limits of the Planning
   Area, are detailed in Table 10.A. Other faults exist in the area, but due to their distance from the
   Planning Area and lower probability of producing a large earthquake, they are considered to present
   a less significant risk to the City.
   Table 10.A: Major Active Faults Affecting the Planning Area
                         Distance         Direction From       Maximum Credible         Maximum Probable
         Fault            (Miles)          Planning Area      Earthquake (Richter)      Magnitude (Richter)
   San Jacinto                0                  ---                  7.5                     6.5 – 7.5
   San Andreas                5                  NE                   8.25                    6.8 – 8.0
   Cucamonga                 13                 NW                     6.5                    6.0 – 7.0
   Elsinore                  22                 SW                    7.5                     6.5 – 7.5
   Newport-
   Inglewood                 48                 SW                     7.0                    6.0 – 7.4
   Source: Southern California Earthquake Data Center.
   Four faults are located within the limits of the Planning Area. They include the San Jacinto Fault, the
   Loma Linda Fault, the Banning Fault and the Reche Canyon Fault. The San Jacinto Fault zone
   crosses the southwest portion of the Planning Area and has been the most historically active fault
   zone in Southern California. There are numerous offset gullies, linear ridges, and other fault-related
   features that indicate active faulting along the Claremont branch of the San Jacinto Fault. The Loma
   Linda Fault has been mapped as crossing the northern portion of the Planning Area. This fault was
   originally identified from groundwater data and lacks topographic evidence. No evidence of active
   faulting has been identified. The Live Oak Canyon Fault is a trace of the San Andreas Fault,
   extending westward from the San Gorgonio Pass. This fault is not generally thought to be active
   within the Planning Area. The Banning Fault extends through the north eastern quadrant of the
   Planning Area and also is generally thought to be inactive. The Reche Canyon fault traverses the
   southwest corner of the Planning Area and is considered a potentially active fault.
   The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (Alquist-Priolo) was passed in 1972 to mitigate the
   hazard of surface faulting to structures built for human occupancy. The Act’s main purpose is to
   prevent the construction of buildings used for human occupancy on the surface trace of active faults.
   This law required the State Geologist to establish regulatory zones (Earthquake Fault Zones) around
   the surface traces of active faults and to issue appropriate maps, which are then distributed to
   affected Cities, Counties, and State agencies for use in planning and/or regulating new or renewed
   construction in such zones. No habitable structure is permitted across the known trace of any active
   fault. Setback zones (generally 50 feet on either side of the fault trace) are established for habitable
   structures. The width and location of any required setback is dependent on the geology a particular
   site, the characteristics of the fault, and the degree of certainty on the fault’s location. The Seismic
   Hazards Mapping Act of 1990 became law in 1991. The purpose of this Act is to protect public safety
   from the effects of strong ground shaking, liquefaction, landslides, or other ground failures, or other
Chapter 10.0                             Public Health and Safety Element                                   10-2

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                          Public Health and Safety Element
   hazards caused by earthquakes. The 1990 Act is a companion and complement to the Alquist-Priolo.
   Areas within the Planning Area susceptible to fault rupture hazards are illustrated in Figure 10.1.
   The San Jacinto Fault, considered to be active, has been mapped in the southern portion of the
   Planning Area. An earthquake hazard zone has been established along the trace of this fault.
   Investigations of the San Jacinto Fault have recommended building setbacks varying from 50 to
   100 feet.
   The strength of seismic ground shaking at any given site is a function of many factors. Of primary
   importance is the size of the earthquake, its distance, the paths the waves take as they travel through
   the earth, the rock or soils underlying the site, and topography (particularly whether a site sits in a
   valley, or atop a hill). The amount of damage also depends on the size, shape, age, and engineering
   characteristics of the affected structures. Of the earthquake faults in the Planning Area, only the San
   Jacinto Fault is considered active and, due to this designation, an earthquake hazard zone has been
   established along the trace of this fault. The largest earthquake expected in an area under the current
   tectonic environment is termed to be the maximum credible earthquake (MCE). Using the Richter
   scale, the MCE for the San Jacinto Fault is 7.5.
   Liquefaction occurs primarily in saturated, loose, fine-to-medium-grained soils in areas where the
   groundwater table is within 50 feet of the surface. Shaking suddenly increases pore water pressure,
   causing the soils to lose strength and behave as liquid. Three groundwater basins underlie portions of
   the Planning Area and include in the northern (Bunker Hill), southwest (Reche Canyon Basin), and
   eastern (San Timoteo Basin). Local faults form the boundaries of these underground water reservoirs.
   There is a moderate to moderately high susceptibility for liquefaction hazards in the northwest portion
   of the Planning Area and the southern reaches of Reche Canyon. The north-central portion of the
   Planning Area and a canyon extending into the western portion of the Planning Area from Reche
   Canyon are moderately susceptible to liquefaction hazards.
   10.1.1 Identified Technical Hazard Issues
   Geologic and seismic hazards are constraints to development as they place limitations on where
   structures can be built and how structures should be constructed. Should a large earthquake hit Loma
   Linda, the primary geologic affects will be surface-ground rupture along the causative fault and
   intense ground shaking thus causing damage to structure and lifelines with potential wide spread fires
   and release of toxic substances. Loma Linda, like much of Southern California, is likely to experience
   a powerful earthquake. Given that one active fault and one potentially active fault run through and
   adjacent to the City, standards for development need to be carefully regulated to minimize structural
   damage and loss of life.
   10.1.2 Guiding Policy
   Minimize the risks of property damage and personal injury resulting from seismic and geologic
   hazards.
Chapter 10.0                         Public Health and Safety Element                                    10-3
    WATERMAN AVENUE
                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                 is
                                                                                                                                      si o
                                                                                                                                             nC
                                                                                                                                                               §
                                                                                                                                               ha
                                                                                                                                                    n ne
                                                                                                                                                           l   ¦
                                                                                                                                                               ¨
                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                          REDLANDS BOULEVARD
                                                              ma
                                                            Lo
                                                                                                                                                B an
                        Gage Ca nal
                                                                    Lin                                                                             nin
                                                                                                                                                                              CALIFORNIA STREET
                                                                                                                                                               gF
                                                                            F                                                                                       aul
                                                                         da                                                                                               t                            Za
                                                                                lt                                                                                                                          nj a Creek
                                                                              au
                                                                                                                     S an                                                                                M
                                                                                                                            T im                                                                            orre y
                                                                                                                                      ot e                                                                           Arro yo
                                                                                                                                             oC
                                                                                                                                                  reek
                                                                    ANDERSON
                                                                                                           BARTON ROAD
                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                Lo
                                                                    STREET                          a
                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                         Li
                                                                                                              Fa
                                                                                                                 ul t
                                                                                                                    (In
                                                                                                                        ac
                                                                                                                          tiv
                                       Sa                                                                                    e)
                                          n
                                                  Ja
                                                       ci
                      Ri                                    nt
                        al                                     o
                             to                                    Fa         Sa                                                                               Sa n
                               -C                                       ul       n                                                                                    T im o
                                      ol                                  tZ       Ja                                                                                          teo C
                                           to                               on                                                                                                       a ny
                                              n                                       i    c                                                                                  Live        on F
                                              Fa                              e             nt                                                                                     Oa k        ault
                                             Re ult                                            o                                                                                        C an y      Zo n e
                                               ch                                                Fa ul                                                                                         on F
                                                  eC                                                  tZ                                                                                            au l t
                                                                   an                                      on
                                                                     yo                                         e
                                                                          n
                                                                               Fa
                                                                                    ul                                                                                                     Sa
                                                                                       t                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ci
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                       nto
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                tZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0        1,600       3,200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feet
                       Geologic Hazards                                                    Fault Lines                  JURISDICTIONAL                                                                                          FIGURE 10.1
                                                                                                                        AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                                 San Jacinto Alquist-Priolo Zone                           Loma Linda Fault
                                                                                                                                 City Boundary
                                 Fault, Certain                                            USGS Faults
                                                                                                                                 City Sphere of Influence
                                 Fault, Approximate                                        Liquefaction Zones
                                                                                                                                 Railroad
                                 Fault, Concealed                                          Area of Steep Slopes
                                                                                           and Slope Instability                 Water Ways
                                                                                                                                                                                                      City of Loma Linda General Plan
SOURCE: Safety Element of the April 1, 1991 General Plan, Rick Engineering Company; California
Geological Survey, 2002; USGS 30x60 San Bernardino Geologic Map, 2003; Thomas Bros 2009
*Branch Fault Lines are not all named per the USGS Geologic Maps 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2009_Jan\fig10-1_GeologicHazards.mxd (04/17/09)

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                            Public Health and Safety Element
   Implementing Policies
   a. Limit development to low density in areas near geologic hazards such as the San Jacinto Fault
        that would create adverse conditions to those inhabiting the area and to the overall community.
   b. Enforce the provisions of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act.
   c.   Require geologic and soils reports to be prepared for proposed development sites, and
        incorporate the findings and recommendations of these studies into project development
        requirements.
   d. Provide information and establish incentives such as free inspections or possibly reduced fees for
        property owners to rehabilitate existing buildings using construction techniques to protect against
        seismic hazards particularly in buildings with high occupancy such as churches and other places
        of assembly.
   e. Identify and publicize the geologic and seismic hazards within Loma Linda and advise residents
        and property owners of appropriate protection measures to reduce or eliminate structural
        damage.
   f.   Encourage continued investigation by State agencies of geologic conditions within the Inland
        Empire to update knowledge of seismic hazards and promote public awareness.
   g. Require that engineered slopes be designed to resist seismically induced failure.
   h. Require that structures overlying both cut and fill areas within a grading operation be over-
        excavated to mitigate the potential for seismically induced differential settlement.
   i.   Require specialized soils reports in areas suspected of having problems with potential
        liquefaction and areas depicted as liquefaction zones as shown on Figure 10.1 (Geologic
        Hazards), bearing strength, expansion, settlement, or subsidence, including implementation of
        the recommendations of these reports into the project development.
   j.   Work with Southern California Edison, the Southern California Gas Company, pipeline
        companies, and industrial companies to implement measures to safeguard the public from
        seismic hazards associated with high voltage transmission lines, caustic and toxic gas and fuel
        lines, and flammable storage facilities.
   10.2 FLOODING HAZARDS
   Flooding represents a potential hazard to
   citizens and property within the Planning Area.
   Flooding hazards may be considered in two
   categories: natural flooding and reservoir or
   water tank failure. While the majority of the
   area potentially subject to flood hazards is
   located in the northern portion of the Planning
   Area, local topography and the presence of a
   number of large aboveground water storage
   tanks, increase the potential for flood events in
   other portions of the Planning Area.
                                                               A flooding hazard controlled through a channel
   The principal types of flood hazards in the
   Planning Area include stream flooding, bridge
   scour, dam inundation and earthquake-induced flooding (seiches). The Planning Area is potentially
   vulnerable to flooding associated with San Timoteo Creek, Mission Channel, and the Santa Ana
   River, as well as small-scale floods originating on hillsides in the southern portion of the City. While
Chapter 10.0                        Public Health and Safety Element                                          10-5
                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                         Public Health and Safety Element
   not likely to occur in the City, bridge foundations are vulnerable to scouring during a flood. Major
   roadways that cross over watercourses/channels in the City include Anderson Street and Barton
   Road (San Timoteo Creek), and Redlands Boulevard (Mission Channel), and Beaumont Avenue (San
   Timoteo Creek). The northern portion of the Planning Area is within the inundation area of the Seven
   Oaks Dam, the failure of which while not likely, would impact the City and its Sphere of Influence. The
   Seven Oaks Dam is a dry dam that serves to decrease peak water flows during spring runoff and
   rainstorm events. Upon filling, the dam water is “metered out” through a culvert located at the base of
   the dam. Additionally, canals, levees, and flood control channels may be vulnerable to the
   earthquake-induced effects of liquefaction, lateral spreading and primary fault rupture. In Loma Linda,
   an earthquake may cause local flooding by creating seiches (reverberating waves) by damaging
   water storage facilities or detention basins which are located generally in the southern foothills as
   shown in Figure 10.2.
   The most widely distributed flood map product is the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The Federal
   Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is mandated by the Flood Insurance Act of 1968 and the
   Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 to evaluate flood hazards and provide FIRMs for local and
   regional planners to further promote sound land use and floodplain development. Flood risk data
   presented on FIRMs are based on historic, meteorological, hydrologic, and hydraulic data, as well as
   open space conditions, flood control works, and development. To prepare a FIRM that illustrates the
   extent of flood hazards in a flood-prone community, FEMA conducts an engineering study referred to
   as Flood Insurance Study (FIS). Using information gathered in these studies, FEMA engineers and
   cartographers delineate Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) on FIRMs. SFHAs are those areas
   subject to inundation by a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or
   exceeded during any given year.
   The City of Loma Linda participates in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). Consequently,
   FIRM maps prepared by FEMA to show potential flood zones are available for areas within the City
   limits. Flood hazard areas and flood control facilities in the City are shown on Figure 10.2. As
   depicted on FIRM maps, flood hazard areas in the City of Loma Linda are identified in the following
   manner:
   Zone AE. This is one of the seven classifications of areas of special flood hazard areas inundated by
   the 100-year flood. Within the City of Loma Linda, the AE zone is generally located in the San
   Timoteo Creek Channel. Base flood elevations have not been determined for this area as it is
   undergoing channelization.
   Zone AO. Areas with this designation have average flood depths of one to three feet. The flooding is
   usually due to sheet flows on sloping terrain. The area with this designation is located in the sphere of
   influence around the Mission Channel south of Redlands Boulevard.
   Zone A99. Areas so designated are those where the partial completion of a flood control project (e.g.,
   the San Timoteo channelization project) has reduced but not yet eliminated the possibility of flooding
   in the area. The A99 designation adjacent to the San Timoteo Channel became effective June 27,
   2001. In the City of Loma Linda, the A99 zone is generally located between I-10 to the north and the
   UPRR line to the south, and it extends from California Street on the east to the western boundary of
   the City. Remapping of this area for flood hazards will occur after the completion of the channelization
   project.
   Zone X (shaded). Identified as the areas of the 500-year flood; areas of the 100-year flood with an
   average depth of less than one foot or with drainage areas of less than one square mile; and areas
   protected by levies from the 100-year flood. Within the City, the X zone is primarily restricted to areas
   at the extreme southern and northern limits of the AE zone. Two areas: one north of Redlands
Chapter 10.0                         Public Health and Safety Element                                      10-6

    WATERMAN AVENUE
                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                      is
                                                                                                           si o
                                                                                                                  nC
                                                                                                                                    §
                                                                                                                    ha
                                                                                                                         n ne
                                                                                                                                l   ¦
                                                                                                                                    ¨
                                                                                                                                    10
                                                    ANDERSON
                                                                            REDLANDS BOULEVARD
                                                    STREET
                                                                                                                                                CALIFORNIA STREET
                                                                                                                                                                       Za
                                                                                                                                                                            nj a Creek
                                                                                           S an                                                                         M
                                                                                                  T im                                                                      orre y
                                                                                                           ot e                                                                      Arro yo
                                                                                                                  oC
                                                                                                                       reek
                                                                                     BARTON ROAD
                                                     (
                                                     !
                                                     (
                                                     !         (
                                                               !
                                                                                            (!
                                                                                            ! (
                                                                                           (
                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                       0       1,600
                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                                                                       3,200
                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet
                                                                                                                            Jurisdictional and
                                                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE 10.2
Flood Zones*                                              Zone X - 500 yr or greater Water Tanks                            Infrastructure
                                                          Areas determined to be
                                                          outside the 500 yr floodplain !
                                                                                        ( Water Tank - 3.2MG
             Zone A                                                                                                                 City Boundary
             No base flood elevations determined,
             contained within channel                     Existing Detention Basin     (
                                                                                       !   Water Tank - 8.0MG                       City Sphere of Influence
             Zone AO - Flood Depths of 1-3 ft             Proposed Detention Basin     (
                                                                                       !   Water Tank - 2.0MG                       Railroad
             Zone X - 100 to 500 yr                       Major Storm Drains           (
                                                                                       !   Water Tank - 0.6MG                       Water Ways
             Areas pf 500 yr flood; areas
                                                                                       (
                                                                                       !   Water Tank - 1.0MG
             of 100 yr flood with average                                                                                                                            City of Loma Linda General Plan
             depths of less than 1 foot                                                (
                                                                                       !   Water Tank - 0.1MG
                                                                                                                                                                    FLOOD HAZARD AREAS AND
*Flood Zone AE is locatied within the confines of the San Timoteo Creek Channel
SOURCE: FEMA DFIRM 2008; Thomas Bros 2009
                                                                                                                                                                    FLOOD CONTROL FACILITIES
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig10-2_FloodHazards.mxd (10/29/08)

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                            Public Health and Safety Element
   Boulevard between California Street and Rhonda Street, and the other, north of the UPRR line at the
   western City boundary are also located within this zone.
   Zone X (unshaded). Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain. All areas of the City not
   identified within Zones AE or X (unshaded) are included under this designation.
   10.2.1 Flood Control Features
   The San Bernardino County Flood Control District covers the entire County (including the
   incorporated cities), and provides planning, design, construction, and operation. Maintenance on the
   regional storm drain facilities within the County. Storm drain systems have been constructed
   throughout the City to accommodate both the increased runoff resulting from development and to
   protect developed areas within the City from potential localized flooding. Because County drainage
   facilities receive upstream drainage from the City’s drainage system, the City storm drain system
   must be consistent with the County’s Master Plan. The City of Loma Linda (along with the City of
   Redlands) is located within the area addressed in San Bernardino County Comprehensive Storm
   Drain Master Plan No. 4. Future improvements to the City’s storm drain system will follow the
   improvements outlined in Master Plan No. 4.
   10.2.2 Identified Flooding Hazard Issues
   Many storm drains and open channels drain into the San Timoteo Creek channel, which is a County
   facility. Until the Federally funded flood control projects are completed along this channel, the areas
   north of this channel within the City will remain within the interim flood zone.
   The Mission Channel, which flows in an open channel from California Street to the I-10 freeway, is
   susceptible to flooding in a 100-500 year storm. Improvements to this channel system are necessary
   to reduce flooding hazards in the area.
   10.2.3 Guiding Policy
   Protect the community from risks to lives and property created by flooding and stormwater runoff.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Through the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Citizen’s Advisory Committee,
        continue to make recommendations to the County Board of Supervisors for improvements to the
        flood control facilities in the City of Loma Linda to reduce the potential of 100 – 500 year floods
        within the City.
   b. In areas where local and sub-regional drainage facilities are not currently provided, require new
        development to prepare hydrologic studies to assess storm runoff on the local and subregional
        storm drainage systems and/or creek corridors and incorporate appropriate mitigation in project
        development.
   c.   Require new development to provide for the perpetual maintenance of detention basins, if
        necessary to support the new development.
   d. Require new development to incorporate features into drainage plans that would reduce
        impermeable surface area, increase surface water infiltration, and minimize surface water runoff
        during storms.
   e. Cooperate with the State and Federal agencies to encourage that streams and creeks in the
        south hills area be left in their natural state in order to preserve their value as percolation and
        recharge areas, natural habitat, scenic resources, and recreation corridors, if technically and
Chapter 10.0                           Public Health and Safety Element                                   10-8

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                             Public Health and Safety Element
        financially feasible. If not, then the loss or modification of a creek stream should be appropriately
        mitigated.
   f.   Cooperate with San Bernardino County Flood Control District to reduce hazards caused by local
        flooding through maintenance and improvements to the area’s storm drain system such as the
        jointly maintained Loma Linda storm drain.
   g. Maintain current flood hazard data, and coordinate with the Federal Emergency Management
        Agency, San Bernardino Flood Control District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other
        responsible agencies to coordinate flood hazard analysis and management activities.
   10.2.4 Flood Control Facilities
   10.2.4.1 Performance Objective
   Ensure adequate facilities to protect Loma Linda residents and businesses from damaging flood
   conditions.
   10.2.4.2 Performance Standard
   Provide sufficient facilities development to protect structures designed for human occupancy and
   roadways identified as evacuation routes from inundation during the 100-year flood event. Do not
   approve projects where adequate flood protection to meet this standard is not available.
   10.3 SLOPE FAILURE HAZARDS
   “Slope” is defined as the vertical change in elevation over a given horizontal distance. A 10 percent
   slope is one that rises 10 feet over a horizontal distance of 100 feet. Hillsides, generally speaking,
   can be unstable platforms for development. Unless a landslide is already occurring, a steep slope can
   generally be thought of as existing in a state of equilibrium. When this equilibrium is disturbed, the
   likelihood of slope failure, soil erosion, silting of lower slopes, and downstream flooding increases.
   Slope stability is dependent on rock type, pore water pressure, and slope steepness due to natural or
   man-made undercutting. Every slope has an angle of repose and slopes less than this angle can
   resist the pull of gravity and will be at rest. Slopes steeper than this angle will eventually fail. On
   average, the angle of repose is 35 degrees from horizontal, but varies widely. The looseness or
   consolidation of the material, planes of weakness and vegetative cover all affect angles of repose.
   The southern portion of the City (the Badlands and South Hills) has steep natural slopes, which are
   susceptible to instability. The general area where slope instability may impact development is in the
   southern hillside area of the City (see Figure 10.1). The type of instability anticipated in this area
   includes deep-seated landslides, surficial soil slips, wet debris flows, and surficial creep. Most of
   these mapped landslides appear to be relatively recent (less than 11,000 years). Other deep-seated
   landslides, smaller in size and not as geomorphically pronounced, are suspected to exist in the steep
   terrain of the southern portion of the City.
   10.3.1 Identified Slope Failure Hazard Issues
   As the City grows, potential development will seek to locate in the southern hillsides. As noted, these
   hillsides are susceptible to instability and careful siting, grading, and building considerations will need
   to be established to avoid deep-seated landslide areas and to avoid soil erosion, silting of lower
   slopes, and downstream flooding.
Chapter 10.0                            Public Health and Safety Element                                     10-9

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                           Public Health and Safety Element
   10.3.2 Guiding Policy
   Reduce the potential for property damage and personal injury from slope failure hazards and erosion.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Limit cut and fill slopes to 3:1 (33% slope) throughout the City to maintain slope stability unless an
        engineering geologist can establish to the City’s satisfaction that a steeper slope would not pose
        undue risk to people and property.
   b. Blend cut-and fill slopes with existing contours to avoid high cut slopes and steep embankments
        which could lead to silting of lower slopes and soil erosion.
   c.   Require geologic and soils reports as part of the development review process and/or building
        permit process for development in the affected areas to minimize slope failure.
   d. Require erosion-control measures in areas of steep slopes or areas with high erosion problems
        on all grading plans to reduce soil erosion from wind, grading and construction operations, and
        stormwater runoff.
   10.4 FIRE HAZARDS
   Wildfires are a potential hazard to development
   located in forest and brush areas. Due to a
   combination of topography, weather, fuel and
   exacerbated by possible high winds and limited
   access, portions of the Planning Area are highly
   susceptible to wildland fire hazards. The City has
   specified a boundary, signifying the areas at risk
   of wildland fires which is called the Urban
   Wildland Interface division line. This division line
   is identified in Figure 10.3. The greatest fire
   hazard can be expected to come from the
   adjacent hills and canyons in the southern portion
   of the city. This area of high fire hazard is the
   northern terminus of the Badlands locally referred
   to as the South Hills. In recent years, the South                      Wildland fire hazard area
   Hills has experienced the following wildfires:
   2001, one wildfire; 2000, one wildfire; 1999, two wildfires; and 1998, seven wildfires.
   Development of residential structures on steep slopes, brush-covered hillsides, or along ridges in the
   southern portion of the City is an additional source of hazard. The risk of fire damage to structures
   can be minimized with appropriate spacing of structures, brush clearance, fuel modification zones,
   building materials, built-in fire protection systems, water availability, access, and adherence to State
   and local fire codes.
   10.4.1 Identified Fire Hazard Issues
   The presence of human activities in or near a wildland area dramatically increases the risk of a major
   fire due to careless smokers, illegal campfires, off-road vehicles, and other related risks. Present
   wildfire-fighting techniques are designed to control wildland fire where the optimum place, response
   time, and equipment/resources for control can be chosen. Residential development intrusion into the
   lower foothills to the south and southwest creates additional problems in controlling a wildland fires
   due to limited firefighting facilities and lack of direct access to the areas, which lengthens response
   times.
Chapter 10.0                           Public Health and Safety Element                                   10-10

    WATERMAN AVENUE
                                                                                       M
                                                                                           is
                                                                                                si o
                                                                                                       nC
                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                         ha
                                                                                                              n ne
                                                                                                                     l   ¦
                                                                                                                         ¨
                                                                                                                         10
                                                         ANDERSON
                                                                    REDLANDS BOULEVARD
                                                         STREET
                                                                                                                               CALIFORNIA STREET
                                                                                                                                                    Za
                                                                                                                                                         nj a Creek
                                                                                S an                                                                  M
                                                                                       T im                                                              orre y
                                                                                                ot e                                                              Arro yo
                                                                                                       oC
                                                                                                            reek
                                                                        BARTON ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                    0       1,600
                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                    3,200
                                                                                                                                                                    Feet
                                                                                                                                                                            FIGURE 10.3
                Urban Wildland Interface Division Line
                Hazardous Fire Area
Jurisdictional and
Infrastructure
                City Boundary
                City Sphere of Influence                                                                                                           City of Loma Linda General Plan
                Railroad
                                                                                                                                 URBAN WILDLAND INTERFACE
                Water Ways
SOURCE:Thomas Bros 2009
                                                                                                                         DIVISION LINE/HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig10-3_UrbanWildlandInterface.mxd (10/16/08)

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                          Public Health and Safety Element
   10.4.2 Guiding Policy
   Minimize the threat to persons, property, and the environment resulting from wildfires.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Require fire protection agency review of all development in high fire risk areas and minimize risks
       accordingly.
   b. Require new development in areas of high wildfire hazard to utilize fire-resistant building
       materials. As appropriate, require on-site fire suppression systems, including, automatic
       sprinklers, buffers and fuel breaks, and fire retardant landscaping.
   c.  Require detailed fire prevention and control measures, including, community firebreaks, for
       development projects in high fire hazard zones.
   d. Require fire sprinklers in all structures greater than 200 square feet.
   e. Prohibit single-access neighborhoods in high fire hazard areas. Provide adequate access for fire
       and other emergency response personnel and vegetation management programs.
   10.5 HAZARDOUS WASTE AND MATERIALS
   Hazardous materials are commonly used by all segments of our society including manufacturing and
   service industries, commercial enterprises, agriculture, military bases, hospitals, schools, and
   households. If improperly handled, stored, or disposed of, these materials can have substantial health
   and environmental consequences. The term “hazardous materials” includes a full spectrum of
   substances from pre-product materials to waste. Pre-product materials are considered to have value,
   and are used in, or represent the purpose of the manufacturing process. These materials include
   solvents, paints, acids and other chemicals, which, because they have value, are subject to proper
   transportation, storage, and use procedures. “Hazardous waste” refers to the valueless by-products
   of manufacturing processes and other use of materials. Hazardous waste requires proper disposal.
   The City of Loma Linda has adopted the County
   of San Bernardino’s Area Plan for its Hazardous
   Materials     Emergency        Response       Plan.
   Individuals within the City’s Fire and Rescue
   Division are trained to administer the County of
   San Bernardino Area Plan for a hazardous
   material emergency response.
   Based on discussions with the Loma Linda Fire
   and Rescue Division Hazardous Materials
   Coordinator, the most common hazardous
   materials and hazardous waste problems and
   concerns within the City and its surrounding
   Sphere of Influence are related to medical
   waste, transportation accidents, illegal dumping,
   underground storage tank (UST) leaks, leaking                 Properly identified hazardous material
   natural gas pipelines, commercial/industrial wastes,
   agricultural pesticides, and illegal drug laboratories. Proper identification of potential problems
   associated with the handling, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials will play an increasingly
   important role in the anticipated residential, commercial, and economic growth of Loma Linda and its
   Sphere of Influence in the coming years.
Chapter 10.0                         Public Health and Safety Element                                   10-12

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                          Public Health and Safety Element
   10.5.1 Identified Hazardous Waste and Materials Issues
   Hazardous materials include a wide range of potentially injurious substance including pesticides,
   herbicides, toxic metals and chemicals, gases and liquefied gases, explosives and volatile chemicals,
   biological compounds and organisms, and radioactive substances. The most common hazardous
   materials incidents in the City of Loma Linda involve gasoline and oil spills resulting from traffic
   collisions. The potential for uncontrolled release of hazardous materials from vehicular accidents is
   increased by the location of the I-10 adjacent to the City. Vehicles using this major transportation
   artery carry a wide variety of hazardous materials.
   Illegal dumping of hazardous waste is a region-wide problem that is by no means unique to the City of
   Loma Linda. As the City of Loma Linda continues to develop, the amount of unimproved land will
   decrease and therefore less dumping will occur. However, the overall number of hazardous waste
   sites requiring cleanup as a result of illegal dumping is expected to increase due to the increasing
   costs of legal disposal and the phased closure of many existing hazardous waste landfills.
   Many types of retail stores in Loma Linda also store hazardous materials on their shelves. If an upset
   such as an earthquake or fire occurs, these materials may be subject to uncontrolled release.
   Currently there is very little industrial development within the City of Loma Linda. As industrial
   development occurs in the future, the potential for new sources of hazardous materials exist.
   10.5.2 Guiding Policy
   Minimize the negative impacts associated with the storage, use, generation, transport, and disposal
   of hazardous materials.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Promote the reduction, recycling, and safe disposal of household hazardous wastes through
        public education and collection programs.
   b. Support and implement policies contained in the San Bernardino County Hazardous Waste
        Management Plan that encourages and assist the reduction of hazardous waste from businesses
        and homes in Loma Linda.
   c.   Continue a program of regular inspections and monitoring to ensure compliance with local, State,
        and Federal regulations, in order to reduce the risks associated with the use and handling of
        hazardous materials and wastes.
   d. Carefully review and require appropriate mitigation for pipelines and other channels for hazardous
        materials.
   e. Where applicable, identify and regulate appropriate regional and local routes for transportation of
        hazardous material and hazardous waste by maintaining formally designated hazardous
        materials routes away from populated and other sensitive areas and restricting all processors and
        new large generators to access only along established material carrier routes.
   f.   Ensure adequate provisions are made for emergency responses to all crises involving hazardous
        materials by requiring emergency response plans for all hazardous waste processors and large
        generators be submitted as part of use permit application.
   g. Provide educational and technical assistance to all hazardous materials users and waste
        generators to aid in their source reduction efforts (e.g., substitution of less hazardous products
        and modification of operation procedures in cooperation with the County).
Chapter 10.0                        Public Health and Safety Element                                   10-13
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                           Public Health and Safety Element
   h. Maintain a “Hazardous Materials” ordinance to define siting criteria to be used for various types of
       facilities, requirements for application submittal, and required finds for approval.
   i.  Locate hazardous materials facilities at a sufficient distance from populated areas to reduce
       potential health and safety impacts by requiring risk assessment studies to determine potential
       health impacts for all proposed hazardous waste processors and large generators as part of
       permit application submittals.
   10.6 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
   The purpose of Emergency Preparedness is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general
   public during and after natural, man-made (technological), or attack-related emergencies. Such
   emergencies include flooding, high winds, earthquakes, other geologic hazards, hazardous material
   and attack-related incidents, and wildfire. To handle such events effectively requires the coordination
   of a number of public and private agencies as well as the public safety agencies such as sheriff, fire,
   public works, ambulance, and health services.
   The City of Loma Linda recognizes the importance of emergency preparedness through the design
   and implementation of the Loma Linda Emergency Operations Plan. This plan is based on the
   functions and principles of the Standard Emergency Management System (SEMS), which follows the
   FIRESCOPE Incident Command System (ICS) identifying how the City fits into the overall SEMS
   structure.
   The California Emergency Services Act requires the City to manage and coordinate the overall
   emergency and recovery activities within its jurisdictional boundaries. Under SEMS, the City is
   responsible at two levels, the field response and local government levels. At the field response level,
   the City and all other agencies use ICS to aid in a standardized emergency response. At the local
   government level, a designated Emergency Operations Center (EOC) is used as the central location
   for gathering and disseminating information and coordinating all jurisdictional emergency operations
   within the area. During disasters, the City of Loma Linda is required to coordinate emergency
   operations with the San Bernardino County Operational Area and, in some instances, other local
   governments. Local agencies are a part of a broader Emergency Management Systems, overseen by
   the State of California’s Southern Region Emergency Operations Center.
   10.6.1 Identified Emergency Preparedness Issues
   During disasters, the City of Loma Linda is required to coordinate emergency operations with the San
   Bernardino County Operational Area and, in some instances, other local governments. Local
   agencies are a part of a broader Emergency Management Systems, overseen by the State of
   California’s Southern Region Emergency Operations Center.
   10.6.2 Guiding Policy
   Maintain a level of preparedness to adequately respond to emergency situations and disasters.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Maintain and update the City’s Emergency Plan, as required by State law.
   b. Maintain ongoing emergency response coordination with surrounding jurisdictions.
   c.  Develop a public awareness program on the nature and extent of natural hazards in the Planning
       Area, and ways of minimizing disasters.
Chapter 10.0                         Public Health and Safety Element                                    10-14

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                          Public Health and Safety Element
   d. Require all City staff to be adequately trained to respond to emergency situations and conduct
        regular emergency preparedness drills with local organizations including City and County Fire,
        Police, Emergency Medical Services, and Public Works.
   e. Establish community programs that train volunteers to assist police, fire, and civil defense
        personnel during and after disasters.
   10.7 AIRPORT SAFETY
   The San Bernardino International Airport, a commercial airport with an instrument landing system and
   a 10,000-foot runway, is located 1.5 miles from the northern boundary of the City. Portions of the City
   fall within the 2-mile radius considered within the airport influence area as shown in Figure 10.4.
   According to Government Code, Section 65302.3, general plans must be consistent with the Airport
   Land Use Commission’s plan for the area included within their jurisdiction.
   10.7.1 Identified Airport Safety Issues
   The Airport Land Use Plan for the San Bernardino International Airport has not been adopted and,
   therefore, compliance with airport land use compatibility policies cannot be determined at this time.
   10.7.2 Guiding Policy
   Support the San Bernardino Airport Land Use Commission.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Participate in the development of the Airport Land Use Plan.
   b. Upon adoption of the Airport Land Use Plan, adopt an overlay zone for the area which specifies
        the criteria included in the Plan for the airport influence area.
   10.8 Railroad Crossing Hazards
   The City of Loma Linda is bisected by two parallel sets of railroad tracks which serve both passenger
   and freight trains. In addition, a third set of tracks is under construction. Passenger or freight trains
   use these tracks on a continuous basis with approximately 60 trains passing through Loma Linda
   daily.
   10.8.1 Identified Railroad Safety Issues
   The highway-rail grade crossings present a safety hazard when drivers or pedestrians neglect or
   refuse to obey warning signs and signals.
   10.8.2 Guiding Policy
   Minimize the threats to drivers and pedestrians at rail-highway crossings
   Implementing Policies
   a. Work with railroad owners to maintain grade crossing tracks and road surfaces.
   b. Assist railroad companies with community education and awareness programs related to railroad
        safety.
   c.   Encourage and assist where applicable, the maintenance of warning signs and devices for
        railroad grade crossings.
Chapter 10.0                          Public Health and Safety Element                                   10-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PL                   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RR I                                                                                                     CUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HA RT F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NG T                                COULSTON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RESEA                      BRYN
                                                                                                                                                                                            WY                                                                       PL                                                                ST                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO                                     CT         CT
                                                                                                                                                                          LAFAYETTE
                                                                                                                                                                  San Bernardino International Airport Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                           COULSTON Area                                 R
                                               Y                                                                                                               LEE                                                S AM BR OS IA           RAINTREE    TR A L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E                                                                                            DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MOUNTA
                                                                                                                                                                                            TREE                                                     LN E                                                                                                                   E LM
                                              LI T                                                                                                                                                                                                                RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NG T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SYCAMORE
                                         I TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LILAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COLOMA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JASMIN
                                     SP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          P E R TREE
                                                                                                           LAURELWOOD                                                                                                                                          R
                                HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PE P                                                   BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                                                                           S APPLE
                                              E                                                  ORCHARD
                                                        H A RR IMAN                                        E    ROSEWOOD                                     DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROSEWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BU SINESS                                                                                           DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TUDO
                                                                                                                                            TIPPECANOE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y                                                                                  ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AV                                                                 R
                                                                                                 S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DR                                                                                                                                                                                                        SEVERN                 CT          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                     FRW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DR                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SPADE                                                           ST                                                                                                                        CARDIGAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR                        CIR                                                                            PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ST   SNOWDEN                      TAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MAWR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RICHARDSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST                                                                                                                                                                             BRYN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CURTIS                                                                            COMMERCE                 CORPORATE                       ENTERPRISE                INDUSTRIAL                                                     RHONDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           REDLANDS                                                                     BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RANC
                                                                                                                                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DR       D
                                                                                                                                            ST                COURT          ST                                                 ST
NE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MIRAMONTE
                                                                                                                                                                                AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VERDES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COLOMA
                                                                                                                                                                                         OHIO                                                                     PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VERDES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AMIGOS
                                                                                                                                                                                LIND                                                                                                      ST                                                                                                                  VIEW         AMAPOLAS                     LOMAS
          ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POPL AR                                                                          ST                     ST                                  ELM ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MEAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV                                               ST
                                                                                                               ACADEMY
ARTESIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S                                            ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OA                                     MYRTLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K
S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LILAC                  JASMINE                SHEDDEN              CURTIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST         AM                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AV                                              OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        STATE          ST
                                                                                                                              AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STATE                             ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MOUNTAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                  ER S
AL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LA                                                                                                                                                               WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                                                      ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NE                                                                                                                                               PEPPER
                                                                                                                                                         VAN                                                                                                                 BENTON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST                                                                                                                                         LORO        VER D E
                                                                                                                                                                           LEUVEN
                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CITRUS
                                                                                       E VA NS
                                              STEWART                                                               ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              JUANITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         JUANITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IO
                                                                                                 ST                                                                                                                                                                                                  COLE                      ST                                                                    ST                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                       SHEPA RDSON                                                           DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ORAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CALIFORNIA
                                                                    EVANS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                     RD
                                                     JUAN ST
NIVERSITY                                                                          AV                                                                                                                                  ST                                                                                                                         WILLIS                                                                 UP                                                                                                          ITA                  A
                          PL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         JU                                              LL                                                                RD
                                                                                                                              CT                                                                     O NT                                     ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AN                       AN
              RO                                                                                                                                                  MOUND    ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST    AD
                                      MATEO   SAN              MARCOS                                                                  TAYLOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ITA                                          E
                      A                                                                                                                                                                                                POPLAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ST
                  RI T                                         DR                                                                      ST
               SA                              DR                         SAN                                                                                                                        RI C H M
                          YARDLEY     S AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ST                                                                                                   PROSPECT                     AV
                                                     SAN
                                                                         PROSP E C T                                          TAYLOR                         PROSPECT                                                             AV
                              DR
                                                                                       AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RR                                           ST
                                                                       DR
                                      N                                        LUCAS                                                                         STARR                        ST
                                    SA     DR                  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EXETER
                                                                   AN                                                                                                                                                                                                           BEN TON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RY S
                                         O                             JU                                                                                                                                                                     BELLAIRE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MAYBER      T
                                      TE
                                                                                                  CAMPUS
          0                         750
                                    MA                               S
                                                                      1,500       AN
                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BA RTON RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MAY BE RRY                   ST                                                     B ARTON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST
                                                                                                                         AV                     ST                                DAISY                       AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MAIN
          Feet                                                                                             DA ISY
                                                                               LO M    SAN                               IR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TE                                                    1ST             ST
                                                                                                           C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AN
                                                                                                                                                                      FE R N             LIP             AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 10.4
  Jurisdictional and Infrastructure                                                                                           General Plan Land Use
                          City Boundary                                                                                                      Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)                                                                                                                     Business Park                                                                          City Facilities
                          City Sphere of Influence                                                                                           Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)                                                                                                                  Office                                                                                 Institutional
                          Water Ways                                                                                                         High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)                                                                                                                   Special Planning Area                                                                  Park
                          Proposed Street Alignments                                                                                         Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac)                                                                                                              Health Care                                                                            Public Open Space
                          Rail Road                                                                                                          Commercial                                                                                                                                                 Industrial
                          Airport Influence Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City of Loma Linda General Plan
  SOURCE: Airport Influence Area CalTrans Division of Aeronautics, 2003; Thomas Bros, 2009                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AIRPORT INFLUENCE AREA
  R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig10-4_AirportInfluence.mxd (07/10/09)
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                Growth Management Element
   2A         GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
   In order to achieve the goal of maintaining the unique quality of life in the City of Loma Linda and to
   assure the protection of natural hillsides, the preservation of open space, the reduction of traffic
   congestion, and the maintenance of safe, quiet residential areas, the following principles of managed
   growth shall apply to all new development:
   SECTION I: SIX PRINCIPLES OF MANAGED GROWTH
   A. PRINCIPLE ONE—New development within the planning area and sphere of influence
         of the City of Loma Linda shall conform to City development standards that promote
         environmentally sensitive development designed to preserve and enhance the quality
         of life now experienced in the City.
   In order to assure that future development within the City of Loma Linda is limited so that it promotes
   the environmental, social and economic well-being of the entire community, the following standards
   shall apply to new development in all areas within the City and its sphere of influence:
   1. Definitions
         (a) Definition of Gross Land Area. Gross Land Area of developable land in any residential
              project is defined as the area remaining after deducting the area of any floodway easement,
              utility easement, and the area of the right-of-way of any bordering street.
         (b) Residential Land Use Designations and Standards Defined. The following maximum
              allowable densities apply with regard to Gross Land Areas within the residential land use
              designations set forth below:
                        Land Use Designation                              Maximum Allowable Density
   Hillside Conservation                                         0–1 du/10 acres*
   Low Density Hillside Preservation                             0–1 du/10 acres**
   Medium Density Hillside Preservation                          0–1 du/5 acres**
   Rural Estates                                                 0–1 du/acre
Chapter 2A                              Growth Management Element                                         2A-1

                                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                            Growth Management Element
                        Land Use Designation                                          Maximum Allowable Density
   Very Low Density                                                          0–2 dus/acre
   Low Density                                                               0–4 dus/acre
   Medium Density                                                            0–9 dus/acre
   High Density                                                              0–13 dus/acre
   Very High Density                                                         0–20 dus/acre
   Senior Citizen Housing                                                    0–25 dus/acre
   Du=dwelling unit
   * With potential bonus when the specified criteria of the Hillside Conservation Amendments are met.
   ** With potential bonus when the specified criteria of this Chapter 2A are met.
        (c) Minimum Residential Lot Size. The minimum lot size for a single family residence,
             regardless of density bonuses, shall not be less than seven thousand, two hundred (7,200)
             square feet in any planning area or zone.
        (d) Maximum Residential Building Height. The maximum residential building height shall not
             exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
        (e) Avoidance of Environmentally Sensitive Areas. New development shall be sited so as to
             maximize the permanent preservation of large blocks of unbroken open space and to
             minimize the loss of habitat, wildlife, and watershed resources.
        (f) Development to Respect Wildlife Habitats. Development projects are to be designed to
             protect habitat values and to preserve significant habitat areas and habitat connections in
             their natural condition:
             i.    Within habitat areas of rare, threatened or endangered species, disturbance of protected
                   biotic resources is prohibited.
             ii.   Development shall avoid “canyon bottoms,” which are defined as the land occurring
                   within 200 feet of either side of a line referred to as a “blue line stream” as designated on
                   a U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) map. Within riparian and wetland areas, the vegetative
                   resources that contribute to habitat carrying capacity (vegetative diversity, faunal resting
                   areas, foraging areas, and food sources) shall be preserved in place or replaced so as to
                   not result in a measurable reduction in the reproductive capacity of sensitive biotic
                   resources. Development shall not result in a net loss of wetlands.
             iii. Buffer zones adjacent to areas of preserved biological resources shall be provided. Such
                   buffer zones shall be adequate in width so as to protect biological resources from grading
                   and construction activities, as well as from the long-term use of adjacent lands. The
                   landscape design adjacent to areas of preserved biological resources shall be designed
                   so as to avoid invasive species that could negatively impact the value of the preserved
                   resource.
        g) Animal Uses Preserved. Within single family residential areas, existing entitlements for
             recreational, equestrian and animal uses shall be preserved.
        (h) Alternative Infrastructure. Use of alternative infrastructure (e.g., septic systems, water
             systems, etc.) may be permitted in areas where municipal systems feasibly cannot be
             extended in an economically feasible manner. The cost of either alternative infrastructure or
             the extension of municipal systems shall be the responsibility of the developer.
Chapter 2A                                   Growth Management Element                                                  2A-2

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                Growth Management Element
       (i) San Timoteo Creek Area Designation. The San Timoteo Creek Area is depicted on Exhibit
           A to this Chapter 2A. Land area in the San Timoteo Creek Area shall not be re-designated for
           any use other than single family residential use and the maximum allowable density shall not
           exceed more than two (2) dwelling units per acre. Land in this area may only be re-
           designated for single family residential use at a maximum allowable density which shall not
           exceed two (2) dwelling units per acre upon approval by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the total
           authorized membership of the City Council following a noticed public hearing. The boundaries
           of the San Timoteo Creek Area are described in Exhibit A1 to this Chapter 2A.
   2. Development in the City’s Planning Area and Sphere of Influence
   Development within the planning area and within the sphere of influence of the City, and within all
   other areas outside the City for which City services are requested to be provided, shall conform to
   development standards within the City and shall be subject to the following policies:
       (a) Residential Density Standards Shall be Retained. Neither the number of residential land
           use designations nor the maximum residential density standards set forth in this Chapter 2A
           shall be increased without a vote of the people.
       (b) Development Agreements. All development agreements entered into by the City and any
           developer pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65864, et seq. shall conform to
           the policies contained in the Loma Linda General Plan, including without limitation this
           Chapter 2A and the Loma Linda zoning ordinance.
       (c) Annexation. No pre-annexation agreement shall be entered into by the City that conflicts
           with the Loma Linda General Plan and/or this Chapter 2A. Any property subject to a pre-
           annexation agreement or otherwise annexed to the City shall be designated and zoned to
           conform to the Loma Linda General Plan including this Chapter 2A, and any previous
           designation and zoning imposed by any other jurisdiction shall be null and void.
       (d) Extension of Public Utilities Outside the City Limits. Extension of utility services shall
           mean the provision of any utility or public service to any parcel of land not subject to City
           metering, billing, taxation or other fee for service arrangement for such services. No
           extension, connection, or provision, either directly or indirectly through any other entity, of
           City-provided utility services to areas or parcels outside the City limits shall occur until such
           areas or parcels are properly annexed to the City, except that utility services may be
           extended, connected, or provided to areas or parcels outside the City limits without prior
           annexation if, and only if, all of the following conditions are met:
           i.   The area or parcel to be served is not contiguous to the City;
           ii.  The City and the landowner have entered into a properly recorded and binding pre-
                annexation agreement establishing covenants running with the land that assure full
                compliance with all development standards of the City, payment of all capital
                improvement and other development fees which would be applicable to the property if it
                were within the City limits at the time of extension, connection, or provision of such
                services, and immediate processing of annexation to the City at the City’s request; and
           iii. The landowner agrees as a condition of extension, connection, or provision of utility
                services or facilities to serve the proposed development to pay the full cost of such
                extension, connection, or provision of such utility services or facilities, including without
                limitation its proportionate share of the cost of developed infrastructure necessary for the
                extension, connection, or provision of such utility services.
Chapter 2A                              Growth Management Element                                          2A-3

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                Growth Management Element
   3. Development Fee Policy
   In accord with the provisions of California Government Code Sections 66000 et seq. all development
   projects as defined therein shall be required to pay development fees to cover 100% of their pro rata
   share of the cost of any public infrastructure, facilities, or services, including without limitation roads,
   sewer, utility, police and fire services, necessitated as a result of the approval of such development.
   The City Council shall set and determine development fees sufficient to cover 100% of their pro rata
   share of the estimated cost of such public infrastructure, facilities, and services based on appropriate
   cost-benefit analyses, as required by the provisions of California law.
   B. PRINCIPLE TWO—The hillside areas of the City of Loma Linda, its planning area and
        its sphere of influence are important to the community and shall be preserved in as
        natural a state as possible consistent with the Hillside Conservation Amendments and
        the standards set forth in this Chapter 2A.
   1. Hillside Preservation Area Defined
   The Hillside Preservation Area is depicted on Exhibit A to this Chapter 2A. The boundaries of the
   Hillside Preservation Area are described in Exhibit A1 to this Chapter 2A.
   2. Hillside Conservation Area Defined
   The Hillside Conservation Area is described in the Hillside Conservation Ordinance (Ordinance 495)
   as amended by Ordinance 541, which is codified as Chapter 20.12 of the Loma Linda Municipal
   Code, and is described in Exhibit B of that Ordinance. The boundaries of the Hillside Conservation
   Area as depicted on Exhibit A to this Chapter 2A are intended to be consistent with Ordinance 541. In
   the event that any inconsistency should be found, the map set forth as Exhibit A to this Chapter 2A
   shall control over the map attached to Ordinance 541 as Exhibit A and the legal description attached
   to Ordinance 541 as Exhibit B.
   3. Expanded Hillside Area Defined
   The Expanded Hillside Area is depicted on Exhibit A to this Chapter 2A. The boundaries of the
   Expanded Hillside Area are described in Exhibit A1 to this Chapter 2A.
   4. Hillside Preservation Area, Hillside Conservation Area and Expanded Hillside Area
        Development
        (a) Permitted Development. The City shall only allow future development within the Hillside
            Preservation Area, the Hillside Conservation Area, and the Expanded Hillside Area which:
            i.   Protects the area’s natural environment and sensitive environmental features, as well as
                 public health and safety, maximizing the preservation of land in permanent public open
                 space;
            ii.  Ensures that the design and layout of future hillside development adapts to the natural
                 hillside topography; and
            iii. Minimizes the need for and costs of providing infrastructure, utilities, and public services
                 to all hillside areas.
Chapter 2A                              Growth Management Element                                            2A-4

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                               Growth Management Element
       (b) Ridgeline Setbacks. Development shall be set back from Primary Ridgelines 100 feet
           horizontally and 100 feet vertically. “Primary Ridgelines” include ridgelines having any of the
           following characteristics:
           i.   Ridges that have a difference in elevation of at least 200 feet from the toe of slope of the
                valley floor or the toe of slope of any canyon floor;
           ii.  Ridges which, prior to grading, are visible, or which would be visible but for man-made
                obstructions such as buildings or houses, from north of Barton Road, Interstate 10, or
                east of San Timoteo Canyon Road;
           iii. Ridges that form a prominent landform in the foreground, a major skyline ridge in the
                background, or one of the layers of ridges that may be visible in between, or which would
                be visible but for man-made obstructions such as buildings or houses; or
           iv. Ridges that frame major visual access when a person is traveling through the Hillside
                Preservation Area, the Hillside Conservation Area or the Expanded Hillside Area and will
                provide the first view of valley and canyon areas as a traveler emerges from the other
                side of the ridge.
       (c) Commercial Uses Generally Prohibited. No commercial uses such as, but not limited to,
           retail stores, professional or medical buildings, offices, warehouses, construction or
           manufacturing businesses, and hotels, shall be allowed in the Hillside Preservation Area, the
           Expanded Hillside Area or the Hillside Conservation Area except that commercial animal and
           agricultural uses such as ranches, stables, grazing, citrus and avocado groves that existed as
           of the Effective Date of enactment of this Chapter 2A shall be allowed. Commercial
           recreational uses and associated uses may be allowed consistent with the protection of
           environmental values.
       (d) Trails Master Plan Policies. The City shall develop a Trails Master Plan that identifies
           existing usable trails and potential future trails and open space areas in the Hillside
           Preservation Area, the Expanded Hillside Area, and the Hillside Conservation Area. Once a
           Trails Master Plan is adopted, the City shall encourage new development to be consistent
           with the Trails Master Plan. New development in the Hillside Preservation Area, the
           Expanded Hillside Area and the Hillside Conservation Area shall provide a trail system that
           will link with future dedicated trails. Sidewalks in development projects are not considered
           trails unless such sidewalks are suitably broad and equipped for equestrian use.
   5. Clustering Policies for Hillside Preservation Area
       (a) Clustering. Clustering requires development to be grouped in the more level and less
           environmentally sensitive portions of the Hillside Preservation Area, while steeper or more
           environmentally sensitive areas are preserved in a natural state. Clustering should facilitate
           the permanent protection of key natural features, such as, without limitation, steep slopes,
           biological habitats, recreational roads and trails, ridgelines, and scenic areas.
       (b) Only Single Family Residences Permitted. Only single family residences shall be permitted
           in the Hillside Preservation Area.
       (c) Dedication of Open Space. Where clustering is allowed, the remaining open space shall be
           preserved and deeded to the City and dedicated as permanent open space and/or
           conservation area or subject to a permanent conservation easement and shall be open to the
           public for noncommercial recreational uses consistent with environmental values. The City is
Chapter 2A                              Growth Management Element                                          2A-5

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                              Growth Management Element
           prohibited from permitting any development inconsistent with non-commercial recreational
           uses or open space on such dedicated land without a vote of the people.
       (d) No Clustering on Northerly Facing Slopes. In no event shall clustering be permitted on the
           northerly facing slopes which, prior to grading, are visible, or which would be visible but for
           man-made obstructions such as buildings or houses, from north of Barton Road, Interstate
           10, or east of San Timoteo Canyon Road (the “Northerly Facing Slopes”).
       (e) No Commercial Recreational Development on Northernmost Northerly Facing Slopes.
           In no event shall commercial recreational development or associated development be
           permitted on the northernmost Northerly Facing Slopes.
       (f) Urban Slope Line. The Urban Slope Line is depicted on Exhibit A to this Chapter 2A. This
           line is intended to correspond to the toe of slope of the hillside. If there is a discrepancy
           between the Urban Slope Line as depicted oh Exhibit A and the toe of a slope for a particular
           parcel as determined by a registered civil engineer or surveyor, the line which is farther north
           is the line which shall be used for purposes of determining the Cluster Area boundary line for
           that particular parcel.
       (g) Cluster Areas. The following are general descriptions of the only areas where clustered
           housing is allowed:
           i.   Cluster Area A, with 2½-acre minimum lot size: south of Beaumont Avenue and the
                southern boundary of the railroad, north of the Urban Slope Line, east of Bryn Mawr
                Avenue, and west of Nevada Street.
           ii.  Cluster Area B, with 1-acre minimum lot size: south of the eastern boundary of Loma
                Linda’s Sphere of Influence, north of the Urban Slope Line, east of Nevada Street, and
                west of the eastern boundary of Loma Linda’s Sphere of Influence.
           iii. Cluster Area C, with ½-acre minimum lot size: with the exception of the Northerly Facing
                Slopes, south of the ridgelines of the northernmost Northerly Facing Slopes.
   6. Density Bonus Policies for Developments in Hillside Preservation Area
   A density bonus is allowed only where clustering of dwelling units and additional public benefits, such
   as preservation of open space, are provided. In no event shall more than one density bonus be
   allowed for any particular project.
       (a) Criteria for Allowing a Density Bonus. Where all of the following criteria are met, a density
           bonus as provided in Section 6(b) may be permitted:
           i.   No dwelling unit or related structure or commercial recreational development or
                associated development is located on the northernmost Northerly Facing Slopes;
           ii.  The project is clustered except for in no event shall clustering be permitted on any
                Northerly Facing Slopes;
           iii. In no event shall a lot size less than 2½ acres be permitted in Cluster Area A;
           iv. In no event shall a lot size less than 1 acre be permitted in Cluster Area B;
           v.   In no event shall a lot size less than ½ acre be permitted in Cluster Area C;
Chapter 2A                             Growth Management Element                                         2A-6

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                               Growth Management Element
           vi. In no event shall densities or density bonuses be transferred from parcels south of the
                 northernmost ridgelines to land north of the northernmost ridgelines;
           vii. All development infrastructure, including roads and utility and service extensions, is kept
                 off of the Northerly Facing Slopes to the fullest extent possible;
           viii. The need for extensions of streets and other utilities and services is minimized;
           ix. The remaining open space created through clustering, including without limitation,
                 significant natural areas, view areas, and habitats, is preserved and deeded to the City
                 and dedicated as permanent open space and/or conservation area;
           x.    Provision is made for riding and hiking trails; and
           xi. The land is not located within the area depicted as Rural Estates on Exhibit A to this
                 Chapter 2A.
       (b) Extent of Density Bonus Allowed Where All Criteria Are Met. Where all of the criteria set
           forth in Section 6(a) above are met, the City may grant a density bonus as follows:
           i.    In the Low Density Hillside Preservation Area, one unit per 10 acres is allowed, subject to
                 a density bonus of up to one dwelling unit per 5 acres; and
           ii.   In the Medium Density Hillside Preservation Area, one unit per 5 acres is allowed, subject
                 to a density bonus of up to one dwelling unit per 2.5 acres.
       (c) Alternative Density Bonus Standard. In lieu of the above density bonuses, the City may
           grant a density bonus of up to 1.5 dwelling units per 5 acres in the Low Density Hillside
           Preservation Area, and a density bonus of up to 1.5 dwelling units per 2.5 acres in the
           Medium Density Hillside Preservation Area, where all of the following criteria are met:
           i.    All of the criteria set forth in Section 6(a) above; and
           ii.   The densities and resulting density bonuses are transferred to land south of the
                 northernmost ridgelines from parcels any portion of which is north of the northernmost
                 ridgelines.
       (d) Transfer of Densities. Transferring densities from land north of the northernmost ridgelines
           to south of those ridgelines shall be encouraged.
       (e) The City May Refuse to Allow a Density Bonus. The City may refuse to allow a density
           bonus for reasons that include, but are not limited to the public health, safety, and welfare,
           environmental concerns, protection of view sheds, habitat preservation, maintenance of
           recreational trails, or any other rational basis consistent with the goals of the Loma Linda
           General Plan, the Trails Master Plan, and this Chapter 2A.
   7. Grading Policies for Hillside Preservation Area
       (a) Focused Grading Allowed. Focused Grading is defined as the minimum grading required
           for access roads, the grading necessary for the extension of City services, and/or the grading
           of no more than the size of the footprint of the house and ancillary structures on each
           individual lot, with each such footprint and ancillary structures separated from each adjacent
           lot by ungraded, natural terrain. Mass Grading is defined as any grading that does not meet
           the definition of Focused Grading.
Chapter 2A                                Growth Management Element                                       2A-7
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                               Growth Management Element
        (b) Mass Grading Prohibited. Mass Grading on any Primary Ridgeline or any Northerly Facing
            Slope is prohibited.
        (c) Slope Conforming Foundations Required. Development shall preserve natural scenic
            vistas where the natural slope is fifteen (15) percent or greater by requiring building
            foundations for structures to conform to the natural slope to minimize grading and other
            environmental impacts and to ensure that roof lines do not eliminate or obstruct ridgelines.
   8. Limitation of Traffic Impacts
   Roads through the Hillside Conservation Area and/or the Hillside Preservation Area and/or the
   Expanded Hillside Area from Reche Canyon Road or San Timoteo Canyon Road to roads north of the
   Hillside Conservation Area or the Hillside Preservation Area or the Expanded Hillside Area shall be
   restricted to use by emergency vehicles only. Otherwise, no existing or future roads shall be
   connected to Reche Canyon Road or San Timoteo Canyon Road, or to each other by roads through
   the Hillside Conservation Area or the Hillside Preservation Area or the Expanded Hillside Area.
   Examples of existing roads which these restrictions apply to, include, but are not limited to, Anderson
   Way, Allen Way, Carrol Court, Loma Linda Drive, Welebir Street, Almond Court, Pecan Way,
   Crestview Drive, Richardson Street, Sierra Vista Drive, Oakwood Drive, Bryn Mawr Avenue, Whittier
   Avenue, Wellesley Avenue, Beaumont Avenue and roads extending to the south of Beaumont
   Avenue, Lawton Avenue and roads extending to the south of Lawton Avenue, and Mountain View
   Avenue. A road which connects to Beaumont Avenue in two different locations may be allowed, so
   long as it does not connect to other existing roads.
   9. Roads in Hillside Conservation Area, Expanded Hillside Area, and Hillside Preservation
        Area
   Construction of roads in the Hillside Conservation Area, the Expanded Hillside Area, and the Hillside
   Preservation Area must minimize grading and be consistent with environmental concerns, view
   sheds, habitat preservation, wildlife corridor preservation, recreational trails, landslide avoidance, and
   other factors related to the public health, safety, and welfare. The Hillside Preservation Area, the
   Hillside Conservation Area, and the Expanded Hillside Area shall be developed with the minimum
   number of roads possible, with clustering of development strongly encouraged to minimize the need
   for access roads. The purpose of limitations on through roads is to minimize the adverse impacts of
   through traffic and the environmental damage that is often caused by road construction. All roads in
   the Hillside Preservation Area, the Hillside Conservation Area, and the Expanded Hillside Area should
   be designed to fit the hilly terrain by following contour lines, using minimum pavement widths, relaxed
   curve and other standards, and slow speeds.
   C. PRINCIPLE THREE—New developments shall be planned and constructed in a manner
        that preserves natural scenic vistas and protects against intrusion on the view shed
        areas.
   1. Preservation of Vistas
   New development shall only be approved if it preserves scenic vistas of natural hillside areas and
   ridgelines, which, prior to grading, are visible, or which would be visible but for man-made
   obstructions such as buildings or houses, from north of Barton Road, Interstate 10, or east of San
   Timoteo Canyon Road.
Chapter 2A                              Growth Management Element                                           2A-8

                                                                                       Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                  Growth Management Element
   2. Minimization of View Shed Intrusion
   New development shall only be approved if it minimizes wall surfaces facing towards view shed areas
   through the use of split pads, varying setbacks, low roof pitches, and landscaping.
   3. Architectural Compatibility
   New development shall only be approved if it uses architectural style which is compatible with the
   natural setting. The use of colors, textures, materials, and forms which will attract attention shall be
   avoided.
   4. Massing and Scale
   The overall scale and massing of structures shall respect the natural surroundings by incorporating
   designs which minimize bulk and mass, and minimize visual intrusion on the natural landscape.
   Structures shall be sited to best fit with a hillside’s natural contours in hillside areas.
   D. PRINCIPLE FOUR—Preservation of open space and agricultural land areas is a priority
        in the City of Loma Linda, its planning area and its sphere of influence, and dedication
        of open space in perpetuity shall be a requirement for certain development as well as
        for the City.
   1. City-owned Land
   The City-owned land in the Hillside Conservation Area, the Expanded Hillside Area, and the Hillside
   Preservation Area (approximately 850 acres) is designated open space with no development of any
   type allowable except as provided in this Chapter 2A. The City shall not sell, rent, lease, or otherwise
   confer any right or title to land in, the Hillside Conservation Area, the Expanded Hillside Area or the
   Hillside Preservation Area to which the City holds title without a vote of the people. The sole
   exception to this restriction is that the City-owned land southwest of the San Jacinto Fault Line
   (approximately 350 acres) may be traded for other land inside the Hillside Conservation Area and/or
   the Hillside Preservation Area and/or the Expanded Hillside Area so long as the land received is
   preserved and deeded to the City and dedicated as permanent open space and/or conservation area.
   Land southwest of the San Jacinto Fault Line that is traded by the City may be re-designated for use
   other than open space after it is traded. Land may be traded only to preserve open space and to
   reduce densities in other, more highly valued hillside areas, and for no other purposes The City shall
   not approve a trade of land unless all of the following conditions are met: (1) Mountain View Avenue
   shall not connect to future development in the traded land, (2) All roads connecting to future
   development in the traded land shall not extend farther east than Mountain View Avenue, and (3) the
   only roads which may connect to future development in the traded land are Oakwood Drive or roads
   connecting to Reche Canyon Road.
   City-owned land in the Hillside Conservation Area, the Hillside Preservation Area, and the Expanded
   Hillside Area shall be open to public non-commercial recreational uses consistent with the protection
   of environmental values. Public non-commercial recreational amenities, such as, but not limited to,
   parks, trails, and tennis courts may be allowed on City-owned land.
   2. Planned Residential Developments and Planned Communities
   Planned Residential Developments and Planned Communities shall meet one of the following open
   space standards as described below:
Chapter 2A                              Growth Management Element                                            2A-9

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                               Growth Management Element
       (a) Properties under Fifteen Percent Slope. Not less than twenty percent of the gross land
           area shall be held in common as landscaped, recreational open space. Such open space
           shall contain a minimum dimension of fifty square feet, and be accessible to each lot through
           a system of public or private walkways. Open space areas may include swimming pools,
           putting greens, court games, and other recreational leisure facilities, as well as landscaped
           areas or areas with native vegetation. Such areas shall be identified as permanent open
           space on the final tract map. Open space calculations shall not include buildings, private
           patios, balconies, driveways, and off-street parking areas.
       (b) Properties with an Average Slope of Fifteen Percent or More. Not less than twenty-five
           percent of the gross land area shall be held in common open space. Such open space shall
           contain a minimum dimension of twenty-five square feet, and be accessible to each lot
           through a system of public or private walkways. Open space areas may include natural
           undeveloped areas of land, swimming pools, putting greens, court games, and other
           recreational leisure facilities, as well as landscaped areas or areas with native vegetation.
           Such areas shall be identified as permanent open space on the final tract map. Open space
           calculations shall not include buildings, private patios, balconies, driveways, and off-street
           parking areas.
       (c) Preservation of Citrus Groves. The City recognizes the desire to maintain citrus and
           avocado groves and other agricultural uses as a means to provide open space, to provide
           and maintain a balanced economy, and to maintain green space and vegetation that will
           consume carbon dioxide and improve air quality. The open space requirement of paragraphs
           (a) and (b) of this section may be met by preserving citrus and/or avocado groves or other
           agricultural uses determined appropriate by the City Council, and assuring ongoing
           maintenance through a conservation easement or other legal mechanism, provided that the
           minimum percentage open space requirement of (a) and (b) are met.
       (d) Common Open Space. Common open space may include areas held in common by
           associations where the perpetual open space is guaranteed by acceptable legal mechanisms
           including public and private easements and conservation easements and other open space
           conditions, restrictions and covenants guaranteed in perpetuity by similar mechanisms. If an
           applicant proposes to dedicate a portion of a site as public park lands, this area may be
           considered as common open space by the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Council.
       (e) Maintenance of Common Open Space. Maintenance of common open space areas within
           Planned Residential Developments and Planned Communities shall be the responsibility of
           the developer and the residents. In no event shall the City be responsible for such
           maintenance.
   E. PRINCIPLE FIVE—Water quality and availability are critical to the current and future
       residents of the City of Loma Linda, its planning area and its sphere of influence. No
       new development shall be approved that endangers the quality or quantity of water
       delivered to households within the City.
   No development project shall be approved which would cause the quality of water delivered to Loma
   Linda households to fail to meet State and/or Federal water quality standards, or which would cause
   an increase in residential rates, or which would result in a restriction of water usage, except for those
   projects exempt under State and/or Federal law.
Chapter 2A                             Growth Management Element                                          2A-10

                                                                                           Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                     Growth Management Element
   F. PRINCIPLE SIX—Traffic levels of service throughout the City of Loma Linda shall be
        maintained at current levels and new development shall be required to fully mitigate
        any impact on traffic resulting from that development.
   Limitations on traffic levels of service are essential to managing growth within the City by preventing
   undue urbanization and its attendant urban blight, the degradation of public services, and the over-
   intensive development of land.
   1. Traffic Levels of Service Defined
   Level of service (LOS) is a qualitative measure of traffic service along a roadway or at an intersection.
   LOS ranges from A to F, with LOS A being best and LOS F being worst. LOS A, B and C indicate
   conditions where traffic can move relatively freely. LOS D describes conditions where delay is more
   noticeable and average travel speeds are as low as 40 percent of the free flow speed. LOS E
   indicates significant delays and average travel speeds of one-third the free flow speed or lower where
   traffic volumes are generally at or close to capacity. Finally, LOS F characterizes flow at very slow
   speeds (stop-and-go), and large delays (over a minute) with queuing at signalized intersections; in
   effect, the traffic demand on the roadway exceeds the roadway’s capacity. Levels of Service are
   defined according to the following table:
                                                                                          Volume to Capacity Ratio:
    Level of                                                                                Freeway         Street
    Service                                   Description                                  Segments      Segments
     LOS A      Conditions of free flow; speed is controlled by driver’s desires,           0 to 0.30     0 to 0.60
                speed limits, or physical roadway conditions.
     LOS B      Conditions of stable flow; operating speeds begin to be restricted;       0.31 to 0.49  0.61 to 0.70
                little or no restrictions on maneuverability from other vehicles.
     LOS C      Conditions of stable flow; speeds and maneuverability more                0.50 to 0.71  0.71 to 0.80
                closely restricted; occasional backups behind left-turning vehicles
                at intersections.
     LOS D      Conditions approach unstable flow; tolerable speeds can be                0.72 to 0.88  0.81 to 0.90
                maintained but temporary restrictions may cause extensive
                delays; little freedom to maneuver; comfort and convenience low;
                at intersection, some motorists, especially those making left turns,
                may wait through one or more signal changes.
     LOS E      Conditions approach capacity; unstable flow with stoppages of             0.89 to 1.00  0.91 to 1.00
                momentary duration; maneuverability severely limited.
     LOS F      Forced flow conditions; stoppages for long periods; low operating            >1.00          >1.00
                speeds.
   Sources: Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual, 1994. DKS Associates.
   2. Levels of Traffic Service Throughout the City Shall Be Maintained
   To assure the adequacy of various public services and to prevent degradation of the quality of life
   experienced by the residents of Loma Linda, all new development projects shall assure by
   implementation of appropriate mitigation measures that, at a minimum, traffic levels of service (LOS)
   are maintained at a minimum of LOS C throughout the City, except where the current level of service
   is lower than LOS C. In any location where the level of service is below LOS C at the time an
   application for a development project is submitted, mitigation measures shall be imposed on that
   development project to assure, at a minimum, that the level of traffic service is maintained at levels of
Chapter 2A                                   Growth Management Element                                            2A-11

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                               Growth Management Element
   service that are no worse than those existing at the time an application for development is filed. In
   any location where the Level of Service is LOS F at the time an application for a development project
   is submitted, mitigation measures shall be imposed on that development project to assure, at a
   minimum, that the volume to capacity ratio is maintained at a volume to capacity ratio that is no worse
   than that existing at the time an application for development is filed. Projects where sufficient
   mitigation to achieve the above stated objectives is infeasible shall not be approved unless and until
   the necessary mitigation measures are identified and implemented.
   SECTION II: EXEMPTIONS
   The following categories of development shall be exempt from certain restrictions of the Principles of
   Managed Growth set forth in this Chapter 2A, as specified herein.
   A. Vested Projects. This Chapter 2A shall not apply to or affect any property on which a vested
       right has been legally perfected and acquired pursuant to state law prior to the Effective Date.
   B. Certain Non-Profit Entities. Development projects that directly further the primary institutional
       purposes of Loma Linda University Adventist Health Sciences Center and/or related entities or
       subsidiaries are exempt from the traffic level of service requirements except as to those related to
       the Hillside Preservation Area, the Hillside Conservation Area and the Expanded Hillside Area,
       the building height requirements, and the maximum allowable residential densities except for
       those set forth for the Hillside Conservation Area and the Hillside Preservation Area, so long as
       such development projects are either 1) non-residential in character, or 2) provide only student
       and/or staff housing for those exempt entities. In no event shall such entities be exempt from the
       standards established in Principle Two of this Chapter 2A.
   C. Infill Construction. New infill construction of individual single-family homes on existing lots of
       record that are smaller than 5 acres, and bounded on three sides by developed property as of the
       Effective Date of this Chapter 2A, are exempt from the traffic level of service requirements.
   D. Remodeling, Rehabilitation and Additions. Rehabilitation, remodeling or additions to existing
       single-family residential structures are exempt from the traffic level of service requirements.
   E. Reconstruction and Replacement. Reconstruction or replacement of any uses to the same
       density, intensity and classification of use as existed on the Effective Date of this Chapter 2A,
       including legal non-conforming uses, are exempt from the traffic level of service requirements.
   F. Temporary Uses. Special, temporary, or occasional uses of public streets, including parades,
       local sporting and cultural events, graduation ceremonies, approved school activities, religious
       gatherings, and other occasional public gatherings, are exempt from the traffic level of service
       requirements.”
Chapter 2A                             Growth Management Element                                        2A-12

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                             Growth Management Element
                                                EXHIBIT A1
   San Timoteo Creek Area Boundaries
   Beginning at the point where the western boundary of the Sphere of Influence intersects with the
   northern boundary of Beaumont Avenue, thence northerly along the western boundary of the Sphere
   of Influence to the point which is as far north as the southern boundary of Lawton Avenue, thence
   easterly along a line that is as far north as the southern boundary of Lawton Avenue to the eastern
   boundary of the Sphere of Influence, thence southerly along the easterly boundary of the Sphere of
   Influence to the northern boundary of Beaumont Avenue, thence westerly along the northern
   boundary of Beaumont Avenue to the beginning point.
   (a) Hillside Preservation Area Boundaries
        i.   Low Density Hillside Preservation:
        Area 1. Beginning at the point where the southern boundary of EL/RL-5 in the Sphere of
        Influence (depicted on the San Bernardino County Official Land Use Map dated January 5, 2004
        and attached as Exhibit B to Chapter 2A) intersects with the eastern boundary of the Hillside
        Conservation Area, thence easterly along the southern boundary of EL/RL-5 in the Sphere of
        Influence to the eastern boundary of the Sphere of Influence, thence southerly along the eastern
        boundary of the Sphere of Influence to the southern boundary of the Sphere of Influence, thence
        westerly along the southern boundary of the Sphere of Influence to the eastern boundary of the
        Hillside Conservation Area, thence northerly along the eastern boundary of the Hillside
        Conservation Area, thence northerly along the eastern boundary of the Hillside Conservation
        Area to the beginning point.
        Area 2. Beginning at the point where the San Jacinto Fault Line intersects with the southern
        boundary of the Sphere of Influence, thence westerly along the southern boundary of the Sphere
        of Influence to the western boundary of the Sphere of Influence, thence northerly along the
        western boundary of the Sphere of Influence to the San Jacinto Fault Line, thence easterly along
        the San Jacinto Fault Line to the beginning point.
        ii. Medium Density Hillside Preservation:
        Beginning at the point where the southern boundary of Beaumont Avenue intersects with the
        western boundary of the Sphere of Influence, thence easterly along the southern boundary of
        Beaumont Avenue to the southern boundary of the railroad, thence southerly along the southern
        boundary of the railroad to the eastern boundary of the Sphere of Influence, thence southerly
        iii. Rural Estates
   (b) Expanded Hillside Area Boundaries
   Area 1. Beginning at the point where the San Jacinto Fault Line intersects with the western boundary
   of the Sphere of Influence, thence southerly along the western boundary of the Sphere of Influence to
   the Riverside County Line, thence westerly along the Riverside County Line to the western boundary
   of the land owned by the City of Loma Linda as of September 14, 2005, thence northerly along the
   western boundary of the land owned by the City of Loma Linda as or September 14, 2005 to the San
   Jacinto Fault Line, thence easterly along the San Jacinto Fault Line to the beginning point.
   Area 2. Beginning at the northern boundary of the Hillside Conservation Area, thence due north to the
   point where the western boundary of Hulda Crooks Park intersects with the northern boundary of
   Hulda Crooks Park, thence easterly along the northern boundary of Hilda Crooks Park to Mountain
Chapter 2A                             Growth Management Element                                      2A-13
                                                                           Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Growth Management Element
   view Avenue, thence easterly across Mountain view Avenue to the southern boundary of Beaumont
   Avenue, thence easterly along the southern boundary of Beaumont Avenue to the eastern boundary
   of the land owned by the city of Loma Linda as of September 14, 2005 to the northern boundary of
   the Hillside Conservation Area, thence westerly along the northern boundary of the Hillside
   Conservation Area to the beginning point.
Chapter 2A                          Growth Management Element                                   2A-14


                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                          Land Use Element
   2.0       LAND USE ELEMENT
   As required by State planning law, this Land Use Element designates the general distribution,
   location, and extent of land uses for housing, business, industry, open space, institutions, city
   facilities, and other categories of public and private uses of land. The emphasis of this Land Use
   Element is on the desired or intended use of land in the community, including future development of
   the City and its sphere of influence.
   The Land Use Element includes a brief summary of existing types of land uses and contains a
   summary table of existing land use acreage. Discussion regarding the intended uses and allowable
   density within each land use category is a primary focus in this Land Use Element. The land use
   category text is accompanied by the General Plan Land Use Map, which illustrates the intended
   location and distribution of each of the land use categories.
   A description of the general layout desired for each land use is provided in this Land Use Element;
   however, more extensive descriptions of appropriate design and photo examples of various
   commercial, office, business park, industrial, and pedestrian oriented development are contained
   within the Community Design Element.
   In addition to the land use category descriptions, which reflect the community’s policies regarding the
   types of allowable uses, density, and character, specific enumerated policies are outlined. These
   policy statements are organized into more general “guiding policies” and specific “implementing
   policies” that are intended to facilitate achievement of the guiding policies. Through the
   implementation of the Land Use Element, the city seeks to:
   x    Establish and maintain an orderly pattern of development in the city;
   x    Establish a land use classification system that implements land use policies;
   x    Identify acceptable land uses and their general location; and
   x    Establish standards for residential density and non-residential intensity for development.
   This Land Use Element concludes with a table showing the estimated numbers for housing units,
   population, and jobs at the future build out of the planning area, which includes the city and its sphere
   of influence, according to the land uses and densities outlined in this Element.
Chapter 2.0                                  Land Use Element                                               2-1

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                          Land Use Element
   2.1       EXISTING LAND USE
   The existing land uses within the city and its sphere of influence are shown in Table 2.A (Planning
   Area – Existing Land Uses). Residential land uses form the largest percentage of developed uses (24
   percent). Of the residential uses, single-family residential development occurs within 14 percent of the
   planning area. These single-family uses are generally located in two areas: (1) the northern portion of
   the city just south of Redlands Boulevard, and (2) south of Barton Road along the base of the South
   Hills. Other types of residential uses within the planning area include rural residential (typically
   adjacent to orange groves or within the hillside), multifamily residential, and mobile homes.
   Commercial uses make up a small percentage of the land use within Loma Linda, comprising about
   3 percent of the city and its sphere of influence. Commercial uses consist of both general commercial
   and office commercial types of land use. Large commercial or office uses within the city include the
   auto dealerships south of the Interstate 10 freeway, the offices within the Corporate Business Center,
   and the Stater Bros. market.
   Land uses that are categorized as Institutional make up 9 percent of the planning area. These uses
   include medical uses, university uses, schools, churches, public facilities, utilities, and utilities
   combined with agricultural uses. Of these sub-categories, utilities, university uses, and medical uses
   are the most well represented Institutional uses within the planning area. Loma Linda University (LLU)
   and the Loma Linda University Medical Center and Children’s Hospital (LLUMC/CH) are significant
   institutional uses within the city.
   Heavy and light industrial uses characterize approximately 31 acres or 0.5 percent of the planning
   area. Industrial uses include self-storage facilities and the Hallmark-Southwest Corporation, located
   on Redlands Boulevard, which manufactures mobile homes.
   Land devoted to open space, agricultural use, recreational use, or vacant land that is not developed
   totals approximately 3,867 acres or 63 percent of the planning area. These areas include the hills
   located to the south and the remaining orange groves within the city and the sphere of influence.
   2.2       GENERAL PLAN LAND USE CATEGORIES
   This section describes the intended land use for the city and its sphere of influence, according to
   each land use category. The General Plan Land Use Map (Figure 2.1) illustrates the location and
   distribution of the uses that will be discussed. The general types of desired land uses are given for
   each category, along with the maximum building density allowed.
   The following summary of general land use goals forms the basis for the specific land use policies
   contained within this Element:
   x    Increase the diversity and volume of land uses to help create an economically, socially, and
        culturally vital community.
   x    Achieve adequate levels of employment opportunities, tax-generating uses, shopping and service
        uses, leisure activities, and residential opportunities to enhance and preserve the desired
        character of the city; provide for the everyday needs of its residents, workers, and visitors; and
        ensure and increase the quality of life within the Loma Linda community.
   x    Maintain a pattern of land uses that minimizes conflicts between different land uses and that
        designates land based on conditions such as location, adjacent uses, access, and natural terrain.
   x    Preserve and protect designated hillside areas in a portion of the south hills area of the City
        designated as “Hillside Conservation” on the General Plan Land Use Element Map.
Chapter 2.0                                  Land Use Element                                              2-2

                                                                           Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                  Land Use Element
   Table 2.A: Planning Area – Existing Land Uses, 2003
                             Acres in Acres in Sphere     Total Percent of Planning Area (including
          Land Use             City     of Influence      Acres    City and Sphere of Influence)
   Residential
   Single-Family
                             846.24            35.62     881.86            14.0%
   Residential (SFR)
   Mobile Homes (MH)          59.66                0      59.66             0.97%
   Multifamily
                             262.74                0     262.74             4.3%
   Residential (MFR)
   Rural Residential
                             149.46           129.12     278.58             4.5%
   (RR)
   Subtotal                 1318.10           164.74    1482.84            24.0%
   Commercial
   General
                             163.67             1.37     165.04             2.7%
   Commercial (CG)
   Office     Commercial
                              13.24                0      13.24             0.2%
   (CO)
   Subtotal                  176.91             1.37     178.28             2.9%
   Institutional
   Medical (M)               103.85                0     103.85             1.7%
   University (Un)           117.16                0     117.16             1.9%
   Schools (S)                58.11                0      58.11             0.95%
   Churches (C)               11.05             4.64      15.69             0.25%
   Public        Facilities
                              42.59                0      42.59             0.69%
   (PF)
   Utilities (U)             120.55            83.90     204.45             3.4%
   Utilities   Agriculture
                              11.98                0      11.98             0.19%
   (UA)
   Subtotal                  465.28            88.54     553.82             9.0%
   Industrial
   Heavy and Light
                              17.68                0      17.68             0.29%
   Industrial (H-L/I)
   Subtotal                   17.68                0      17.68             0.29%
   Open Space
   Open Space (OS)          1494.81          1053.99    2548.80            41%
   Vacant (V)                324.03            34.99     359.02             5.8%
   Agriculture (AG)          386.05           503.24     889.29            14%
   Recreation (R)             63.08                0      63.08             1.0%
   Subtotal                 2267.97          1592.22    3860.19            63%
   TOTAL                    4245.94          1846.87    6092.81           100.0%
Chapter 2.0                                   Land Use Element                                      2-3

                                                                                                                                                                              BN                                                                                                                                         Rural Estate (0 to 1 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                SF
                                                                                                                                                                                     RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Very Low Density Residential (0 to 2 du/ac)***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MISSION CREEK
                                           CAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)
                                              AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)
                                        GAG
                                            E                                                           REDLANDS BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                    Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Senior Citizen Housing (0 to 25 du/ac)***
                                                                                          SA
                                                   PROPOSED EVANS ST                         N   TIM                                                                                                                                                                                                                     South Hills
                                                                                                     OT
                                                                                                        E   OC
                                                                            ANDERSON ST                       RE
                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         South Hills Preserve
                                                                                                                     K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Expanded Hillside Area
                                                                                                                                                           MOUNTAIN VIEW AV
                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                      ALIGNMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac)*
                                                                                                              VAN LEUVEN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                          MI
                                                                                                                                                                                               SS                                                                                               ZANJA CREEK              Low Density Hillside Preservation (0 to 1 du/10 ac)**
                                                                                                                                                                                                 IO                                                                                     EY
                                                                                                                                                                                                   NR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        D                                                                             RR                                 Medium Density Hillside Preservation (0 to 1 du/5 ac)**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                UP RR
                                                           STEWART ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                         YO                         San Timoteo Creek Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Commercial
                                   UNIVERSITY AV                                                                                                                                                                                               PROPOSED ORANGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ALIGNMENT                                                             Business Park
                                                                                           PROSPECT AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Office
                                                                CAMPUS ST                                                 BENTON ST
                                                                                                                                                                               R                                                                                                                                         Special Planning Area
         Sa                                                                                BARTON RD                                                                                            CF                                                                               BARTON RD
           nJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Health Care
              ac i                                                                                                                                    CF
                   o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Industrial
                nt
                        ul t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Facilities
                     Fa                                                                      LAWTON AV                                                                                    LAWTON AV
                          Zo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Institutional
                               n
                               e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C                                                                         Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Public Open Space
                                                                                                                                      LOMA LINDA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                R                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Public and Quasi Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BRYN MAWR AV                                                                                              E    Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R    Riding & Hiking Trails
                                                                                                                                                           C                                                                                                                                                      C    Community Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BEAUMONT AV                                   CF   Community Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WHITTIER AV                                                                      Conditions Specified under Measure V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  * Potential bonus of up to 1 du/5 acres when criteria of Hillside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Conservation designation are met.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ** Potential bonus when specified criteria of Chapter 2A of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  General Plan are met.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *** Future residential land uses not specified on the map.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c                                                                                   0           1,000       2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sa into
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nJ F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ac au                                                                              Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i n lt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to Zo                                                                        SOURCE: Parcel Base - City of Loma Linda,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fa n                                                                       Thomas Bros. 2001, USGS 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ul e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e                                                                                                                              Figure 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ci
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nto                                                             City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ul t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fa                                                                             GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Zo                 Adopted May 26, 2009                                    LAND USE MAP
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2009_Jan\fig2-1B_ProposedGPLU.mxd (07/09/09)
                                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                            Land Use Element
   The description and discussion of desired land use and the distribution of land uses as shown in the
   Land Use Map inherently reflect the community’s policy preferences for addressing these land use
   issues. In conjunction, specific “guiding policies” and “implementing policies” are presented after each
   land use category. The former provide direction for decisions and actions, while the latter indicate
   detailed steps that should be taken in order to strive to meet the specified desires.
   In designating land uses, this General Plan takes into account the existing land use patterns within
   the community and the market demand for various types of land uses. Also considered are which
   locations of vacant or underdeveloped lands are best for which types of land use and what
   infrastructure (such as roads) will be required to serve such lands uses. The General Plan provides
   opportunities, but does not cause development to happen. The General Plan recognizes that,
   ultimately, growth and development depend on the initiative of individual developers.
   The overall pattern of land use desired for Loma Linda is to focus commercial uses in the northern
   portion of the community near I-10. Institutional uses are to be located in proximity to such existing
   uses, such as Loma Linda University (LLU) and Loma Linda Academy. Areas designated for health
   care uses are also located near to existing similar uses such as Loma Linda University Medical
   Center (LLUMC), the Jerry L. Pettis VA Medical Center, and the Community Medical Center. Areas
   for business park uses are designated both at the northern and eastern edges of the community,
   while industrial uses will largely be located in the eastern portion of the community, and separated
   from residential neighborhoods. Residential uses are intended to characterize the central portion of
   the community (roughly south of Redlands Boulevard), the base of the South Hills, and the flatter
   areas within the hillsides. A number of mixed-use-designated areas, especially in the eastern portion
   of the community, allow for a variety of different types of uses (e.g., commercial, office, institutional,
   and/or residential) to be located next to each other or within the same building.
   Following are the types of land uses allowed within Loma Linda, descriptions of the desired character
   for such uses, and the relative guiding policies and implementing policies.
   2.2.1 Residential Land Use Designations
   Residential land use designations within the city and its sphere of influence are divided into twelve
   categories, each with their own density ranges: Hillside Conservation, Low Density Hillside
   Conservation, Medium Density Hillside Conservation, South Hills, Rural Estates, Very Low Density,
   Low Density, Medium Density, Medium High Density, High Density, Very High Density, and Senior
   Citizen Housing. Residential development is also permitted within Special Planning Area land use
   designations. Permitted development within the South Hills and San Timoteo Creek area is also
   addressed in the Growth Management Element (Chapter 2A) of the General Plan. Included in
   Chapter 2A is the “San Timoteo Creek Designation.”
   Residential densities within residential land use designations include a maximum density per acre.1
   Achievement of this maximum is neither guaranteed nor implied by this General Plan. The final
   density of any particular residential development is dependent upon development design; any
   physical, geological, or environmental constraints that might be present within the site or surrounding
   area; available infrastructure and services; and other factors. Development standards established in
   the Loma Linda zoning ordinance may also limit attainment of maximum allowable densities.
   Within all residential designations, the following non-residential uses are allowed in order to provide
   functional, high-quality residential areas: infrastructure and utilities needed to serve the residential
   development; public schools and playgrounds; and parks and other passive open space areas. Home
   occupations and second dwelling units may be permitted according to the zoning ordinance.
   1
        For purposes of determining density, “acre” shall be defined as an acre of gross land area as set forth in Chapter 2A.
Chapter 2.0                                         Land Use Element                                                           2-5

                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                            Land Use Element
   Provision of density bonuses as allowed by State law and the Loma Linda zoning ordinance may
   result in development densities in excess of the nominal General Plan maximum density for any land
   use designation.
   The following subsections discuss the intended development types and allowable densities for each
   of the residential land use categories.
   2.2.1.1      Hillside Conservation (0 to 1 dwelling unit per 10 acres)
   This category is intended to provide for very low density single-family residential homes in the Hillside
   Conservation Area. The allowable density for this category ranges from zero to one dwelling units per
   10 acres with a potential bonus up to one dwelling unit per 5 acres where all of the following criteria
   are met. The maximum anticipated population for this designation is 2.4 persons per ten acres with a
   potential increase up to 2.4 persons per 5 acres where all of the following criteria are met.
   (1) The project is clustered, provided that in no event shall a lot size less than 2.5 acres in size be
        permitted;
   (2) The City determines that, to the maximum extent feasible, all development, including roads and
        utility extensions, is kept off the north facing slopes of the hillsides, which comprise the prime
        view from Downtown Loma Linda;
   (3) The need for extensions of streets and other utilities and services is minimized;
   (4) Significant natural areas, view areas, and habitats are preserved and set aside as permanent
        open space and/or conservation areas; and
   (5) Provision is made for riding and hiking trails as called for by applicable City Plans.
   2.2.1.2      Low Density Hillside Preservation (0 to 1 dwelling unit per 10 acres)
   This category is intended to provide for low density single-family residential homes in the Hillside
   Preservation Area. The allowable density for this category ranges from zero to one dwelling units per
   10 acres. The maximum anticipated population for this designation is 2.4 persons per ten acres.
   2.2.1.3      Medium Density Hillside Preservation (0 to 1 dwelling unit per 5 acres)
   This category is intended to provide for low density single-family residential homes in the Hillside
   Preservation Area. The allowable density for this category ranges from zero to one dwelling units per
   5 acres. The maximum anticipated population for this designation is 2.4 persons per five acres.
   2.2.1.4      South Hills
   The South Hills land use category is intended to provide for management of the City’s southwestern
   hillside area in order to balance appropriate levels of development and increased preservation efforts.
   Defining “appropriate levels of development” is accomplished in the General Plan through a
   combination of a maximum allowable development intensity and controlled development and hillside
   design policies, since reasonable limitations on single-family residential development density and
   character are needed for the protection of sensitive environmental features; public safety; efficient
   provision of infrastructure, utilities, and public services; and protection of the City’s visual resources.
   The maximum allowable density for this category ranges from zero to one dwelling unit per 10 acres
   for non-clustered development and one dwelling unit per 2 acres for clustered development.
Chapter 2.0                                    Land Use Element                                               2-6

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                           Land Use Element
   2.2.1.5    Rural Estates (0 to 1 dwelling unit per acre)
   This category is intended to provide for single-family homes in a rural setting. The allowable density
   for this category ranges from zero to one dwelling unit per acre. The maximum anticipated population
   for this designation is 2.4 persons per acre.
   2.2.1.6    Very Low Density (0 to 2 dwelling units per acre)
   This category is intended to provide for single-family residential homes in a large lot, suburban
   setting. The allowable density for this category ranges from zero to two dwelling units per acre. The
   maximum anticipated population for this designation is 5 persons per acre.
   2.2.1.7    Low Density Residential (0 to 4 dwelling units per acre)
   This category is intended to provide for traditional single-family subdivisions within the city and sphere
   of influence. The allowable density for this category ranges from zero to four dwelling units per acre.
   The maximum anticipated population for this designation is 12 persons per acre.
   2.2.1.8    Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 dwelling units per acre)
   This category allows for single-family residential, duplexes, townhouses, and condominium types of
   development. It is intended that as the aging mobile home developments within the community need
   to be replaced, they are re-built with one of the above development types, so as to combine lower-
   cost housing with newer market trends for single-family development types (such as those allowing
   for landscaped open space and other amenities) to improve the quality of the living environment for
   residents. The allowable density for this category ranges from 0 to nine dwelling units per acre. The
   maximum anticipated population for this designation is less than 22 persons per acre.
   2.2.1.9    Medium High Density Residential (0 to 13 dwelling units per acre)
   The allowable uses in this category consist of multifamily uses consisting of townhouse,
   condominium, and low-rise apartment style development. The allowable density for this category
   ranges from 0 to 13 dwelling units per acre. The maximum anticipated population for this designation
   is less than 34 persons per acre.
   2.2.1.10 High Density Residential (0 to 13 dwelling units per acre)
   This category is intended for multifamily uses consisting of low-rise (one to three stories)
   condominium and apartment style development. The allowable density for this use ranges from 0 to
   13 dwelling units per acre. The maximum anticipated population for this designation is 34 persons per
   acre.
   2.2.1.11 Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 dwelling units per acre)
   This category is intended for multifamily uses consisting of low-rise (one to three stories)
   condominium and apartment style development. The allowable density for this use ranges from 0 to
   20 dwelling units per acre. The maximum anticipated population for this designation is 52 persons per
   acre.
   2.2.1.12 Senior Citizen Housing (0 to 25 dwelling units per acre)
   This category is intended for multifamily uses consisting of condominium and apartment style
   development within age-restricted developments. The allowable density for this use ranges from 0 to
   25 dwelling units per acre. The maximum anticipated population for this designation is 45 persons per
   acre.
Chapter 2.0                                 Land Use Element                                                 2-7
                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                        Land Use Element
   2.2.2 Policies for Residential Land Use
   Following are the policies applicable to residential land uses.
   2.2.2.1    Guiding Policy for Residential Land Use
   Ensure quality single-family and multifamily residential development in order to create and preserve
   residential neighborhoods that embody the strengths and accomplishments of the community and to
   preserve both the economic investment of new and existing individual property owners and the
   community’s natural resources.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Encourage a mixture of dwelling sizes, layouts, and ownership types (consistent with the
       corresponding land use designation, density range, and applicable General Plan requirements),
       especially within large-scale residential development projects, in order to provide housing
       opportunities for a range of incomes and households.
   b. Residential neighborhoods should exhibit a complementary variety of dwelling setbacks and
       placement on the lot, and lot patterns that reflect the existing topography.
   c.  Where residential infill development is proposed, ensure that the density is compatible with the
       existing residential neighborhood.
   d. Provide every multifamily dwelling unit with a usable private garden area, yard, patio, or balcony.
   e. Provide the citizens of Loma with a choice of areas of varying densities and housing with a range
       of costs
   f.  Require that new residential development provide for construction of infrastructure and provision
       of open space and/or construction of recreational facilities in order to reduce the public cost
       associated with such uses.
   g. Allow gated communities as long as infrastructure is built to typical City standards.
   h. Require that all new detached single-family residences shall have a minimum lot size of 7,200 s.f,
       regardless of the underlying land use designation or zone.
       For purposes of this policy, a “single-family residence” means a detached residence which is
       intended to serve as the principal dwelling unit on the property, and does not include .structures
       containing more than one dwelling unit, such as duplexes, triplexes or other multiple unit
       dwellings. In addition, detached condominium units that are part of a larger condominium project
       are not considered single-family residences for purposes of this policy, provided that (1) the unit
       adjoins common space shared by other units in the project; and (2) at least a majority of the
       condominium units in the project consist of attached residences. The 7,200 s.f. minimum lot size
       requirement is not intended to prohibit the approval of attached or detached guest structures or
       second residential units on a parcel occupied by a single detached single-family residence, where
       the guest unit or second residential unit is authorized in conformity with state law or City
       regulations, and the second units remain under the same ownership as the principal dwelling unit.
   i.  Unless specifically exempted from the applicable provisions of Measure V, require that all
       residential structures, including the residential portion of any mixed-use structure containing
       residential dwelling units, be no greater than 35 feet in height.
   j.  Conversion of existing single-family uses to multifamily development within the High Density
       Residential area along the north and south sides of Barton Road at Loma Linda’s western City
       limits shall be contingent upon preparation of a plan for consolidation of access of existing
Chapter 2.0                                 Land Use Element                                              2-8

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                         Land Use Element
        driveways. Prior to approval of multifamily development, the project sponsors shall demonstrate
        that:
        x   Access for proposed multifamily development will be provided in a safe and efficient manner;
            and
        x   There is sufficient agreement among property owners to implement such a plan.
   2.2.3 Employment-Generating Land Use Designations
   The General Plan identifies five employment-generating types of land use that provide a broad range
   of employment opportunities for the community: commercial including various types of hotels, office,
   business park, health care, and industrial. Permitted maximum land use intensities are given for each
   designation. These maximum intensities are stated as maximum floor area ratios (FAR). FAR is
   determined by dividing the total proposed building area (square feet) of a development project by the
   square footage of the development site prior to any new dedication requirements. Achievement of this
   maximum is neither guaranteed nor implied by this General Plan. The final density achieved by any
   particular development is dependent upon the development design/layout; any physical, geological,
   or environmental constraints that might be present within the site; available infrastructure and
   services; and other factors. Development standards established in the Loma Linda Municipal Code
   may also limit attainment of the stated maximum allowable densities.
   2.2.3.1    Commercial Land Use (Maximum 0.5 FAR)
   The intent of the commercial designation is to provide
   for the shopping and commercial service needs of the
   residential community, the workers who are employed
   within Loma Linda, and those who visit the city, such
   as to receive health care. Examples of the intended
   nature of development within the commercial category
   include shopping centers, in-line shops, specialty
   shops, and stand-alone commercial uses. The
   Commercial land use designation also allows office
   uses and religious assembly uses to be incorporated
   into commercial development (e.g., offices in small
   storefronts, a cluster of office suites within a larger
   shopping center, or religious assembly uses in
   buildings originally designed for commercial uses) if
   the dominant character of the overall development
   remains commercial. The maximum allowable density
   for the Commercial designation is 0.5 FAR FAR (0.75
   for hotel uses as provided for in Implementing Policy
   2.2.4.1 “c,” below).
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and photo         Auto sales are considered a commercial use
   examples of appropriate commercial design for Loma
   Linda, which are contained in the Community Design
   Element of this General Plan. The Community Design Element addresses a variety of commercial
   types of development, including auto-oriented commercial, “big box” development, hospitality
   development [e.g., hotels and extended-stay suites], and “convenience” development [e.g., car
   washes, service stations].)
Chapter 2.0                                 Land Use Element                                               2-9

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                            Land Use Element
   2.2.3.2      Office (Maximum 0.5 FAR)
   This land use category provides primarily for professional or medical office uses, but also allows for
   commercial uses that support the office uses or office workers (e.g., office supply stores, copy
   services, pharmacies, day care, restaurants, dry cleaners, sundry stores, etc.). Buildings may range
   from low to high-rise (one to five stories). (This designation is distinct from the Business Park
   category, since the latter may include a mix of office and light industrial uses.) The maximum
   allowable density for the Office designation is 0.5 FAR (Floor Area Ratio).
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and photo examples of appropriate Auto Oriented
   Commercial and Small Office Development design for Loma Linda, which are contained in the
   Community Design Element of this General Plan.)
   2.2.3.3      Business Park (Maximum 0.5 FAR)
   The Business Park designation allows for professional offices, research and development activities,
   and light industrial uses in low to high-rise developments (one to five stories). Limited retail or service
   uses designed to meet the business needs of offices or the personal needs of office workers are also
   permitted. Buildings may be stand-alone or be a series of buildings that are coordinated in terms of
   site layout, architectural design, and landscaping to form a “campus.” The maximum allowable
   density for the Business Park designation is 0.5 FAR (Floor Area Ratio).
   The community seeks to expand these types of uses by attracting firms that are related to the medical
   technology field or that would benefit from the medical advances of LLUMC/CH and the VA Medical
   Center. The Loma Linda community would also be a good location for the corporate headquarters of
   firms that are related to physical, mental, and spiritual health products or services, since the location
   of a firm’s headquarters can be important to company image and marketing.
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and photo examples of appropriate Business Park/ Research
   and Development design for Loma Linda, which are contained in the Community Design Element of
   this General Plan.)
   2.2.3.4      Health Care (Maximum 1.0 FAR)
   The Health Care designation is intended for
   hospitals, medical clinics, medical research
   facilities, rehabilitation centers, and residential
   facilities that provide a high degree of medical
   care and supervision. Also permitted within this
   designation is employee housing as an
   accessory use. The maximum allowable density
   for the Health Care designation is 1.0 FAR
   (Floor Area Ratio).
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and
   photos addressing appropriate design of health
   care uses for the Loma Linda community
   (depending on the type of health care use)                 The Veterans Medical Center provides health care
                                                                        to the community and region
   contained in the Community Design Element of
   this General Plan. For hospitals and similar large-scale medical facilities, see the text descriptions,
   policies, and photo examples of appropriate Large Office/Business Park design. For small medical
   office uses, see the text, policies, and photos addressing small office use. For residential facilities
   providing a high level of health care see the text, policies, and photos addressing hospitality use.)
Chapter 2.0                                  Land Use Element                                                  2-10

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                          Land Use Element
   2.2.3.5      Industrial (Maximum 0.6 FAR)
   The Industrial land use category is intended for light industrial uses such as manufacturing, assembly,
   warehousing, and distribution that have limited or no impact on or resulting from the following: air
   quality, electrical or electronic interference, hazardous materials, light and glare, liquid and solid
   wastes, noise, odors, ground vibration, or water quality. Warehousing and distribution uses should be
   limited to those uses that generate a relatively low number of vehicle trips in order to prevent impacts
   on traffic congestion from vehicular transportation of goods. Office use that is ancillary to the main
   industrial use is also allowed. All activities associated with industrial uses must be located within a
   fully enclosed building, or beneath a covered, semi-enclosed structure (see Industrial section within
   Community Design Element). The maximum allowable density for the Industrial designation is 0.5
   FAR (Floor Area Ratio).
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and photo examples of appropriate Industrial design for
   Loma Linda, which are contained in the Community Design Element of this General Plan.)
   2.2.4 Policies for Employment-Generating Land Use
   Following are policies regarding commercial, office, business park, health care, and industrial land
   uses.
   2.2.4.1      Commercial/Office Guiding Policy
   Attract new, and maintain existing, commercial and office uses to better serve the retail and service
   needs of the community, to keep the sales tax revenues from purchases by the Loma Linda
   community from going elsewhere, to reduce the length of trips necessary to meet retail and service
   needs, and to expand employment opportunities within the community.
   Commercial/Office Implementing Policies
   a. Encourage commercial uses that are currently underrepresented within Loma Linda (e.g.,
        membership bulk-merchandise stores, home improvement warehouses, discount general
        merchandisers, electronics, pet supplies, office supplies, sporting goods, linens, furniture, books,
        toys, family clothing, baby and children’s clothing, discount designer clothing, etc.).
   b. Encourage pedestrian-oriented development and small-scale development that feature specialty
        stores and boutiques to create vibrant areas for people to gather and socialize and to better serve
        the community by providing a greater range of commercial uses (e.g., sit-down restaurants,
        upscale apparel, stores related to hobbies or collectibles, gifts, etc.).
   c.   Encourage a greater variety of visitor/service commercial uses to better serve the community
        (e.g., hotels and extended-stay suites that include special event facilities to hold conventions,
        corporate events, weddings, etc., particularly along Redlands Boulevard, car wash/detailing
        facilities, service stations, etc.).
          On sites where a proposed hotel facility cannot feasibly provide appropriate and desirable
          amenities and parking with an FAR of 0.50 or less, the City may permit an increase in the
          allowable floor area ratio up to a maximum FAR of 0.75, if the City determines that the resulting
          development would be compatible with surrounding existing and planned development.
   d. Encourage more commercial leisure activities (e.g., family-oriented commercial recreation
        facilities, kids’ entertainment restaurants, day spas, sit-down restaurants that not only provide
        food but are oriented around family gatherings and appreciation of nature through their settings).
Chapter 2.0                                  Land Use Element                                             2-11

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                           Land Use Element
   e. Provide for retail and service uses that focus on physical, mental, and/or spiritual well being. By
       seeking out these uses, the community could attract businesses and services that want health-
       oriented customers (which the community of Loma Linda provides) and at the same time the
       community would receive a greater variety of wellness-oriented uses that it needs and values.
   f.  Place commercial and office development so that it has a strong relationship with the street, such
       as by siting the buildings so that they are close to the street, or for buildings that need to be set
       back from the street with a large parking lot, locate pad buildings along the street to maintain an
       attractive street edge and visually buffer the parking lot.
   g. Ensure that new commercial/office developments are designed to provide for reciprocal access,
       where feasible, along commercial corridors to minimize the number of driveway entries
       necessary, limit the need to use the street to gain access to nearby uses, and provide a unified
       street edge.
   2.2.4.2     Business Park Guiding Policy
   Develop attractive business park uses to expand the employment opportunities within the community
   and help build the diversity of uses required to create an economically, socially, and culturally vital
   community.
   Business Park Implementing Policies
   a. Create a cohesive visual character within all business parks (i.e., through complementary
       architecture, landscaping, signage, etc.).
   b. Provide abundant landscaping to create a high caliber, professional character in all business
       parks.
   c.  Require the provision of outdoor amenities (e.g., plazas, outside seating, fountains, public art) to
       enhance the working environment.
   d. Provide a network of public pathways around the perimeter and between buildings to enhance the
       connectivity within each business park.
   2.2.4.3     Health Care Guiding Policy
   Promote health care facilities that are conveniently located and well designed to aid patients and to
   make a positive visual contribution to the community in general.
   Health Care Implementing Policies
   a. Encourage LLU in the implementation of its master plan process for its diverse health care
       facilities and future facilities to ensure consistency with the General Plan, zoning, and other City
       requirements.
   b. Encourage associated health care facilities and services to locate within close proximity of each
       other and require pedestrian connections (and bicycle paths, where appropriate) between such
       uses in order to limit necessary vehicle trips for patients, visitors, health care workers, and health
       care students.
   c.  Ensure that health care uses are designed so that site layout, architectural elements, and signage
       clearly direct visitors to parking areas, appropriate buildings, and building entries. Encourage
       health care uses to employ similar clarity of design and signage on the interior of buildings to
       ease visitors’ stress through a well-designed wayfinding approach.
Chapter 2.0                                   Land Use Element                                              2-12

                                                                                       Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                              Land Use Element
   d. Require that any residential uses be clearly ancillary to the primary health care use and restricted
        to housing for employees of the onsite health care facility.
   2.2.4.4     Industrial Guiding Policy
   Ensure that new industrial development will not impact nearby residential uses and other sensitive
   uses.
   Industrial Implementing Policies
   a. Require all industrial uses to be adequately screened to reduce glare, noise, dust, and vibrations.
   b. Ensure that all industrial uses adjacent to residential land uses (either existing residential uses or
        residentially designated land) include a buffer zone or noise attenuation wall to reduce outside
        noise levels at the property line to an acceptable level.
   2.2.5 Community and Public Land Use Designations
   Included within this heading are institutional and public categories of uses as well as recreational
   open space. The City of Loma Linda acknowledges that some of these land uses may be outside of
   the jurisdictional control of the City and that the corresponding public entities might not be required to
   follow the City’s development standards. In such cases, the following land use policies, including
   maximum development density, are intended to serve as a guideline for the public agency.
   2.2.5.1     Institutional (Varies, Maximum 0.5 and 0.8 FAR)
   The Institutional land use designation is intended for educational institutions and religious assembly
   uses. Included within this designation is the LLU campus, which is characterized by lecture halls,
   classroom buildings, laboratory buildings, libraries, administration buildings, and service buildings
   (e.g., printing service and security office). Also included is student housing (e.g., dorms, detached or
   attached dwelling units) and employee housing (detached or attached dwelling units). This category
   also encompasses smaller educational uses, including Loma Linda Academy and the public school
   (Bryn Mawr Elementary) currently located within the city. These smaller educational uses may include
   facilities characterized by classrooms, auditoriums,
   libraries, gymnasiums, administration offices, and
   cafeterias. Religious assembly uses may be
   characterized by assembly areas or buildings,
   classrooms, religious administrative offices, and
   limited residential facilities for religious personnel.
   The design of Institutional development may take on
   a variety of built forms depending on the exact type
   of institutional use. The maximum allowable density
   for the large uses under the Institutional designation
   (e.g., LLU) is 0.8 FAR. The maximum allowable
   density for the small institutional uses (e.g., Loma
   Linda Academy, Bryn Mawr Elementary, religious
                                                                 Institutional uses include Loma Linda University
   assembly uses) is 0.5 FAR.
   (See also the text and policies regarding appropriate Institutional design for Loma Linda, which are
   contained in the Community Design Element of this General Plan.)
Chapter 2.0                                     Land Use Element                                                  2-13

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                           Land Use Element
   2.2.5.2     City Facilities (Maximum 0.5 FAR)
   The City Facilities designation includes the Civic
   Center and the City’s Corp Yard facility. The Civic
   Center contains the city hall as well as a senior
   center, library, community center, and fire station.
   The Corp Yard facility provides a location for
   maintenance and storage of City vehicles. The
   maximum allowable density for the City Facilities
   designation is 0.5 FAR.
   Any new development within the            City Facilities
   designation may take on a variety          of built forms
   depending on the exact type of use.        New buildings
   within the Civic Center should be          architecturally
   consistent with the existing buildings.                            Loma Linda City Hall and Civic Center
   2.2.5.3     Recreation (Maximum 0.1 FAR)
   The Recreation land use category applies to a strip of land located approximately a half mile east of
   Mountain View Avenue that runs from north to south, connecting Redlands Boulevard to Beaumont
   Avenue at the foot of the hills. This area contains Edison electrical transmission towers, numerous
   orange trees, and sections of a pedestrian/bicycle trail with a concrete walkway. The purpose for
   designating this land as a recreational use is to serve nearby neighborhoods and the community in
   general by establishing a continuous trail system characterized by a concrete walkway from Redlands
   Boulevard to Beaumont Avenue.
   The intent of this designation is to preclude the development of buildings, except those that may be
   ancillary to the recreational use (e.g., restrooms, small service buildings). Thus, the maximum
   allowable density for the Recreation designation is 0.05 FAR. (Because the allowed development
   within this designation is extremely limited, there are no applicable text descriptions or photo
   examples regarding this use within the Community Design Element.)
   2.2.5.4     South Hills Preservation
   The South Hills Preservation land use category applies to lands within Loma Linda’s South Hills area
   that is owned by the City, and intended for permanent natural open space and trails. The intent of this
   designation is to preclude the development of buildings, and to permit only such improvements and
   facilities as are consistent with the permanent protection of natural open space. Thus, while this area
   is to be open to the public and recreational trails are encouraged within this area, the design and use
   of trails and trailheads are to be consistent with the environmental values of the lands they traverse.
   2.2.5.5     Parks
   The Parks designation applies to lands owned and operated by the City of Loma Linda as passive or
   active public parks.
   2.2.6 Policies for Community and Public Land Uses
   Following are the policies relating to community and public land uses.
   2.2.6.1     Institutional Guiding Policy
   Strengthen the physical layout and visual identity of LLU as it relates to the community as a whole so
   that it both functionally integrates with the larger community and is an identifiable landmark.
Chapter 2.0                                    Land Use Element                                             2-14

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                            Land Use Element
   Institutional Implementing Policy
   a. Increase the functionality, identity, and appearance of LLU, especially at the edges where it
        meets with the surrounding community, through appropriate land uses and land use controls, site
        planning, and use of design elements. (See also Community Design Element.)
   b. Encourage LLU in its implementation of its master plan process for university-related facilities and
        future facilities to ensure consistency with the General Plan, zoning, and other City requirements.
   c.   Require that residential uses be housing for students or employees of the institutional use.
   2.2.6.2     City Facilities Guiding Policy
   The Civic Center should continue to serve as a strong symbol of the community by maintaining its
   attractive, functional design.
   City Facilities Implementing Policy
   a. Any expansion of the Civic Center should be coordinated with the existing buildings in terms of
        site layout, building orientation, architectural design, and landscaping.
   (For any new buildings within the Corp Yard, see also the text descriptions and photo examples of
   appropriate Industrial design for Loma Linda, which are contained in the Community Design Element
   of this General Plan.)
   2.2.6.3     Recreation Guiding Policy
   Ensure functionality and pleasant aesthetics through proper design of the pathway, access points,
   and landscaping of the north/south riding and hiking trail.
   Recreation Implementing Policy
   a. Add an enhanced pedestrian crossing at the signalized intersection of Barton Road and Newport
        Avenue/Corp Yard in order to provide better access between the trail segments north and south
        of Barton Road if such an at-grade crossing can provide for adequate pedestrian safety.
   b. Provide trail amenities such as signage, benches, and trash receptacles. Signage should identify
        the entrances to the riding and hiking trail. Benches and trash receptacles should be spaced
        along the trail.
   c.   Provide increased access by designing pedestrian linkages from the adjacent residential cul-de-
        sacs to the trail system.
   d. Maintain the privacy of adjacent dwellings by allowing walls and fences of a standard height along
        existing residential property lines that are located adjacent to the perimeter of the trail.
   e. Encourage public visibility of the trail system in order to promote safety for the users by designing
        new adjacent residential development with windows that overlook the trail system. Design trail
        entrances to promote visibility and safety by placing them in prominent locations and minimizing
        obstacles (e.g., walls, tall plant materials) immediately adjacent to the entrances.
   f.   Retain, maintain, and irrigate clusters of the existing orange trees within the designated trail area
        to serve as landscaping adjacent to the pathway, since these trees help promote the community’s
        sense of place and reflect the community’s agricultural past.
   g. Publicly owned open space owned by the City within the hillside area (area designated “South
        Hills Preservation”) shall be designated as permanent open space and shall be maintained as an
Chapter 2.0                                    Land Use Element                                             2-15

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                          Land Use Element
        open space preservation area on the General Plan land use map. Such permanent open space
        designation shall not be changed expect upon a vote of the citizens of Loma Linda. Lands
        designated South Hills Preservation shall not be used for residential development or for the
        purpose of trade to acquire other properties within the South Hills Area or to provide density
        transfers or density bonuses. Open space land shall be open to public recreational use consistent
        with prior historical uses and the protection of environmental values. Roads shall be prohibited
        within the South Hills Preservation Area, except as is necessary for (1) access to trail head
        locations or (2) protection of public health and safety.
   2.2.7 Special Planning Areas
   There are seven general areas within the city that are designated as “Special Planning Areas”
   (Figure 2.2). Each area is intended to provide a different variety of uses at varied densities according
   to each area’s location, access, size, and adjacent land use designations. Each area has its own
   purpose and intent and provides a healthy mix of land uses throughout the City. The intent is to
   create areas in which a mix of uses can come together to meet the commercial, employment,
   institutional, and residential needs of the neighborhood and community at large through efficient
   patterns of land use; and allow for flexibility in determining the specific use of each parcel, as long as
   the intent of this Element is maintained, to accommodate changing market forces in the future. The
   Special Planning Areas are further described below.
   2.2.7.1     Special Planning Area A: Loma Linda Academy Area (West of Proposed
               Future Evans Street Alignment)
   This area, which currently consists of agricultural uses, lies on both sides of the future Evans Street
   alignment and extends to the private Loma Linda Academy schools. The northern boundary is the
   commercial uses fronting on Redlands Boulevard, and the eastern boundary is the Gage Canal. The
   Union Pacific Railroad is the southern boundary. An extension of Evans Street is proposed as a new
   future exit from the Interstate 10 (I-10), and would provide vehicular access to this area.
   Guiding Policy for Loma Linda Academy Special Planning Area A
   The area should create a “high end” professional character in which building architecture, landscaping,
   and amenities (e.g., fountains, public art, walking pathways) serve to integrate various uses including
   research and development, professional or medical offices, health care facilities, religious assembly,
   and/or educational uses.
   Implementing Policies for Loma Linda Academy Special Planning Area A
   a. Allow business park, professional or medical offices, and/or religious assembly along with
        ancillary uses such as restaurants and services along the frontage of the proposed Evans Street
        extension.
   b. Mix uses in a horizontal pattern; that is, the buildings within this Special Planning Area should be
        designed to work together (e.g., circulation, compatible architectural character, landscaping) as
        an integrated “campus,” with each building containing different uses. The non-residential uses
        within this area may also be mixed in a vertical pattern; that is, different types of uses may be
        contained within the same building.
   c.   Place buildings close to the proposed Evans Street in order to form a strong street edge. Access
        to these uses should be from a consolidated access road as opposed to various driveways along
        the new street, since the latter would impact traffic flow.
   d. Buffer residential and school uses (e.g., using landscaped setbacks, site layout, and building
        orientation) from the railroad tracks to reduce impacts from noise.
Chapter 2.0                                   Land Use Element                                              2-16

                                                                                                                                                                                                 BN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SF
                                                                                                                                                                                                        RR                                                                                                       Special Planning Area Boundary A through J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A      Loma Linda Academy
                                                                                                                                                                          $
                                                                                                                                                                          `
                                                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                       MISSION CREEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B      Anderson Street/Van Leuven Street
                                         CAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C      University Center
                                            AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D      Redlands Boulevard/California Street
                                      GAG
                                          E                                                                        REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E      Mission Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F      San Timoteo Creek at Barton Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G     Town Center
                                                                                                     SA
                                                                                                        N   TIM                                                                                                                                                                                                  H     (Reserved)
                                                                                                                OT
                                                                                                                   E   OC                                                                                                                                                                                        I     (Reserved)
                                                                                                                         RE
                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                       ANDERSON ST
                                              A                       ALIGNMENT                                                 K                                             MOUNTAIN VIEW AV                                            D                                                                      J     (Reserved)
                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jurisdictional and Infrastructure
                                                  PROPOSED EVANS ST
                                                                                                                         VAN LEUVEN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SS                                                                        ZANJA CREEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IO                                                                 EY                            City Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D                                                         RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                           UP RR
                                                                      STEWART ST                                                                                                                                                                                                            YO                       Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E                             PROPOSED ORANGE ST ALIGNMENT                                     Water Ways
                                UNIVERSITY AV
                                                                                                                                     BENTON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D                                                        Rail Road
                                                                                                                                                 PROSPECT AV
                                                                           CAMPUS ST                   C                                                                                                                                                                                                             Proposed Street Alignments
                                                                                                      BARTON RD                                                                                                                                                                 BARTON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      F
                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                        LAWTON AV                                                                                            LAWTON AV
                                                                                                                                                          LOMA LINDA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BRYN MAWR AV
                                                                                                                                                                              C                                                                                          BEAUMONT AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WHITTIER AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0          1,000        2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SOURCE: Parcel Base - City of Loma Linda,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Thomas Bros. 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 2.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LOCATION OF SPECIAL PLANNING AREAS
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2009_Jan\fig2-2_SpecialPlanningAreas.mxd (08/11/09)
                                                                                             Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                     Land Use Element
   e. All buildings should be one to three stories in height, unless additional height is granted by the
        final reviewing authority through an approved conditional use permit.
   f.   Appropriate densities for this Special Planning Area shall be 0.5 FAR for Business Park uses,
        Office uses, and for small Institutional buildings (e.g., religious assembly buildings and schools).
        Higher intensity development may be permitted for health care facilities through an approved
        conditional use permit.
   g. Implement development of Special Planning Area A through the adoption of a specific plan(s) or
        planned development(s), so that specific siting of land uses/buildings, architectural design,
        landscaping, road infrastructure, utilities, and other elements can be planned in a comprehensive,
        rather than piecemeal, manner throughout the area.
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and photo examples of appropriate Large Office/Business
   Park design for Loma Linda, which are contained in the Community Design Element. For design of
   schools, see the text descriptions and policies for Institutional uses in the Community Design
   Element. For residential uses, also see the design policies within the Community Design Element.)
   2.2.7.2      Special Planning Area B (Anderson/Van Leuven Area)
   This Special Planning Area is located east of Anderson Street, north of Van Leuven Street, south of
   San Timoteo Creek, and west of existing residential uses and vacant parcels along Poplar Street.
   Current vehicular access into the interior of this area is provided by Orange Grove Street via either
   Van Leuven Street located to the south or Anderson/Academy Street located to the west.
   This area is currently characterized by single-family residential uses located along Anderson Street
   and Parkland Street (which splits off from and runs roughly parallel to Anderson Street). Single-family
   dwellings are also located on the west side of Orange Grove Street. Elmer Digneo Park is located on
   the east side of Anderson Street, north of the rail line. Agricultural uses occupy the remainder of the
   area, with a small telephone utility use at the corner of Van Leuven and Orange Grove Streets.
   Guiding Policy for Anderson/Van Leuven
   Area Special Planning Area B
   The intent for this area is to develop a mixed use2
   village with residential, office, retail, cultural,
   medical/health care, educational, and park and
   recreation uses. Religious assembly uses, such
   as a church, would also be appropriate within this
   area.
   Implementing Policies for Anderson/ Van
   Leuven Area Special Planning Area B                                Residences currently fronting on Anderson Street
   a. Encourage               horizontal          mixed-use
        development (i.e., different uses in separate, adjacent buildings), as well as and vertical mixed-
   2
        “Mixed-use” development consists of two (2) or more primary land use components such as, but not limited
        to, residential and retail business, residential and offices, etc., which are harmoniously grouped into a
        visually compatible and functional land use arrangement that would not otherwise be permitted under a
        traditional residential, business park, or office zoning district. A “mixed-use” development needs to provide a
        common amenity or feature that ties different uses together into an integrated project. Thus, merely placing
        different uses adjacent to each other within a single development does not constitute “mixed-use”
        development. Mixed-use development may occur in either the same building (vertical mixed use) or on
        adjoining buildings on the same site (horizontal mixed use).
Chapter 2.0                                       Land Use Element                                                     2-18

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                            Land Use Element
       use development (i.e., different uses such as residential, commercial, office, or educational uses
       within the same building).
   b. Promote commercial retail, services, and office uses or vertical mixed-use buildings with these
       uses on the ground floor along the frontage of Anderson Street.
   c.  Allow religious assembly and/or residential development, ranging from medium to high density, to
       be located to the east of the commercial uses to the boundary of the area.
   d. Place medium high (0–13 du/ac) to very high (0–20 du/ac) density residential, as well as senior
       citizen (0–25 du/ac) housing in proximity to Elmer Digneo Park, to take advantage of this amenity.
       High to very high density residential and senior citizen housing should also be located closest to
       the commercial and office uses that are intended along Anderson Street. Medium high density
       residential should be placed towards the eastern portion of the area to be compatible with the
       medium to high density residential uses to the east.
   e. Permit a maximum of 525 dwelling units
       within this area (1,280 residents, assuming
       2.44 persons per dwelling unit).
   f.  Site all residential uses to facilitate
       pedestrian access to the park from the
       residential areas.
   g. Provide the main access to the commercial
       center along Anderson Street so that it is off
       of Orange Grove Street (or its replacement
       street).
   h. Provide a new road or improve the existing
       Orange Grove Street alignment to provide
       better access into the heart of the Special
       Planning Area and improve circulation from                Conceptual development for a portion of
       Van Leuven Street to the Anderson                                Special Planning Area B
       Street/Academy Street intersection, with an
       opportunity for a second access road connecting to Anderson Street.
   i.  Appropriate non-residential development intensity for this Special Planning Area shall be 0.5 FAR
       for Commercial, Office, and Institutional development, including medical/health care, educational,
       and religious assembly uses.
   j.  Design residential uses at the eastern edge of the Special Planning Area (adjacent to residences
       along/near Poplar Street) as one story dwellings of an appropriate height and scale to avoid
       visual conflicts with existing residences.
   k.  Implement development of Special Planning Area B through the adoption of a specific plan(s) or
       planned development(s), so that specific siting of land uses/buildings, architectural design,
       landscaping, road infrastructure, utilities, and other elements can be planned in a comprehensive,
       rather than piecemeal, manner throughout the Special Planning Area.
   (See also the text, policies, and photo examples of Auto Oriented Commercial/Small Office buildings
   that are contained in the Community Design Element of this General Plan. General site layout and
   design policies for religious assembly uses are addressed in the Institutional section of the
   Community Design Element. For residential uses, also see the design policies within the Community
   Design Element.)
Chapter 2.0                                  Land Use Element                                             2-19

                                                                                             Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                     Land Use Element
   2.2.7.3      Special Planning Area C (“University Center”)
   This area generally lies south of Mound Street and Shepardson
   Drive , north of Barton Road, with a portion straddling Prospect
   Avenue. The western boundary is Anderson Street and the
   eastern boundary varies with the outer edge extending to
   Richardson Street. Vehicular access is provided by a number of
   streets primarily located at the area’s perimeter, including
   Anderson Street, Mound Street, Prospect Avenue, Taylor Court,
   Taylor Street, La Mar Road, Shepardson Drive, and Richmont
   Road. This area is walking distance from LLU, LLUMC, and the
   surrounding residential area to the east and southeast.
   Current uses include retail and service commercial, a federal
   post office, university offices, and single and multifamily
   residential. Service and retail uses (e.g., travel services and
   watch shop), as well as LLU department offices are currently
   located to the west of Anderson Street. A post office, bank, and
   market are located on or near the eastern frontage of Anderson
   Street. The eastern half of this Special Planning Area currently                    The small University Center offers
   consists of single and multifamily residences.                                         future potential as a “village”
   Guiding Policy for University Center Special Planning Area C
   The University Center Special Planning Area is intended to be a vertical mixed-use3 area that is the
   center of activity within the neighborhood, especially serving the students, faculty, workers, and
   visitors of the nearby LLU and LLUMC. Retail and service commercial uses should be increased in
   the area (especially along the frontage of Anderson Street and Taylor Street), adding to and
   strengthening the small number of existing retail and service uses. These expanded retail and service
   uses should consist of pedestrian-oriented development with residential uses on the upper floors, to
   build a denser and varied “downtown” character.
   Within this Special Planning Area, it is intended that a parking structure be developed to provide
   parking for many users, including new upper floor residential units, commercial customers who arrive
   via car, and University students since the existing University parking lots (which require a parking
   permit) may be lost due to the new mixed-use development. The residences that are anticipated to be
   lost due to the development of the parking structure are intended to be replaced by upper floor
   residential units constructed in association with the new mixed-use development.
   Implementing Policies for University Center Special Planning Area C
   a. Allow retail and service commercial uses on the ground floor of buildings. Permit office and
        residential uses on upper floors.
   3
        “Mixed-use” development consists of two (2) or more primary land use components such as, but not limited
        to, residential and retail business, residential and offices, etc., which are harmoniously grouped into a
        visually compatible and functional land use arrangement that would not otherwise be permitted under a
        traditional residential, business park, or office zoning district. A “mixed-use” development needs to provide a
        common amenity or feature that ties different uses together into an integrated project. Thus, merely placing
        different uses adjacent to each other within a single development does not constitute “mixed-use”
        development. Mixed-use development may occur in either the same building (vertical mixed use) or on
        adjoining buildings on the same site (horizontal mixed use).
Chapter 2.0                                       Land Use Element                                                        2-20

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                         Land Use Element
   b. Orient development to existing primary circulation routes such as Anderson Street, Mound Street,
       and Prospect Avenue, or at least provide detailed, pedestrian friendly architecture on all street
       frontages. (See the section on Pedestrian-Oriented Development within the Community Design
       Element for descriptions and photo examples of pedestrian oriented development.)
   c.  Place buildings that are located within the interior of the Special Planning Area (i.e., those that do
       not front directly on a street) so that they front onto pedestrian-only internal “streets” or streets
       designed so that pedestrian use takes precedence over vehicular traffic.
   d. Integrate large commercial uses such as the existing market, bank, and post office with new,
       smaller sized tenant spaces. Existing University department offices within this “downtown” area
       should be moved elsewhere on campus or relocated to the second floor of new mixed-use
       development, if at all possible, since the buildings in which they are contained are not pedestrian-
       friendly (e.g., they lack interesting/detailed architecture, large display windows, pedestrian
       pathways along the perimeter, amenities such as landscaping or seating near the buildings, etc.).
       At a minimum, new retail and service tenant spaces that are designed to be pedestrian-friendly
       should be developed immediately adjacent to the perimeter of the existing department offices to
       help integrate them into the pedestrian environment (e.g., by obscuring the blank exterior walls of
       the offices with a series of small pedestrian-oriented tenant spaces).
   e. Retain and integrate existing historic buildings with new development, wherever possible.
   f.  Design parking structure(s) to have shared walls with mixed-use development so that secured
       access to upper floor residential units can be provided from within the structure. In addition, the
       parking structure should be designed so that retail and service uses are located along the
       perimeter of the ground floor of the structure to provide a pedestrian-friendly and visually
       attractive method for camouflaging the parking structure.
   g. Explore the feasibility of angled on-street parking in order to provide additional short-term parking
       for commercial uses.
   h. The appropriate density for this Special Planning Area shall be 1.0 FAR for commercial, office,
       and residential uses in a mixed-use building.
   i.  Implement development of Special Planning Area C through the adoption of a specific plan(s) or
       planned development(s), so that specific siting of land uses/buildings, architectural design,
       landscaping, road infrastructure, utilities, and other elements can be planned in a comprehensive,
       rather than piecemeal, manner throughout the Special Planning Area.
   j.  Provide for an increase of 83 dwelling units over 2006 conditions (202 residents, assuming 2.44
       persons per dwelling unit).
   (See also the text, policies, and photo examples for Pedestrian-Oriented Development that are
   contained in the Community Design Element of this General Plan. Parking structures are discussed
   and illustrated in the “Convenience” Development section of the Community Design Element.)
   2.2.7.4    Special Planning Area D (Redlands Boulevard/California Street)
   The Redlands Boulevard, California Street Special Planning Area is bordered by Redlands Boulevard
   on the north, California Street on the east, Mission Road on the south, and the Edison transmission
   towers to the west. Access to this area is currently feasible from Redlands Boulevard, California
   Street, and Mission Road, which diagonally forms the southern boundary of this area. This area
   currently consists of scattered residential uses, primarily along Mission Road and Redlands
   Boulevard. A school facility is located at the corner of Redlands Boulevard and California Street. This
   building is currently being used by the San Bernardino County Superintendent of Schools for special
   education and alternative education purposes, but its current attendance is well below the school’s
Chapter 2.0                                 Land Use Element                                                2-21

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                         Land Use Element
   physical capacity. There are also large parcels that are currently vacant. The visual prominence, large
   size (299.81 acres), and multiple ownerships of this area require a comprehensive approach to its
   planning in order to accomplish a rational land use pattern. It has therefore been designated as a
   Special Planning Area.
   Guiding Policy for the Redlands Boulevard/California Street Special Planning Area D
   This area is intended to be characterized by a horizontal and vertical mixed uses developed along the
   frontages of Redlands Boulevard and California Street, including commercial, office, structured
   parking, and up to 400 very high density residential dwelling units. Religious assembly uses are also
   anticipated along Redlands Boulevard and California Street. (Also see the discussion regarding
   adaptive reuse of historic homes associated with the orange groves in the Community Design
   Element.)
   If the existing school at the corner of Redlands Boulevard and California Street should cease to be
   used as an educational facility, then the possibility of adaptive reuse of the buildings for professional
   and medical offices, as well as low intensity commercial and restaurant use, should be explored (also
   see adaptive reuse section in the Community Design Element).
   Single-family residential uses should be placed towards the central, western, and southern portions of
   the Redlands Boulevard/California Street Special Planning Area, with multi-family development
   permitted toward the interior of the area. New residential uses in proximity to existing, historical
   residential uses along Mission Road should be compatible in density and scale to the historic
   residential uses (although not necessarily the same), since the General Plan intends for these
   existing residences to remain. Overall, the pattern of land use should reflect the pattern and mix of
   uses identified below.
   The General Plan envisions establishment of a heritage park within the Redlands
   Boulevard/California Street Special Planning Area, providing passive recreational uses within an
   historic setting, consisting of examples of local historic architecture. This vision includes relocating
   historic homes into the park, and establishing a local heritage/cultural museum, as well as adapting
   the structures for use for civic and cultural events, as well as for use by local civic and cultural
   organizations.
   The General Plan’s vision for this area is a “livable, walkable community” with a high level of
   amenities for residents, such as parks, trails and paseos, and other recreational uses, exhibiting a
   high level of design quality. Another key concept for this area is development of a large, sports-
   oriented community park to assist Loma Linda in achieving its desired park acreage to population
   ratio.
   Implementing Policies for the Redlands Boulevard/California Street Special Planning
   Area D
   a. Allow retail and service commercial, office, institutional, single-family residential, multi-family
         residential, senior housing, and public open space uses in Special Planning Area D consistent
         with Table 2.B.
   Table 2.B: Table Special Planning Area D Land Use Concept
                                 Land Use                                Acres            Dwelling Units
   Institutional                                                             14.83                         0
   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)                                    80.27                       321
   High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)                                  10.23                       133
Chapter 2.0                                 Land Use Element                                               2-22

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                           Land Use Element
   Table 2.B: Table Special Planning Area D Land Use Concept
                                  Land Use                                  Acres           Dwelling Units
   Park                                                                          4.95                         0
   Parking Structure                                                             7.27                         0
   Parks / Open Space                                                           55.09                         0
   Retail / Mixed Use                                                          102.81                       400
   Roadway                                                                       2.22                         0
   Senior Citizen Housing (0 to 25 du/ac)                                        8.52                       213
   Trail                                                                        13.62                         0
   TOTAL                                                                       299.81                     1,067
   b. Provide anchors within centers having multiple large buildings (e.g., shopping centers) that are
         set back from the street, but that are entirely or partially screened with “pad” buildings that create
         a strong street edge and obscure the interior parking area. “Convenience” commercial uses such
         as service stations should be designed as pad buildings so that they are easily accessible from
         the street. Shopping areas need not be “traditional” supermarket/drug store centers, but can also
         be made up of low-intensity, specialty shopping facilities featuring cafes, boutiques and small
         shops. Boutiques are small, “in-line” shops that are also encouraged within more traditional
         shopping centers.
   c.    Design multiple building developments that might not include “pad” buildings, such as an office
         building or business park complex to feature a strong street presence by placing buildings so that
         they side on to the street and by placing parking lots so that they are easily accessed but not
         dominating the street frontage.
   d. Pursue adaptive reuse of the large residences associated with the citrus groves to the greatest
         extent feasible in order to maintain elements from the community’s history; potential new uses for
         these historic structures may include restaurants, offices, and bed and breakfast establishments.
         New adjacent uses/buildings should be sensitively sited and designed in order to preserve
         historic buildings, allow for viable access to them, and create a cohesive architectural character
         that reflects, and is compatible with, the historic buildings. New development shall be consistent
         with the City’s Historic Mission Overlay District.
   e. Align north-south collector roads with existing streets located to the north of Redlands Boulevard.
   f.    Design vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns in the residential areas to facilitate access to
         the commercial uses along Redlands Boulevard and California Street via the residential collector
         streets behind the commercial uses. Thus, nearby residents should not need to drive or walk
         along Redlands Boulevard or California Street to access the commercial and service uses.
   g. Provide residential uses with easy access to the planned recreation trail running north and south
         through the city (located approximately one half mile east of Mountain View Avenue), such as by
         placing trail connections at the end of cul-de-sacs.
   h. Provide public open space in proximity to residential uses, either in concert with (and in addition
         to) the planned recreation trail running north and south through the city (located approximately
         one half mile east of Mountain View Avenue), or in a separate area.
   i.    Limit non-residential buildings to a maximum of three stories in height, with taller “signature
         buildings” conditionally permitted at key intersections and locations within the Special Planning
         Area.
Chapter 2.0                                    Land Use Element                                               2-23

                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                             Land Use Element
   j.  Under no circumstances shall a residential structure or the residential portion of a mixed use
       structure be permitted to exceed 35 feet in height.
   k.  The maximum allowable number of residential units within Special Planning Area D shall be
       1,067.
   l.  Multi-family and senior housing products shall be provided with sufficient usable open space
       within the development. The internal open space provided within such developments may not be
       counted toward meeting minimum requirements for public park area, but shall be considered to
       be an added amenity pursuant to General Plan policy “o,” below.
   m. New residential uses in proximity to existing residential uses that will remain along Mission Road
       shall be compatible in density (generally, low density residential 0 to 4 dwelling units per acre)
       and scale. A gradation of lot sizes shall be provided from large lots along Mission Road to the
       north and east.
   n. The appropriate density for shopping centers, business parks, and office buildings shall be 0.5
       FAR. The appropriate density for small institutional uses (e.g., religious assembly uses and
       schools) shall also be 0.5 FAR.
   o. Implementation of development within Special Planning Area D shall be through a master plan
       prepared by the City so that specific siting of land uses/buildings, architectural design,
       landscaping, road infrastructure, utilities, and other elements can be planned in a comprehensive,
       rather than piecemeal, manner throughout the Special Planning Area. Such specific plans shall
       provide development standards and guidelines to:
       x    Maintain a feeling of “openness” within the area;
       x    Provide for varying front yard setbacks and a mix of one- and two-story residential dwelling
            units;
       x    Development of an area of lots larger than those found in a typical suburban subdivision; and
       x    Preserve existing oak trees and provide for replacement at an appropriate ratio of those trees
            than cannot feasibly be preserved.
   p. The design of development within Special Planning Area D must encompass a variety of
       amenities to serve the project. Development of residential product types other than single family
       detached dwelling units on minimum 7,200 square foot lots4 shall require the provision of a strong
       package of project amenities within the overall Specific Plan or planned development, including,
       but not limited to:
       x    25 percent usable open space;
       x    Trails and paseos;
       x    Child care facilities;
       x    Neighborhood/satellite community libraries;
       x    Fountains and water features;
       x    Public art;
       x    Amphitheaters and public gathering places;
   4
       Per the provisions of Measure V and Implementing Policy 2.2.2.1g, single-family detached dwelling units are
       not permitted on lots smaller than 7,200 s.f.
Chapter 2.0                                    Land Use Element                                                  2-24

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                          Land Use Element
       x    Homeowner-owned parks and recreational facilities, such as sports fields, ball courts, tot lots,
            putting greens, pools, lakes, and community center buildings;
       x    Public facilities/parks substantially in excess of that required by Quimby Act provisions;
       x    Provision of up to 10 percent of the project’s dwelling units affordable to low and moderate
            income households;
       x    Provision of one or more high density, walkable village areas and/or
       x    Public facilities with a recognizable connection to the project that are substantially in excess
            of the city’s minimum requirements.
   q. Development of commercial, office, and business park development within the Redlands
       Boulevard/ California Street Special Planning Area shall comply with the following.
       (1) Provide plazas, pocket parks, public art, and similar amenities to create gathering places with
            a high level of visual interest.
       (2) Provide a strong mix of commercial uses including neighborhood retail, specialty retail,
            restaurant, entertainment, office-based employment and/or professional services..
       (3) Encourage a pedestrian-oriented character through detailed, pedestrian oriented architecture;
            pedestrian amenities such as seating areas, landscaping, and lighting; water features such
            as fountains and public art; signs that are placed and scaled to the pedestrian; wide
            sidewalks and/or pathways to link buildings; and open areas such as plazas to encourage
            gathering.
       (4) Limit buildings to a maximum of three stories in height, with taller “signature buildings”
            conditionally permitted at key intersections and locations within the Special Planning Area.
       (5) Under no circumstances shall a residential structure or the residential portion of a mixed use
            structure be permitted to exceed 35 feet in height.
   r.     Pursue establishment of a heritage park to preserve the existing reminders of Loma Linda’s
          history; establish a location to which historic structures can be relocated, restored, and
          protected; and provide a location for the operation of historical preservation organizations and
          passive recreation in an historic setting.
   s.  Within planned open space and park areas, provide active sports facilities.
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and photo examples of appropriate commercial design and
   Pedestrian Oriented Development for Loma Linda, which are contained in the Community Design
   Element of this General Plan. For religious assembly buildings and schools, refer to the description
   and policies provided under Institutional uses in the Community Design Element. See the Community
   Design Element for text and policies related to design involving adaptive reuse. For residential uses,
   also see the design policies within the Community Design Element. Design of parking structures is
   discussed and illustrated in the “Convenience” Development section of the Community Design
   Element. For the multifamily and townhouse development, also see the applicable residential design
   policies within the Community Design Element.)
   2.2.7.5    Special Planning Area E (Mission Road)
   This area is located south of the proposed Mission Road alignment to San Timoteo Creek. The
   Edison easement provides the western boundary and California Street is the eastern boundary. The
   area currently consists of vacant and agricultural land interspersed with single-family residential units.
Chapter 2.0                                   Land Use Element                                              2-25

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                          Land Use Element
   Guiding Policy for Special Planning Area E (Mission Road)
   The intent for this portion of the Special Planning Area is to promote both single-family residential as
   well as the potential for a work/live or artisans’ studio environment through a horizontal mixed-use
   pattern. This area is within the Historic Mission Overlay District and all new development will comply
   with the standards of this district. Single-family residential uses are intended along the street frontage
   and generally in the northern half of Special Planning Area E. In the southern half and bordering San
   Timoteo Creek, a work/live environment is intended. This will be accomplished by modifying zoning
   requirements to permit a broader range of home occupation activities than in other portions of the
   City, including permitting a limited number employees who do not live at the residence and uses that
   would attract a small number of patrons to the home occupation. This could also feature single-family
   residences on larger lots with detached studio/workshop buildings at the rear of the lot. Such
   detached studio/workshops would consist of accessory structures (up to 1,000 square feet) for
   conducting studio activities such as painting, sculpting, ceramics, jewelry making, weaving, metal
   working, woodworking, glass blowing, and similar activities. Professional services, such as
   accounting/bookkeeping, doctor’s offices, architectural/engineering consulting, and similar activities
   would also be permitted either within the main residential structure or within a detached structure on-
   site.
   Implementing Policies for the Mission Road Special Planning Area E
   a. Locate single-family residences along street frontages. Detached accessory structures up to
        1,000 square feet are allowed at the rear of the lot for studio and home occupation activities.
   b. Define appropriate studio and home occupation uses to include painting, sculpting, ceramics,
        jewelry making, weaving, metal working, woodworking, glass blowing, and similar activities, as
        well as professional services, such as accounting/bookkeeping, doctor’s offices,
        architectural/engineering consulting, and similar uses that do not create impacts on or due to air
        quality, electrical or electronic interference, hazardous materials, light and glare, liquid and solid
        wastes, noise, odors, ground vibration, or water quality beyond those normally associated with
        residential use, as measured at the property line. The conduct of such home occupation and
        studio uses may involve a limited number of employees who do not reside on-site, and may
        involve also small number of patrons coming to the site.
   c.   Conduct all activities associated with the artisan studio use within an enclosed studio building,
        except for professional activities, which may also be conducted within the main structure.
   d. Limit residential buildings to a maximum of two stories and 35 feet in height.
   e. Limit detached studio buildings to one story and 75 percent of the maximum height associated
        with low-density (0-4 du/acre) residential uses.
   f.   Design all dwelling units to have a typical residential appearance. Dwellings facing on Mission
        Road or adjacent to existing residential development on or near Mission Road should be
        consistent in scale and height with the predominant character of the existing dwellings.
   g. Design detached studio buildings to have the appearance of typical residential accessory
        structures, such as garages.
   h. The appropriate density for single-family residential development shall be low density (0 to 4.0
        dwelling units per acre), medium density (0 to 9 dwelling units per acre), or medium high density
        (0 to 13 dwelling units per acre). Live/work areas may also be at medium high density (0 to 13
        units per acre). Medium and high density development shall provide amenities within the project
        that are substantially in excess of the City’s minimum requirements. Such amenities may include,
        but are not limited to public parks, open space, and/or trails and paseos; community recreational
Chapter 2.0                                    Land Use Element                                              2-26

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                           Land Use Element
        facilities such as sports fields, courts, tot lots, putting greens, pools, and recreation/community
        complexes; public art; and/or community facilities exceeding minimum City requirements.
   i.   The appropriate density for the area south of Barton Road and north of San Timoteo Creek shall
        be 0.5 FAR for commercial uses, industrial uses, and for religious assembly uses.
   j.   Implement development of the Mission Road Special Planning Area E through the adoption of a
        specific plan(s) or planned development(s), so that specific siting of land uses/buildings,
        architectural design, landscaping, road infrastructure, utilities, and other elements can be planned
        in a comprehensive, rather than piecemeal, manner throughout the Special Planning Area.
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and photo examples of appropriate Auto Oriented
   Commercial development and Industrial development, and the description and policies for religious
   assembly uses provided under the Institutional category, which are contained in the Community
   Design Element. For residential uses, also see the design policies within the Community Design
   Element.)
   2.2.7.6      Special Planning Area F (San Timoteo Creek at Barton Road)
   This area is located between Barton Road and San Timoteo Creek, west of California Avenue. Within
   this area is a storage facility that is accessible from Barton Road. The majority of the remaining land
   area is currently characterized by orange groves.
   Guiding Policy for the San Timoteo Creek at Barton Road Special Planning Area F
   To provide flexibility, future land uses are intended to include commercial, religious assembly, and/or
   industrial uses. Access should continue to be from Barton Road.
   Implementing Policies for the San Timoteo Creek at Barton Road Special Planning
   Area F
   a. Allow retail and service commercial, office, institutional, and public open space uses throughout
        the Special Planning Area.
   b. Feature a strong street presence by placing buildings so that they side on to the street and by
        placing parking lots so that they are easily accessed but not dominating the street frontage.
   c.   Design vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns in the residential areas to facilitate access to
        the commercial uses along Barton Road and California Street via the residential collector streets
        behind the commercial uses. Thus, nearby residents should not need to drive or walk along
        Barton Road or California Street to access the commercial and service uses.
   d. The appropriate density shall be 0.5 FAR. The appropriate density for small institutional uses
        (e.g., religious assembly uses and schools) shall be 0.5 FAR.
   e. Implement development of Special Planning Area F through the adoption of a specific planned
        development, so that specific siting of land uses/buildings, architectural design, landscaping, road
        infrastructure, utilities, and other elements can be planned in a comprehensive manner.
   f.   Permit ground floor residential development along the frontage of California Street only upon a
        demonstration that commercial, office and institutional development are not feasible through
        2015.
   (See also the text descriptions, policies, and photo examples of appropriate Auto-Oriented
   Commercial development and Industrial development, and the description and policies for religious
Chapter 2.0                                     Land Use Element                                            2-27
                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                        Land Use Element
   assembly uses provided under the Institutional category, which are contained in the Community
   Design Element.)
   2.2.7.7     Special Planning Area G
   This area consists of approximately 20 acres located south of City Hall between Loma Linda Drive
   and Mountain View Avenue. This area is intended to take advantage of the location of the Senior
   Center portion of the City Hall complex, and provide a transition between higher intensity uses to the
   north and single family neighborhoods to the south. Primary vehicular access to this area should be
   taken from Loma Linda Drive and Mountain View Avenue, with limited access from Lawton Avenue.
   Guiding Policy for the South of City Hall Special Planning Area
   The intended use for Special Planning Area G is a mix of medium density (0-9 du/ac) and senior
   citizen (0-25 du/ac) housing. It is intended that age-restricted senior housing be located within the
   interior and northern portions of the area, designed to provide direct pedestrian access to the City’s
   Senior Center. Medium density housing is to be provided as a buffer to medium and low density
   neighborhoods to the west, east, and south.
   Implementing Policies for Special Planning Area G
   a. Provide for development of approximately 10 acres each of Senior Housing (0-25 du/ac) and
        Medium Density (0-9 du/ac), with senior housing located within the interior and northern portions
        of the area, and provided with direct pedestrian access to the City’s Senior Center. Medium
        density housing is to be provided as a buffer to medium and low density neighborhoods to the
        west, east, and south.
   b. Permit a maximum total of 335 dwelling units (652 people, assuming 2.44 persons per dwelling
        unit for medium density and 1.8 persons per dwelling unit for senior housing).
   c.   Cluster parking areas away from street frontages to emphasize the pedestrian-oriented nature of
        onsite development.
   d. Limit all residential buildings to a maximum height of 35 feet.
   e. Senior housing and medium density residential development shall provide appropriate open
        space and recreation areas for the use of its residents.
   f.   A minimum of 25 percent of the Special Planning Area shall be retained in open space.
   2.2.7.8     Special Planning Area H
   (Reserved)
   2.2.7.9     Special Planning Area I
   (Reserved)
   2.2.7.10 Special Planning Area J
   (Reserved)
   2.3       ESTIMATED POPULATION, HOUSEHOLDS, AND EMPLOYMENT AT
             FUTURE BUILD OUT DATE
   Table 2.C shows SCAG’s estimated total population, households, and employment numbers for the
   City portion of the planning area. These estimates are provided in five year increments through the
Chapter 2.0                                 Land Use Element                                              2-28

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                       Land Use Element
   year 2035. Tables 2.D through 2.F show detailed estimated numbers for acreage, dwelling units, and
   jobs at the future build out date based on the land uses and allowable densities outlined in this
   Element. As shown in these tables, SCAG projections indicate that Loma Linda will reach buildout of
   its residentially designated land uses about 2020, while non-residential land uses will achieve buildout
   sometime beyond the year 2035.
   Table 2.C: SCAG Projection of Population, Households, and Employment (Within Existing City
   Limits Only)
                             2005       2010        2015      2020        2025        2030          2035
   Total Population          21,777     25,481     28,997     32,259      35,426      38,470        41,385
   Total Households           8,140      9,586     11,458     13,050      14,554      15,960        17,286
   Total Employment          16,128     19,343     22,170     24,376      26,915      29,767        33,086
   Source: 2008 SCAG RTP Growth Forecast by City
   Table 2.D: General Plan Build Out Land Uses (Acres)
                   Land Use                      City          Sphere of Influence           Total Acres
   South Hills                                   445.38                   0.00                    445.38
   Rural Residential                              34.19                   0.00                     34.19
   Low-Density Residential                       776.86                  18.73                    795.59
   Medium-Density Residential                    237.36                   0.00                    237.36
   High-Density Residential                       70.17                   0.00                     70.17
   Very High-Density Residential                 179.03                   0.00                    179.03
   Senior Citizen Housing                           0.00                  0.00                       0.00
   South Hills Preserve (Open Space)             773.00                663.28                   1,436.28
   Expanded Hillside Area                         12.96                   0.00                     12.96
   Hillside Conservation Area                    279.57                   0.00                    279.57
   Low Density Hillside Preservation                0.00               733.78                     733.78
   Medium Density Hillside Preservation             0.00               157.75                     157.75
   San Timoteo Creek Area                           6.74                 90.32                     97.06
   Commercial                                    288.83                  28.22                    317.05
   Office                                         10.70                   0.00                     10.70
   Business Park                                  67.02                  86.23                    153.25
   Health Care                                   106.21                   0.00                    106.21
   Industrial                                       4.71                  0.00                       4.71
   Institutional                                 181.18                   0.00                    181.18
   City Facilities                                12.78                   0.00                     12.78
   Park                                           42.32                   0.00                     42.32
   Recreational (Public Open Space)               34.79                   0.00                     34.79
Chapter 2.0                                 Land Use Element                                               2-29
                                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                             Land Use Element
   Table 2.D: General Plan Build Out Land Uses (Acres)
                       Land Use                               City             Sphere of Influence                Total Acres
   Special Planning Areas
      A Loma Linda Academy                                        77.07                                                      7.07
      B Anderson Ave/Van Lueven St                                47.63                                                     47.63
      C University Center
      D Redlands Blvd/California St                               36.31                                                     36.31
      E Mission Rd                                               299.81                                                    299.81
      F San Timoteo Creek/Barton Rd                               69.17                                                     69.17
      G South of City Hall                                          3.06                                                     3.06
                                              Total
                                                                  19.79                                                     19.79
                                                                 552.84                                 0.00               549.72
   Rights of Way1                                                116.97                                 0.00               100.17
   Total Acres                                                 4,230.26                            1,781.51              6.011.77
   1
     The City’s GIS data includes “rights of way” that are considered “parcels” and therefore are included in this table.
     Traditional rights of way for roadways are not included in the acreage calculations for the Planning Area.
   Table 2.E: General Plan Build Out Housing
                      Land Use                            City          Sphere of Influence               Total Dwelling Units
   South Hills
   Single-Family dwelling units                           203                     0                               203
   Multifamily dwelling units                              0                      0                                 0
   Hillside Conservation Area
   Single-Family dwelling units                            27                     0                                27
   Multifamily dwelling units                              0                      0                                 0
   Expanded Hillside Area
   Single-Family dwelling units                            5                      0                                 5
   Multifamily dwelling units                              0                      0                                 0
   Low Density Hillside Preservation
   Single-Family dwelling units                            0                     73                                73
   Multifamily dwelling units                              0                      0                                 0
   Medium Density Hillside Preservation
   Single-Family dwelling units                            0                     31                                31
   Multifamily dwelling units                              0                      0                                 0
   San Timoteo Creek Area
   Single-Family dwelling units                            12                    180                              192
   Multifamily dwelling units                              0                      0                                 0
   Rural Residential
   Single-Family dwelling units                            34                     0                                34
   Multifamily dwelling units                              0                      0                                 0
   Low-Density Residential
   Single-Family dwelling units                          3,107                   75                              3,1821
   Multifamily dwelling units                              0                      0                                 0
Chapter 2.0                                            Land Use Element                                                         2-30

                                                                              Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                     Land Use Element
   Table 2.E: General Plan Build Out Housing
                  Land Use                 City       Sphere of Influence         Total Dwelling Units
   Medium-Density Residential
   Single-Family dwelling units            801                   0                          801
   Multifamily dwelling units             1,135                  0                         1,135
   High-Density Residential
   Single-Family dwelling units             0                    0                           0
   Multifamily dwelling units              898                  56                          954
   Very High-Density Residential
   Single-Family dwelling units             0                    0                           0
   Multifamily dwelling units             3,581                  0                         3,581
   Senior Citizen Housing
   Single-Family dwelling units             0                    0                           0
   Multifamily dwelling units               0                    0                           0
   Special Planning Areas
   Single-Family dwelling units           2,076                  0                         2,076
   Multifamily dwelling units             1,409                  0                         1,409
   Total Dwelling Units                   13,288               415                        13,703
   Total Households                       12,624               394                        13,018
   Total Population                       31,886               996                        32,882
   Table 2.F: General Plan Build Out Employment
               Land Use             City       Sphere of Influence        Total Number of Employees
   Commercial
   Retail Employment               4,363              426                            4,789
   Other Employment               1,213               119                            1,332
   Office
   Retail Employment                  0                0                                0
   Other Employment                 180                0                              180
   Business Park
   Retail Employment                405               495                             900
   Other Employment                 788               963                            1,751
   Health Care
   Retail Employment                428                0                              428
   Other Employment               11,104               0                            11,104
   Industrial
   Retail Employment                  0                0                                0
   Other Employment                  33                0                               33
   Institutional
   Retail Employment               1,095               0                             1,095
Chapter 2.0                              Land Use Element                                              2-31
                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                           Land Use Element
   Table 2.F: General Plan Build Out Employment
               Land Use             City     Sphere of Influence Total Number of Employees
   Other Employment               9,944               0                    9,944
   City Facilities
   Retail Employment                 0                0                      0
   Other Employment                 626               0                     626
   Special Planning Areas
   Retail Employment              1,162               0                    2,344
   Other Employment               4,539               0                    4,539
   Total Retail Employment         8,635             921                   9,556
   Total Other Employment         28,427            1,082                 29,509
   Total Employment               37,062            2,003                 39,065
Chapter 2.0                              Land Use Element                                  2-32
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                 Community Design Element
   3.0      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
   The Community Design Element serves several purposes that help to define the visual character
   desired for Loma Linda. The focus of this Element is to provide policy direction through verbal
   descriptions of appropriate design to guide future improvements, revitalization projects, and new
   development by private, non-profit, and City entities. This Element works in concert with the Land Use
   Element by taking the general design provisions closely related to land use, such as site layout, and
   providing further detail such as appropriate architectural style to reflect the Loma Linda community.
   The design policies contained within the text descriptions are further supplemented by photo
   examples that facilitate an understanding of appropriate development character for Loma Linda, in
   order to guide developers and design professionals. Another purpose of this Element is to identify
   opportunities to enhance the City’s existing built form and make suggestions regarding appropriate
   options for design improvements.
   Design should not be underestimated as merely a visual aesthetic, for community design can have
   many important implications. Positive design character can have the following benefits:
   x   Create a pleasant, functional, and organized environment that helps residents, workers, and
       visitors have a sense of well-being while in the community;
   x   Encourage residents, workers, and visitors to use businesses within the City by making
       commercial areas more attractive and functional;
   x   Provide good “wayfinding” to assist visitors in finding facilities and services within the community;
   x   Attract future development of a high quality by giving developers and new businesses the
       confidence that their investment in the community will be protected; and
   x   Visually reflect the quality of the community.
   The end result of the Community Design Element is to provide an understanding of the important
   positive effects that good design can have on a community, recognize the many positive features of
   Loma Linda’s existing development, identify opportunities for making changes to positively influence
   the Loma Linda’s appearance, and to provide clear guidance for future development that reflects the
   character of Loma Linda and the community’s vision for its built environment.
Chapter 3.0                              Community Design Element                                            3-1

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                               Community Design Element
   3.1      APPROPRIATE DESIGN OF NEW DEVELOPMENT
   New development must do more than just fit in with its surroundings; it needs to make a positive
   contribution to the community. As vacant land develops and under-utilized land experiences new
   development in the future, Loma Linda will require a vision and design parameters to serve as a
   guide for creating attractive and functional new development that reflects the community’s unique
   character. The overall vision for Loma Linda as it relates to the design quality of its built environment
   is based on the following goals:
   x   Create an image and sense of place that reflects the community’s present, past, and future
           Traditional values teamed with innovation
           Excellence and achievement
           Focus on health and well-being
           Agricultural heritage
   x   Ensure high quality and functionality of new development
   x   Convey a sense of vitality and create more “gathering places” within the community
   x   Make sound investments in Loma Linda’s built environment by promoting a timeless appearance
       in design so that the need for frequent renovations and remodels is alleviated.
   Appropriate site planning, building orientation, building scale, and architectural character depend on
   the type of development (e.g., pedestrian-oriented or “big box”) or the nature of the use (e.g.,
   commercial, business complex, industrial). The following categories address appropriate design of
   new development according to its type or nature of use (using the same name for the type/nature of
   use as used in the Land Use Element). For design of mixed-use developments (the appropriate mix
   of uses and locations are described in the Land Use Element), refer to the description and policies of
   Pedestrian Oriented Development in the case of “vertical mixed use” (i.e., different uses are mixed
   within the same multi-story building). For “horizontal mixed-use” (i.e., the different uses occur within
   separate adjacent buildings), refer to the respective use component of the development (e.g.,
   commercial, office, institutional). The design descriptions and policies within this Element are also
   supplemented by photo examples to facilitate an understanding of appropriate development character
   for Loma Linda and to guide developers and design professionals in designing new development.
   These photo examples are found at the end of the following descriptions and policies (Figure 3.1).
   3.1.1 Pedestrian-Oriented Development
   Pedestrian-oriented development is designed around the pedestrian, and facilitates walking and
   bicycling as a primary means of travel for short trips within the development area. The traditional
   small town “Main Street” is the prototype for modern pedestrian-oriented development, which
   provides a mix of land uses such as retail, offices, commercial services, and residential in the same
   building or in nearby buildings. This mix of uses helps to build the synergy that is necessary for
   successful pedestrian oriented development because it allows buildings to be in use 24 hours a day.
   Pedestrian-oriented development is typically characterized by the location of buildings close to
   streets, building architecture that is detailed and scaled to the pedestrian, and a variety of amenities
   (e.g., benches, fountains, awnings, plazas) in a form that is quite different from that of modern
   development that is designed around the car and that requires strict separation of different types of
   uses (e.g., residential, commercial).
Chapter 3.0                             Community Design Element                                            3-2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 When using mirrored glass, combine it with other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 materials, such as stucco and brick as shown here.
                                                                                                         Require varied rooflines such as
                                                                                                         in this example.                                                                                                 Large Office/Business Park
                These buildings use entry statements and
               architectural details to avoid a plain "box" look.
                                                                                                                      This building features a great
                                                                                                                     level of building articulation and
                                                                                                                     breaking up of mass.
                                        "Big Box" Development
                                                                                                                                                                          Provide amenities for workers such as this
                                                                                                                                                                          decorative water feature.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Use architectural design to break up the building mass,
                                                                                                  Design "convenience" development using architectural                                                                            like is done with these linked building components.
                                                                                                 elements with a traditional character such as these
                                                                                                 articulated brick walls and verdigris metal roof.
               Design hotels so that they have similarities to
              residences.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   On the front elevation, use architectural elements
                                                                                                               "Convenience" Development                                                                                           such as varied rooflines and windows.
     Hospitality Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Industrial
                                                                          Encourage service stations to use
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LINDA
                                                                         traditional building roofs, such as this                                                                                                                                          MA       C
                                                                         hipped roof with decorative cupola,                                                                                                                                              O                           A
                                                                        instead of flat canopies.
                                                                                                                                                                             This building uses a traditional stucco facade to
                                                                                                                                                                             screen the metal building behind.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ORNI A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CI TY OF L                                   LI F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAMPLES OF
     Require hotels and extended-stay hotels to use                                                                                                                                                                                                          APPROPRIATE DESIGN TO
    varied rooflines and "traditional" materials such                                                                                                                                                                                                          SE         N
   as these, rather than flat roofs and mirrored glass.                                                                                 When designing parking structures, use                                                                             GUIDE     G MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RVINNEW    DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                                                                       details such as these to make them look like                                                                       IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO                        70
                                                                                                                                       buildings more than parking.                                                                                             R P O R AT E D 1 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 3.1
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig3-1_Samples1of2.cdr 6/21/04
      SE
         RVING MAN
IN
   CO                    70
      R P O R AT E D 1 9
                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                 Community Design Element
   3.1.1.1      Pedestrian-Oriented Development Guiding Policy
   For pedestrian-oriented development (located within commercial or mixed-use land use designations
   as indicated in the Land Use Element) ensure that the features that make for attractive and functional
   pedestrian-oriented development are provided.
   3.1.1.2      Pedestrian-Oriented Development Implementing Policy
   a. Design buildings to be from one to three stories in height.
   b. Locate retail uses on the first floor in order to benefit from street activity and to generate activity
       themselves by providing convenient shopping opportunities and attractive window displays.
       Service uses, such as hair salons and dry cleaning drop-off/pick-up, should only be placed on the
       first floor if the interior tenant spaces are designed to present an attractive, active image that adds
       to the vitality of the street life.
   c.  Within horizontally mixed-use buildings, provide professional services offered directly to the public
       on the first floor with other office-based employment reserved office uses for the second floor of
       pedestrian-oriented buildings. Residential uses are appropriate on the second and third floors.
   d. Orient buildings so that they are always the primary element as seen from the street, as opposed
       to parking areas.
   e. Design streets to accommodate slow to moderate moving local traffic (e.g., two lanes maximum
       each direction) or close streets to provide for pedestrian use only. Thus, through traffic on
       arterials would be provide on the periphery of pedestrian oriented development.
   f.  Though pedestrian access is the focus, also provide convenient vehicular parking via nearby
       parking in an adjacent parking lot located to the side or rear of the building and/or on-street
       parking (where feasible considering traffic). Permit off-street parking standards to be met with a
       convenient off-site parking structure or lot that serves the area.
   g. Provide wide sidewalks/walkways for pedestrian circulation and bicycle lanes or paths for bicycle
       travel.
   h. Scale buildings to the human user and feature detail that is an appropriate level and scale for
       close up viewing.
   i.  Keep private residential areas on the upper floors of mixed-use buildings distinct from public
       spaces and public uses, providing separate entries where feasible.
   j.  Feature prominent display windows on the first floor of buildings with commercial and commercial
       service uses.
   k.  Employ awnings, covered archways, covered patios, arcades, or trees to provide shade and to
       offer protection from sun and rain.
   l.  Use traditional materials such as stucco, brick, stone, wood siding, terra cotta roof tiles, and
       wood-look shingles.
   m. Avoid the use of extremely bright or fluorescent hues (e.g., neon orange).
   n. Provide seating areas (e.g., benches, tables and chairs, low walled planters) and trash
       receptacles. These items should complement the building in style, material, and color.
   o. Encourage public open areas such as plazas that are designed for gathering and ancillary
       outdoor uses such as outdoor dining.
Chapter 3.0                                Community Design Element                                           3-5
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                  Community Design Element
   p. Provide abundant landscaping (e.g., street trees, walled planters, window boxes, and/or pots
       along the building) to add color, fragrance, and soften the appearance of the building. Plant
       materials and sizes should be appropriate to their placement.
   q. Design lighting so that it provides adequate levels of lighting for security and safety, and to create
       a “comfortable” atmosphere. Use lighting to highlight landscaping.
   r.  Place signs so pedestrians can easily see them.
   s.  Encourage the provision of amenities such as water features (e.g., fountains), public art, and
       enhanced paving (e.g., colored paving, special paving designs).
   t.  Incorporate appropriate design details, such as street furniture (e.g., benches, trash enclosures
       and receptacles), fencing, and placement of murals and sculpture in public locations.
   u. Utilize streetlights that are pedestrian-oriented, attractively designed, compatible in design with
       other street furniture, and provide adequate visibility and security.
   v.  Install “street furniture” (benches, bus shelters, planters, bike racks, trash receptacles, newspaper
       racks, water fountains, and bollards) within streetscapes to enhance the pedestrian experience
       and embellish pedestrian gathering places (places for sitting, meeting people, relaxing, people
       watching, etc.). It should be compatible with the streetscape theme, durable, easily maintained
       and easily replaced.
   w. The design and location of street furniture should avoid conflicts with driver sight lines and
       utilities.
   x.  As pedestrian furniture is both in the public right-of-way and on private property, the style and
       placement of furniture should be coordinated on public and private property, and should avoid
       blocking travel on the sidewalk.
   3.1.2 Auto-Oriented Commercial and Small Office Development
   The name of this type of development refers to its vehicular oriented design, not refer to the type of
   business conducted on the site. Thus, “auto-oriented” development does not refer to auto sales or
   auto service uses, but to businesses and development that are designed to be primarily accessed via
   the automobile (e.g., traditional suburban shopping centers, commercial, and office uses).
   Commercial/small office uses that are not specifically designed as pedestrian oriented development
   typically focus on the automobile when designing access, circulation patterns, building orientation,
   and level of architectural detail. The appropriate design of such auto-oriented development depends
   on whether it consists of small buildings adjacent to the street (e.g., a small building on a small lot or
   a “pad” building within a shopping center) or a shopping center with a mix of building sizes (up to
   approximately 60,000 square feet each) surrounding a central parking lot. The following policies
   address each of these situations.
   3.1.2.1     Guiding Policy for Auto-Oriented Commercial and Small Office Development
   For auto-oriented commercial and small offices (located within commercial, office, or mixed-use
   designations as indicated in the Land Use Element) promote designs that facilitate easy auto access
   and parking and create pleasing buildings that are easily visible from the street.
   3.1.2.2     Implementing Policies for Auto-Oriented Commercial and Small Office
               Development
   a. For commercial or small office development that is immediately adjacent to the street, place
       parking wherever feasible at the side of the building or at the rear of the building, or provide
Chapter 3.0                             Community Design Element                                             3-6

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                  Community Design Element
       berms or landscaping around the outside of parking lots to reduce their visual prominence from
       the adjacent street.
   b. For a building immediately adjacent to the street (i.e., no parking area intervening between the
       building and the street), design the building elevation facing the street so it is the main
       architectural focus. A building may place its main entrance adjacent to the parking lot; however,
       the elevation facing the street should still receive the main (or at least equal) architectural focus.
   c.  Place large-scale buildings that are on large lots so that they are set back from the street with a
       parking area in front. Place “pad” buildings at the perimeter of the parking area along the street to
       form a strong edge.
   d. When large-scale shopping centers are located on a street corner, angle the buildings placed
       near the corner to create space for a large landscape treatment facing the street.
   e. Avoid a large “sea of asphalt” parking lot that is visible from the street. Screen any areas of the
       parking lot visible from the street using shrubs, hedges, or low wall treatments.
   f.  Building elevations visible from the street should feature architectural elements and details of a
       scale that can be noticed from a passing vehicle.
   g. Feature a high level of building articulation and detail on the main entry elevation to make it easily
       identifiable.
   h. Employ detailed rooflines, windows on any street-adjacent building elevation, and architectural
       detail on all buildings.
   i.  Avoid the use of “franchise architecture” by requiring that buildings be specifically designed to
       meet the needs of the subject site, to complement adjacent buildings, and to exhibit an
       appropriate character for the building’s setting within Loma Linda.
   j.  Limit auto-oriented commercial/small office buildings to a maximum of three stories in height.
   k.  Avoid the use of extremely bright or fluorescent colors (e.g., neon orange).
   l.  Feature convenient access driveways for interior parking areas.
   m. Design parking lots to ensure safe and convenient circulation for both vehicles and pedestrians.
   n. Landscape the required front and side building setbacks using tree and plant palettes that
       combine materials in a strong design.
   o. Use plant materials of appropriate type (i.e., considering height and width of mature plants) and
       placement to complement the building orientation and architectural elements.
   p. Distribute landscape planters throughout the center and the parking lot so that landscaping
       highlights the building entries, provides shade for pedestrians and cars, and breaks up the visual
       mass of the asphalt parking lot.
   3.1.3 “Big Box” Development
   “Big box” development is a popular term used to describe large retail uses such as discount
   department stores and warehouse stores that typically occupy more than 60,000 square feet and
   often more than 100,000 square feet in a rectangular, single-story building. These buildings that
   require so much square footage can present design challenges and create a negative impact on the
   community’s built form if not designed appropriately. Thus, architectural design requires special
   attention to ensure a high quality appearance. Currently, the primary location of such development is
   outside of Loma Linda within the cities of San Bernardino and Redlands. However, as the area’s
   population expands, development of new large-scale commercial buildings can be expected. As
   discussed in the Land Use Element, appropriate locations for such development are within the
Chapter 3.0                             Community Design Element                                              3-7

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                  Community Design Element
   northeastern portion of the General Plan study area along California Avenue and Redlands
   Boulevard.
   3.1.3.1     “Big Box” Development Guiding Policy
   For “big box” development (located within commercial or mixed-use land use designations as
   indicated in the Land Use Element) ensure that site and building design create a high quality image
   that avoids a box-like building appearance
   3.1.3.2     “Big Box” Development Implementing Policies
   a. Design building placement, parking lot location, access and circulation, and landscaping as
        indicated for auto-oriented commercial development (excluding those policies applying only to
        small buildings adjacent to the street).
   b. Visually break up the building mass into a series of attached building components to prevent the
        look of a plain, rectangular building. When this is not feasible because of the interior layout
        required for the building, at a minimum, big box buildings should provide articulated and detailed
        roof lines, shallow relief of building walls, architectural elements such as towers or archways
        above the main building entry, and variation in colors and materials.
   c.   Place trees and/or vines on trellis structures along, and immediately adjacent to, front or side wall
        elevations.
   d. Generally limit building heights for big box development to one story; however, two story
        elements may be placed at the main entry of a building.
   3.1.4 Hospitality Development
   Hospitality development includes uses such as hotels, which may have ancillary services such as
   restaurants and meeting rooms, and extended stay hotels (which typically feature “suites” that provide
   kitchen facilities and living areas in addition to sleeping areas).
   3.1.4.1     Guiding Policies for Hospitality Development
   Design hotels and extended stay hotels (as allowed within commercial or mixed-use areas as
   indicated in the Land Use Element) to evoke a residential feel (i.e., through roofline forms, choice of
   materials), in contrast to a hi-tech, high rise look.
   3.1.4.2     Implementing Policies for Hospitality Development
   a. Feature enhanced architectural elements (e.g., tower, projecting arch, columns, pilasters) on the
        main building entry. Special exterior treatments may be provided for restaurant and meeting room
        entrances.
   b. Design roofs to be gabled or hipped styles in order to further convey a residential aspect; flat
        roofs are not encouraged.
   c.   Distribute landscape planters throughout the development and the parking lot so that landscaping
        highlights the building entries, provides shade for pedestrians and cars, and breaks up the visual
        mass of the asphalt parking lot.
   d. Provide permitting requirements within the zoning ordinance that would permit consideration and
        approval of buildings taller than three stories in height in appropriate locations.
Chapter 3.0                              Community Design Element                                            3-8

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                  Community Design Element
   e. Select exterior materials that are typical in traditional residential construction, such as wood
       siding (or wood-look vinyl siding), brick, stucco, terra cotta roof tiles, and wood-look roof shingles
       (i.e., fire resistant materials made to look like wood).
   f.  Avoid the use of extremely bright or fluorescent colors (e.g., neon orange).
   3.1.5 “Convenience” Development
   There are many types of development today that provide for modern necessities, but that can pose
   design dilemmas because of their unconventional layouts or building forms; if not properly designed,
   such “convenience” uses as service stations, car washes, fast food outlets and parking structures
   could become design eyesores. Such uses are appropriate along Barton Road only under limited
   circumstances, where they are not the primary use of a site, and visually secondary to a larger,
   permitted use.
   3.1.5.1      Guiding Policies for “Convenience” Development
   Design “convenience” development (as allowed within commercial or mixed-use areas as indicated in
   the Land Use Element) to be of a high quality and visually compatible with traditional types of
   development (such as those that feature fully enclosed buildings).
   3.1.5.2      Implementing Policies for “Convenience” Development
   a. When circulation patterns allow, orient development so that building walls abut the street in a
       “reverse” layout (i.e., turn their “back” to the street) so that the operations/mechanics of the
       business are hidden or de-emphasized through placement (i.e., away from the street) or through
       use of screening techniques (i.e., walls).
   b. Employ architectural details and articulation (e.g., pop-outs, recesses, pilasters) to avoid blank
       walls.
   c.  In the case of parking structures, install landscaping along and on building walls (e.g., climbing
       vines) to visually break up the mass of the structure.
   d. When landscaped setbacks are required, they should consist of a mix of plant materials, which
       should include species of trees, shrubs, and groundcover. The mix of plant types is intended to
Chapter 3.0                              Community Design Element                                            3-9

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                 Community Design Element
       provide greater visual interest than would result from landscaping consisting of only shrubs or
       only groundcovers.
   e. When landscaping of setbacks is not required, movable landscape planters shall be provided
       throughout the site wherever feasible in order to visually break up the expanse of impervious
       materials.
   f.  Permit neon colors in conjunction with fast food when part of a recognized design theme.
   3.1.6 Large Office and Business Park Development
   This type of development can consist of a single large building, such as an office or “R & D” building,
   but can also be characterized by multiple buildings organized into a “campus” facility. This type of
   development usually has large landscaped setbacks, whether the access is from a major corridor or
   from a smaller network of streets.
   3.1.6.1    Guiding Policies for Large Office and Business Park Development
   Design large office and business park buildings (as allowed within the office, business park, health
   care, and mixed-use designations as indicated in the Land Use Element) to create a unified,
   professional business image.
   3.1.6.2    Implementing Policies for Large Office and Business Park Development
   a. Site the building so that when viewed from the street, the major focus is on landscaping and an
       attractive building elevation(s) instead of a “sea of asphalt” parking lot.
   b. Site individual buildings/developments to acknowledge and contribute to the business park as a
       whole. Refrain from siting buildings so that they turn their “back” on other buildings.
   c.  Design a business complex located at the corner of a major street so that it is either anchored
       with a small building (e.g., an ancillary service use), the building is stepped or embellished with a
       major landscape entry treatment.
   d. Limit buildings within business parks to a maximum of five stories in height, permitting buildings of
       three or more stories only at major intersections and at the center of development projects to
       function as visual landmarks within the community.
   e. Employ architectural detail and rhythm using patterns (e.g., window design/placement/ repetition)
       to give a human scale to large buildings by reducing large blank areas on the façade.
Chapter 3.0                             Community Design Element                                           3-10

                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                   Community Design Element
   f.   Visually break up buildings into several components and/or use a mix of materials to further
        reduce the appearance of bulk.
   g. If mirrored glass is used, accent it with more traditional materials such as brick, stone, or stucco.
        The amount of mirrored glass used should be limited to a maximum of 70 percent of each
        building elevation.
   h. Improve the appearance of parking areas by using landscaping and/or building placement to
        screen them from the street. Design parking lots as clusters of spaces rather than large parking
        areas with row upon row of parking stalls.
   i.   Provide abundant landscaping at street edges, parking lot and building entries, and throughout
        the parking lot so that it provides shade for pedestrians and cars and breaks up the visual mass
        of the asphalt parking lot.
   3.1.7 Institutional Development
   Religious assembly facilities (e.g., churches, temples), schools (e.g., LLU, Loma Linda Academy, and
   Bryn Mawr Elementary), and hospital facilities (e.g., Veterans Administration Hospital) comprise the
   institutional category. The City of Loma Linda acknowledges that some uses within the institutional
   category may be outside of the jurisdictional control of the City and that the corresponding public
   entities might not be required to follow the City’s development standards. In such cases, the following
   design policies are intended to serve as a guideline for the public agency. It is also recognized that
   institutional uses are unique, often with special architectural requirements and style preferences that
   reflect the buildings’ users and sometimes their religious beliefs; therefore, photo examples of
   appropriate building styles for Loma Linda are not specifically provided within the Community Design
   Element. However, the following policies address general layout and design for institutional uses.
   3.1.7.1     Guiding Policies for Institutional Development
   For institutional development (located within institutional or mixed use designations as indicated in the
   Land Use Element) ensure that site and building design reduce traffic and circulation conflicts,
   minimize disruption to adjacent sensitive uses, and promote high quality architectural design.
   3.1.7.2     Implementing Policies for Institutional Development
   a. Provide vehicular access via a collector road, instead of from an arterial, wherever feasible.
        Vehicular access points should be consolidated and designed with proper width and turning radii
        to alleviate impacts to traffic flow.
   b. When located within or adjacent to residential areas, facilitate pedestrian access from off-site.
   c.   Avoid impacts to adjacent sensitive uses (e.g., residences, hospitals) through proper design that
        limits effects from noise and glare (i.e., through site layout, building orientation, circulation/parking
        layout, noise attenuation, landscape buffering, and lighting design/location).
   d. Design the various buildings within an institutional facility so that the architectural style, materials,
        and colors are complementary.
   e. Feature architectural details that relate to the building’s scale and acknowledge pedestrian
        entryways through the use of detailed rooflines, enhanced entry statements for principal
        buildings, and building ornamentation.
   f.   Design access to schools with sufficient staging areas such that vehicles waiting to drop off or
        pick up a student do not block travel lanes on public streets.
   g. Encourage the use of architectural elements that define the main entrance of buildings and
        organize space at the ground plane (e.g., arcades, colonnades, and covered walkways) is
Chapter 3.0                                Community Design Element                                             3-11

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                  Community Design Element
       encouraged. Such elements help to reinforce the pedestrian scale of the building and contribute
       to its overall low-rise character. Ensure that the site design of institutional uses distinguishes
       between primary and secondary uses within the site.
   h. Encourage the grouping of buildings or the configuration of a building to create courtyards,
       plazas, or seating areas where people can gather.
   3.1.8 Industrial Development
   This category includes facilities          encompassing    light   industrial, manufacturing,   assembly,
   warehousing, and distribution uses.
   3.1.8.1    Guiding Policies for Industrial Development
   Require that industrial facilities (as allowed within industrial or mixed-use designations as indicated in
   the Land Use Element) are aesthetically pleasing as well as functional.
   3.1.8.2    Implementing Policies for Industrial Development
   a. If pre-engineered metal buildings are used, provide a veneer (e.g., stucco, concrete, brick, or
       simulated stone) or architectural accent such as windows on at least 80 percent of building
       elevations that are visible from public streets. The design objective is to provide the visual
       appearance of traditional construction compatible with the design quality expected of other new
       buildings in the community.
   b. Locate structures that are to be used for ancillary storage at the side or rear of the property where
       they are not visible from public streets.
   c.  Design ancillary storage structures that are visible from areas accessible to the public to be
       consistent with the main building by the use of consistent or complementary architectural
       massing, rooflines, and materials. Such storage structures must be fully enclosed, and have a
       fully covered roof.
   d. Provide landscaping within all required setbacks. If turf is used, it should be mixed with other
       plant materials such as trees and/or shrubs in order to create a high quality appearance.
   e. Avoid the use of extremely bright or fluorescent colors (e.g., neon orange).
   f.  Avoid the use of unpainted, bare metal and highly polished metal materials.
   3.1.9 Residential Development
   Residential development within Loma Linda will feature a variety of built forms, including traditional
   single-family neighborhoods, upper-end rural hillside residential development, attached residential
   development condominiums, town homes, and multi-level apartments.
   3.1.9.1    Guiding Policy for Residential Development
   Ensure quality of design for single-family and multifamily residential development in order to create
   and preserve functional and attractive residential neighborhoods that embody the strengths and
   accomplishments of the community and to preserve the economic investment of new and existing
   individual property owners.
   3.1.9.2    Implementing Policies for Residential Development
   a. Neighborhood streets should be quiet, safe, and amenable to bicycle and pedestrian use.
Chapter 3.0                              Community Design Element                                           3-12
                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                 Community Design Element
   b. Locate parks and recreational areas as close to the center of the neighborhoods they serve as
       feasible.
   c.  Provide individual neighborhoods with pathways and open spaces that connect residences to
       school and recreational facilities, thereby facilitating pedestrian and bicycle access.
   d. Create a distinct character for each residential neighborhood through the use of neighborhood
       signage, streetscapes and landscape buffers, a palette of various complementary architectural
       styles/materials, a complementary variety of dwelling setbacks and placement on the lot, and lot
       patterns that reflect the existing topography.
   e. Provide quality design and visual interest within a development by alternating the massing,
       layout, architectural details, accent materials, and colors so that adjacent dwelling units are not
       nearly identical.
   f.  To reduce architectural massing, orient the shortest and lowest side of a corner residential
       dwelling unit toward the side street.
   g. Where feasible, orient garages so that garage doors do not directly face the street (e.g., use of
       alleys, “side-on” garage configuration, and side loaded corner lots). Garage doors should be set
       back from the front face of the house so that residential tracts are more pedestrian/neighborhood
       friendly.
   h. Within multifamily developments, cluster residential buildings around open space and/or
       recreational features.
   i.  Design the common space associated with each cluster of multifamily dwelling units to provide
       differences in size, dimensions, grading, amenities, and site furniture in order to create variety.
   j.  In higher density projects with tuck-under parking and/or opposing garages, avoid the monotony
       of long parking corridors by turning individual units, staggering parking areas, and/or using an
       interesting variety of landscaping within parking areas.
   k.  Provide each unit of a multifamily development project with some unique elements to create a
       sense of place and identity. Individual units within a multifamily development project should be
       distinguishable from each other, and should have separate entrances and entry paths, where
       feasible.
   l.  Where residential infill development is proposed, ensure that the scale and massing of dwellings
       as well as the architectural character of new development is compatible with the existing
       residential neighborhood.
       x    Setbacks for new residential units should continue the prevailing setback pattern, unless a
            different setback standard is required.
       x    New development should incorporate representative characteristics of the surrounding area
            when the area exhibits a positive, distinctive site layout and/or established pattern.
   m. Structures that are historic or are otherwise distinctive should be preserved and incorporated into
       the design of new development.
   n. Variation in setbacks should be provided within single-family residential neighborhoods. Within
       multifamily developments, buildings should be oriented to avoid instances where the living spaces
       of one unit face the living spaces of another and significantly reduce indoor privacy.
   o. Ensure that applications for new single-family or multifamily residential projects require the
       submittal of site plans, elevations, and color and material boards.
   p. Residential developments should be oriented toward major streets so as not to give the
       impression of an enclave/compound.
Chapter 3.0                             Community Design Element                                           3-13

                                                                                                       Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                   Community Design Element
   q. Promote and facilitate the development of custom and semi-custom home projects for move-up
        housing.
   r.   Reduced front setbacks should be encouraged with mixed housing types. Density in these
        developments should not be tiered but integrated throughout.
   s.   Implement traffic calming on residential streets subject to high speed through travel in order to
        improve neighborhood livability1. Traffic calming techniques such as narrower than standard
        streets, speed humps, neck-downs and traffic diverters, rough-paved crosswalks, roundabouts,
        and planted median islands at the entries into neighborhoods can successfully reduce
        undesirable through traffic within residential neighborhoods.
   t.   The maximum residential building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
   u. The minimum lot size for a single-family residence, regardless of density bonuses, shall not be
        less than seven thousand, two hundred (7,200) square feet in any planning area or zone.
   3.2      DESIGN OF NEW DEVELOPMENT TO PROMOTE ADAPTIVE REUSE
            AND PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC FEATURES
   Loma Linda has a number of structures, features, and other cultural resources that warrant adaptive
   reuse and/or preservation (or rehabilitation or re-creation, when appropriate) so that they are not
   “lost” as the community continues to grow. Examples of such elements include the large residences
   (currently or formerly) associated with the citrus groves and buildings from the early years of the
   University. Other long-time features within the community that have taken on the character of local
   landmarks include the rows of palm trees along Citrus Avenue and the many remaining citrus groves.
   3.2.1 Guiding Policy for Adaptive Reuse and Preservation with New Development
   Employ adaptive reuse of structures that have local historic value because of their scientific,
   aesthetic, educational, cultural, architectural, or historical significance in order to incorporate them
   1
        "Traffic calming" refers to programs designed to increase the compatibility of roadways with their surrounding
        environment, as well as increase their carrying capacity, by creating a steady flow of traffic at slower speeds. By calming
        (slowing) traffic, less space is needed between automobiles to maintain safe stopping distances, thereby allowing more
        vehicles to use roadways without requiring widening. The effect of traffic calming is to create a safer, quieter environment
        for adjacent land uses.
        Traffic calming techniques that may be incorporated into the City’s circulation system include narrower than existing
        standard streets; speed humps; roundabouts; and neck-downs. Many cities have found that the traditional 40-foot wide
        residential street provides more pavement than is necessary, and have gone to narrower sections (typically 32 to 36 feet,
        depending on whether on-street parking is provided along one or both sides of the street.
        Speed humps are raised roadway pavement areas running across the entire width of a street that normally have a height
        of three to four inches and a length of approximately twelve feet. Speed humps represent a lesser risk to vehicles than do
        traditional speed bumps, and have the advantage of being largely self-enforcing and or creating a visual impression, real
        or perceived, that a street is not intended for high speeds or "through" traffic.
        Neck-downs consist of landscaped islands that are used to either narrow down a roadway, or to define a parking lane on
        either side of a roadway. They can be used to define entries into local residential neighborhoods, thereby discouraging
        through traffic. They can also be used to create subtle changes in direction along existing roadways by placing
        landscaping within existing parking lanes on one side of the street, and providing parking and neck-downs on alternating
        sides of the street. Neck-downs may also be appropriate within commercial and office areas to enhance the streetscape
        and slow down traffic. Traffic diverters are physical barriers across a portion of a street, generally constructed in the same
        manner as raised medians that are designed to prevent through traffic from entering a neighborhood at an intersection,
        while permitting local traffic to exit the neighborhood at the same intersection.
        In some cases, crosswalks constructed of rough paving materials, such as stamped concrete or split face block, can be
        used to reduce the speed of traffic across an intersection.
        A roundabout is an at-grade intersection having a one-way circular roadway around a curbed central island. Sometimes
        called traffic circles or rotaries, a properly design roundabout provides for the safe and efficient movement of people and
        goods while preserving, enhancing, or reclaiming the adjacent neighborhood's livability.
Chapter 3.0                                        Community Design Element                                                          3-14

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                Community Design Element
   into any new adjacent development and prevent their demolition. Also, preserve other physical
   elements that are cultural resources by incorporating them (either in their entirety or through a
   representative sample/re-creation if it would carry the same merit) into any future development of the
   area.
   3.2.1.1     Implementing Policies for Adaptive Reuse and Preservation with New
               Development
   a. Retain the historic and architectural integrity when pursuing adaptive reuse of buildings, while
        aiming to meet the design policies set forth within the applicable category of the intended new
        use (i.e., auto-oriented commercial) to the greatest extent feasible.
   b. Sensitively site and design new adjacent buildings in order to preserve historic buildings, allow for
        viable access to them, and create a cohesive architectural character that reflects, and is
        compatible with, the historic building.
   c.   Preserve the character of the existing citrus groves by preserving and incorporating strategically
        located existing trees or rows of existing trees into new development (i.e., in the form of
        landscaped setbacks and/or landscape treatments). Having accomplished this, the remaining
        grove may be removed.
   d. Include new citrus trees of a hearty variety and/or other species that are similar to resemble citrus
        trees within appropriate new or re-landscaped City rights-of-way.
   e. Encourage private development to use new citrus trees as landscape materials on any private
        property when feasible.
   f.   Preserve the rows of palm trees located along Citrus Avenue east of California Street and
        incorporate the trees into future development of the area.
   3.3      STRENGTHENING DESIGN WITHIN THE EXISTING COMMUNITY
   There are many opportunities within the community to make design improvements within existing
   development. Following are specific areas or functions within Loma Linda that could be improved by
   adding or changing specific design elements to achieve better design. These areas or functions have
   been selected because they can be improved through minor modifications, and do not require
   extensive renovation or rebuilding to make a visible improvement. Later in this section, samples of
   appropriate signage and design elements that can be used to remedy the following needs are
   discussed and illustrated.
   3.3.1 Places to Strengthen Design
   The following discussion identifies locations throughout the community where improvements in existing
   design and appearance could be made with a reasonable, modest level of effort. This discussion is
   supplemented by the accompanying photos shown in Figure 3.2. The discussion is concluded with
   policy statements giving direction and assigning responsibility for design improvements.
   3.3.1.1     City Entry Signs
   There are existing signs placed at the City boundaries identifying the City of Loma Linda. However,
   these signs should be re-oriented to be perpendicular to the vehicles traveling on the street so that
   they can be more easily read. The message on the back side of the signs needs to be deleted or
   altered, because it is confusing since it actually announces the City of Loma Linda as drivers are
   leaving the city limits. The appearance of the entry signs should be made more attractive by adding
   landscaping. Plant materials are needed to “soften” the hard surfaces created by the asphalt
   pavement, stamped concrete island, and hard edged stucco sign.
Chapter 3.0                             Community Design Element                                          3-15

                     Landscaping of City entry signs would create a “softer” image. Sign text should                                     A landscaped median should replace the plastic delineator cones on the
                    be deleted on the back side or changed to an appropriate farewell message.                                          roadway bridge over the creek and aesthetically pleasing bridge railings
                                                                                                                                       should be installed.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      An enhanced entry sign for the VA Medical Center would not only better mark its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     location for visitors, but would also add a pleasant visual element along Barton Road.
                                                                        Improved visual elements are needed at this intersection to better identify
                                                                       the route to the University facilities on the mound and the direction of the
                                                                      Medical Center and Childrens Hospital.
                                                                                                                                                         The Campus Plaza needs more noticeable visual elements and/or signage;
                                                                                                                                                       its services can easily be missed by visitors.
                                                                                                                            The junction of University Avenue and Campus Street creates an opportunity to
                                                                                                                           identify the west edge of the University, such as through the use of signage
                                                                                                                          and/or other visual elements.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Some large centers need improved methods for directing customers,
    The edges of the University, such as the intersection of Stewart and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         including readable vehicular directional signs.
   Anderson Streets, should be defined using signage and visual elements
  to enhance the campus image and help orient drivers and visitors.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LINDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MA       C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ORNI A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CI TY OF L                                       LI F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PLACES TO STRENGTHEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COMMUNITY DESIGN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RVING MAN
                              Much of the signage associated with the University’s Medical Center and                                                                   Street edges, especially at the perimeter of commercial centers, should                              IN
                             Children’s Hospital could be improved in appearance.                                                                                      convey a pleasant image through the use of landscaping.                                                    CO                        70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R P O R AT E D 1 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 3.2
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig3-2_Strengthen Design.cdr 6/21/04

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                 Community Design Element
   3.3.1.2     Anderson Street at San Timoteo Creek
   The overpass on Anderson Street at San Timoteo Creek provides an opportunity to make a positive
   design statement. The existing white delineator cones in the center of the bridge need to be replaced
   with a decorative median. The guardrails adjacent to the sidewalk require redesign to be a decorative
   feature that is attractive to passing motorists. Besides creating a pleasant visual statement, such
   improvements would help visitors assess their location on the street (i.e., at the creek) and establish a
   recognizable visual landmark that could be used in wayfinding.
   3.3.1.3     Loma Linda University and Surrounding Area
   Loma Linda University (LLU) is an important entity in the community and should be easily
   recognizable to create a strong sense of place within the community and to help visitors with
   wayfinding. There are several key locations within LLU that need to be made more visually prominent.
   Also, the routes to major destinations should be more clearly identified.
   The intersection of Anderson and Stewart Streets should feature design elements to make an entry
   statement that identifies LLU. Appropriate types of design elements could include a vertically oriented
   pillar type sign on one or both sides of Anderson Street or an archway sign that spans the street. The
   design element should be large in size since this location forms a main entry into LLU and should
   avoid a horizontally oriented ground monument that might be obscured by auto traffic. Although
   design, materials, and colors should be somewhat traditional in keeping with the character of LLU, the
   design element should be easily noticeable by passing motorists. This location would also be
   appropriate for a “reader board” type of sign that could convey changeable messages. Landscaping
   should be designed to form a visual foundation at the base of the element and to complement the
   design element by further adding visual appeal.
   The intersection of Anderson and Mound Streets is in need of new design elements and signage to
   assist in wayfinding, clearly indicating the route to Loma Linda University Medical Center (LLUMC) as
   well as the direction to the University facilities on the mound. The current sign at this location contains
   too much information and consists of small lettering, which together make it very difficult for motorists
   to read. Signs should be more prominent in scale and color and should keep text simple. Appropriate
   design elements do not have to be limited to signs; for example, public art or colorful, pole-mounted
   flags/banners placed on a corner could give needed visual character to this location. And such
   elements, even though they may lack written messages, can serve as visual landmarks that can be
   referenced when directing visitors within the community.
   The entryway into the Campus Plaza commercial center from Anderson Street should be made more
   easily identifiable using new design elements and/or signage. The size and color of the current sign
   make it extremely difficult for visitors to identify the commercial area, which could meet their shopping
   and service needs, especially while visiting the nearby medical uses. Re-design of the parking lot
   layout and on-site circulation would also visually and functionally improve the shopping area. Careful
   placement of walls or other screening such as trees along the rear of buildings visible from the interior
   of the parking area would also make this small center more pleasing. (The long-term goal for major
   renovation/new development of this area is discussed within the Mixed Use section of the Land Use
   Element.)
   The edges of the University, such as the west boundary along Campus Street, should be clearly
   marked through the use of design elements in order to create an identifiable LLU district. Appropriate
   design elements include banners that can be mounted on existing light poles or new flag poles
   featuring flags with a theme or LLU emblem. Monument signs can also be placed at prominent
   corners, as long their placement insures good visibility, considering that traffic may serve as an
   obstruction. Themed bollards or small pylon elements can also be used in a series at key LLU
Chapter 3.0                              Community Design Element                                            3-17

                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                   Community Design Element
   boundaries to create a visual identity. Where buildings are clearly visible from the LLU edges, building
   mounted signs or flags can portray a logo or identifiable theme. A wide variety of design elements
   and materials (e.g., stone, brick, stucco, painted wood, fabric) would be appropriate and provide
   latitude for meeting budget and logistical constraints. The ultimate design of style, materials, and
   colors should generally be traditional to reflect the existing University character and provide a longer
   life span from a style perspective. Care should be taken to also avoid design combinations that would
   be so conservative and bland that the design elements would fail to be noticed.
   Better wayfinding for the University’s facilities is needed, as most of the current signs are difficult to
   read because of poor placement, obstruction from foliage, sign size and orientation, text size, and/or
   fading. Replacement signs should be part of a new comprehensive sign program that studies sign
   location and design to improve readability, especially from a distance to better guide motorists.
   Inclusion of pedestrian directional signage should also be considered for the LLU campus. New
   wayfinding signs should be complementary to the design of other new elements such as LLU entry
   signs and boundary markers.
   3.3.1.4      Jerry L. Pettis Memorial Veterans Medical Center (VA Medical Center)
   Because the VA Medical Center is a significant facility within the Loma Linda community and the
   region, the City should work with the medical center to encourage the installation of a strong design
   element and improved signage to identify the facility from Barton Road. The existing signage is
   utilitarian in its design and is difficult to read because of its size and placement. The city street sign
   hanging from the traffic signal arm currently provides the only clear signage for the Medical Center.
   This important community landmark deserves more attractive signage to provide good wayfinding and
   to create a pleasant visual landmark along Barton Road that symbolizes the Medical Center. The
   landscaping surrounding the medical center makes for a beautiful setting, which could serve as an
   impetus for equally attractive signage that coordinates with this landscaping.
   3.3.1.5      Commercial Centers
   Existing commercial centers within the community need to ensure that they present an attractive
   landscaped perimeter. This will serve many purposes: attract positive attention from motorists, portray
   an image of quality and forecast a pleasant shopping experience, and create a positive impression of
   the community as viewed from major roadways. Landscaping should create a consistent image that
   extends around the entire edge of the commercial center and is complemented by related
   landscaping patterns and materials placed throughout the parking area to soften the hard image of
   asphalt and provide shade.
   Also, signage within the centers needs to help patrons find the services that they seek. This should be
   done with clear, attractive building mounted signs. If existing centers are large and contain many uses that
   are not visible from the main vehicular entries, free standing monument signs should be used to identify
   tenants, ensuring that text is large enough to read from a vehicle and that arrows are clear.
   In well-designed centers, patrons are guided by many visual cues, although they may not even be
   consciously aware of them. Appropriate use of building colors/materials and landscaping can help to
   create a more organized pattern that can guide customers to where they want to go and create a
   pleasant appearance from the street. For example, retail and office areas within a larger center
   should use different complementary building colors or materials to distinguish these functions.
   Patrons should be guided to building entries that can not easily be seen from the main parking areas
   by using colorful landscaping to lead them to distinct walkways. Proper location of landscaping and
   selection of plant materials to serve specific functions can guide patrons by identifying primary
   circulation routes and highlighting and delineating specific areas (e.g., anchor tenants, clusters of
Chapter 3.0                               Community Design Element                                           3-18

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                 Community Design Element
   boutique shops, office suites) within a center. For example, rows of tall palms can delineate main
   drive aisles through parking lots and trees can be used to frame buildings or groups of buildings.
   3.3.1.6    Guiding Policy regarding Places to Strengthen Design
   Make design improvements, replace older design elements that have become unattractive or non-
   functional, and add new design elements where possible to help improve the appearance and
   function of existing development.
   3.3.1.7    Implementing Policies regarding Places to Strengthen Design
   a. Make revisions to the existing City entry signs by adding landscaping, deleting or changing the
       message that is visible on the back of the sign (e.g., “thanks for visiting Loma Linda”), and re-
       orienting the sign placement when the latter is feasible.
   b. Enhance the bridge on Anderson Street over the San Timoteo Creek by adding a decorative
       median (e.g., stamped concrete, monument sign, landscaping that meets the technical
       requirements since the location is part of a bridge) in place of the plastic cones. Also, make the
       bridge a decorative visual feature.
   c.  Work with LLU to encourage the addition of entry signage elements, better identification of the
       commercial center on University property, visually define the edges of the campus, and improve
       wayfinding.
   d. Work with the VA Medical Center to replace the existing signage with a visually attractive signage
       element that creates a landmark that is visible from Barton Road.
   e. Develop a design renovation program to encourage private property owners to implement design
       improvements. Provide financial incentives (funded by grant money) to participants. Streamline
       the City approval and permit process and/or designate a single point of contact for program
       participants to serve as a liaison between relevant city departments.
   f.  Develop a priority task list for design improvements that fall within the responsibilities of the City.
       Identify the relevant department(s) and the budget source for design improvements.
   g. Encourage landscaping along Barton Road that is cohesive and compatible with the community
       theme (Loma Linda University Medical Center, Veterans Medical Center, City of Loma Linda).
   3.3.2 Design Elements to Improve Community Design
   Loma Linda has many design options to improve the visual identity of the community, build a stronger
   sense of place, improve functionality, and aid visitors in easily finding services that they seek within
   the city. The following section describes some of these design elements and design tools. Figure 3.3
   graphically illustrates design options that have the potential to be customized to enhance the
   community of Loma Linda. The policies regarding these design tools are stated at the end of the
   section. As evident in the policies, it is the intent of this General Plan that the City encourage private
   property owners and non-profit institutions to employ such design elements. It is also the intent that
   the City pursue such improvements when they are within its jurisdictional responsibility.
   3.3.2.1    Monument Signs
   New or enhanced monument signs could be used to identify locations and to make an attractive
   visual statement in existing institutional uses, public street right-of-ways, public facilities, and other
   non-commercial uses (this discussion is not intended to address commercial signage that serves
   primarily as advertisement). Entry monument signs can identify a single key building or can be used
   as a series of consistent signs to identify related areas. Traditionally styled signs would be the most
Chapter 3.0                             Community Design Element                                            3-19

                                                                                                         Landscaping
                                                                                                         Public Art
                                                                                                                                        LINDA
                                                                                                                                     MA       C
                                                                                                                                    O                               A
                                                                                   Directional Signage
                                                                                                                                          City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                            ORNI A
                                                                                                                       CI TY OF L                                       LI F
                                                                                                                                          DESIGN ELEMENTS TO
                                                                                                                                            IMPROVE EXISTING
                                                                                                                                           SE
                                                                                                                                             RVING MAN
                                                                                                                                           COMMUNITY   DESIGN
                                                                                                                                    IN
                                                                                                                                         CO                        70
                                                                                                                                              R P O R AT E D 1 9
                                                                                                                                                           Figure 3.3
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig3-3_improve ex design 1of2.cdr 6/21/04
      SE
         RVING MAN
IN
   CO                    70
      R P O R AT E D 1 9
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                  Community Design Element
   consistent with the character of the community. There is a range of appropriate materials, including
   stone, brick, stucco, and wood. Monument signs are enhanced when accompanied by landscaping,
   especially bright colored flowering plants at the base or taller species with interesting shapes placed
   behind the sign in order to attract attention.
   3.3.2.2    Large-Scale Signs
   Large-scale signs/design elements are appropriate for large institutional and large medical uses (e.g.,
   LLU, LLUMC/CH, Veterans Medical Center), when used at one or two key locations per use, such as
   at the corner of Anderson and Stewart Streets and/or at the corner of Anderson Street and Barton
   Road. Large-scale signage that includes a “reader board” or changeable copy could not only identify
   the University, but could convey major announcements in a timely manner. The placement of large-
   scale signs should ensure that they are easily visible from passing vehicles. If a reader board or
   changeable copy is used, locations where vehicles are often stopped, such as at a traffic signal, are
   most appropriate so that persons in vehicles have the opportunity to safely read the messages.
   Appropriate materials for large-scale signs are similar to those for monument signs, as discussed
   above. Reader boards or changeable copy signs typically require the use of plastic materials, which
   would be appropriate if the overall design of the sign maintains a high quality, conservative look.
   3.3.2.3    Elements to Identify Boundaries
   Small, repeating design elements can be used to identify boundaries and establish districts, such as
   LLU or pedestrian oriented districts. Appropriate design elements include pole-mounted flags, street
   light-mounted banners, building mounted signs, and bollards. Such elements could feature a logo or
   create a color scheme. A high quality look should be created by taking into account the height and
   scale of adjacent development when selecting the size of new flags/banners in order to ensure that
   they do not end up being too small to be readily visible or so massive that they look awkward.
   Materials, colors, and style of flags/banners and associated poles or light fixtures should also be
   consistent with the location and character where they will be used. Placement of these design
   elements should avoid blocking vehicular lines of sight, yet should be highly visible.
   3.3.2.4    Directional Signage
   Appropriately placed off-site directional signage is important for providing good wayfinding to key
   locations within the community, including LLU, medical centers/hospitals, public facilities, or locations
   such as downtown districts. (Such off-site signs are not appropriate for other types of land uses, such
   as individual commercial uses.) On-site directional signs can be useful for locating individual
   business tenants in large commercial, office, or business park uses. This type of design element can
   also create an image through its design style, materials, and colors. Vehicular directional signage that
   uses large lettering and reduces the amount of text is the most readable. Design characteristics can
   also help to make a sign easily readable, such as using separate color blocks or horizontal lines to
   differentiate lines of text, employing a consistent pattern for the layout of text and arrows, and placing
   adequate space between lines of text. Pedestrian directional signage can contain more detailed
   information and maps, since readers can easily stop to gather the information that they need.
   Directional signage should be placed in prominent locations, especially where decisions need to be
   made at divergent routes.
   3.3.2.5    Landscaping
   Landscaping can be associated with community design because it can make an environment more
   visually attractive, help to define and organize the city’s built form, and convey a sense of character.
   Landscaping can visually soften and break up large expanses of hard materials such as streets and
   parking lots. It can add visual interest to blank walls and reduce the appearance of bulk in large buildings.
Chapter 3.0                               Community Design Element                                            3-22

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                 Community Design Element
   A consistent landscape palette can unify disparate architectural styles and materials. Landscaping can
   also provide visual interest by creating color contrasts to enliven monochromatic building colors.
   Well organized plant palettes that create different themes can help to differentiate major city streets
   and provide visual transitions between different areas of the community, such as commercial and
   residential areas, through the landscaping of street medians and parkways. Appropriate selection and
   placement of plant materials can help visitors find their way by defining an individual site by
   highlighting parking and building entries, delineating vehicular and pedestrian circulation routes, and
   identifying property boundaries.
   Plant materials that are well suited to the Loma Linda climate are preferable, and help to create a
   character that is reflective of the community and its natural environment. Landscaping can also reflect
   and help preserve the City’s heritage by including plants typically grown for agricultural purposes,
   such as orange trees, within landscaped medians, parkways, and development whenever feasible.
   3.3.2.6      Public Art
   Public art can enhance the aesthetics of an area or serve as a landmark to facilitate wayfinding
   through the community and should be encouraged and promoted. Public art is appropriate for use in
   institutional, commercial, office, business park, and public facilities. The theme and style of public
   artwork, which includes murals among other art forms, should be meaningful to the community and
   related to themes such as health, the citrus industry, religion, and family.
   3.3.2.7      Guiding Policy regarding Design Elements to Improve Community Design
   Encourage private property owners and non-profit facilities, and make a definitive City commitment to
   take action to improve existing design within the community by employing the use of monument
   signs, large-scale signs, boundary markers, directional signage, landscaping, and public art to
   enhance the community’s sense of place, aid in wayfinding, and convey a positive visual image within
   the community.
   3.3.2.8      Implementing Policies regarding Design Elements to Improve Community
                Design
   a. Promote monument signs that effectively identify key institutional uses, public facilities, and
        special districts and characterize the theme of the area. Signs should be designed so that they
        feature styles and materials with a traditional nature and are accompanied by landscaping at the
        base.
   b. Encourage attractive, large-scale signs/design elements be used to identify LLU, LLUMC, and
        Veterans Medical Center. Signs should be placed so that they are easily visible but do not pose a
        traffic safety concern. Signs should be designed so that they feature styles and materials with a
        traditional nature, and limit the use of plastic or highly reflective materials. They should be
        accompanied by landscaping at the base.
   c.   Encourage the installation of repeating design elements (e.g., pole-mounted flags, street light-
        mounted banners, building mounted signs, bollards) to identify the boundaries of LLU and special
        pedestrian districts.
   d. Promote the addition or revision of directional signage to provide good wayfinding to key locations
        within the community, including LLU, medical centers/hospitals, public facilities, or special
        districts. (Such off-site signs are not appropriate for other types of land uses, such as individual
        commercial uses.)
Chapter 3.0                               Community Design Element                                        3-23

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                 Community Design Element
   e. Encourage existing commercial, office, business park, health care, institutional, and industrial
       uses to ensure that their site landscaping creates a strong design character (i.e., delineates
       property perimeters, emphasizes circulation patterns, accents building entries, provides visual
       relief in parking areas, and screens where necessary) and is properly maintained.
   f.  Install landscaped medians along Redlands Boulevard to beautify the street and to add continuity
       to the variety of development and vacant parcels that currently line the street.
   g. Whenever feasible, improve City streetscapes by adding landscaped medians and/or parkways
       along major street corridors.
   h. Encourage and promote public art that embodies physical health and wellbeing and that reflects
       the community’s past, including its historic roots, culture, and agricultural base.
   i.  Develop a design renovation program to encourage property owners and tenants to implement
       design and wayfinding improvements. Provide financial incentives (funded by grant money) to
       participants. Streamline the City approval and permit process and/or designate a single point of
       contact for program participants to serve as a liaison between relevant city departments.
   j.  Develop a priority task list for design improvements that fall within the jurisdiction of the City.
       Identify the responsible department(s) and the budget source for design improvements.
Chapter 3.0                            Community Design Element                                          3-24

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                              Economic Development Element
   4.0       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
   The Economic Development Element seeks to promote economic and fiscal stability in Loma Linda in
   order to maintain a vibrant and healthy community. The City recognizes the economic contributions of
   Loma Linda University and associated medical facilities and seeks to expand upon these economic
   assets while also diversifying the local economy. The Economic Development Element provides
   guidance to City decision-makers, developers, businesses, and the public when considering specific
   projects and other municipal decisions affecting the community economic development and fiscal
   health.
   4.1       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND FISCAL CONDITION CONCEPTS
   Economic conditions consist of circumstances of the private sector economy in an area, typically
   measured by jobs and incomes. Fiscal conditions, in the General Plan context, consist of public
   sector revenues and cost; that is; the City’s net cost/revenue balance. These two sets of conditions
   are distinct but related. Conditions in the overall economy (local, regional, national) affect local
   government substantially through direct impacts on jobs and incomes, while local fiscal conditions
   influence the local economy by affecting the mix of advantages and disadvantages that businesses
   consider in choosing where to establish operations.
   A city’s fiscal outlook tends to rise and fall with economic conditions. When economic conditions are
   favorable, employment levels are robust and higher individual and household incomes support
   expanded discretionary spending. Retail sales increase, property values may rise, and all of the
   activities that relate to local government charges, such as fees and taxes, tend to increase.
   Therefore, city revenues are likely to grow. While new development may add to a city’s service
   delivery responsibilities, it will also at the same time contribute to increased local revenues.
   When economic conditions are adverse, the opposite tends to occur. Lower employment and income
   levels translate into reduced consumer spending, resulting in decreased local tax revenues from retail
   sales as well as lower levels of activity of other kinds that are typically subject to local fees, permits,
   and other revenue sources. In a prolonged recession, property values will decline to a point at which
   the valuations of real property will be adjusted downward.
Chapter 4.0                              Economic Development Element                                         4-1

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                          Economic Development Element
   Long-term economic stability strengthens the stability and predictability of municipal costs and
   revenues. The effects of a marked change in economic direction, whether it is expansion or
   contraction, take time to show up in revenue increases or reductions of city fiscal conditions. The
   influences of an economic cycle on the public sector normally lags behind the private sector.
   Local communities are affected by the health of the overall economy. City fiscal conditions, in turn,
   can affect city economic vitality. A solid fiscal base is among the influences that can prompt
   employers to retain or establish operations locally; a weak economic base, in contrast, will discourage
   establishment of new economic operations and may even prompt existing employers to relocate
   elsewhere. City fiscal management—tax and fee levels, availability and quality of services, efficiency
   and responsiveness of city staff—will also influence the perception of a city as “a good place to do
   business.”
   Often a business seeking a site for a new operation will look critically at the mix of local government
   costs and benefits associated with sites in different cities, balancing costs against the benefits that
   various cities offer. If a city’s operating revenues are insufficient to support an adequate level of
   services, some new development may be discouraged from locating there. A high level of services, in
   contrast, can attract prospective employers and residents. If a city charges higher development fees
   than its neighbors because the cost of providing infrastructure is high, however, then development
   may gravitate toward other, lower-cost locations.
   4.2       LOCAL ECONOMIC PROFILE
   A useful indicator of economic activity in an area is the pattern of existing and projected
   employment. The City of Loma Linda’s economy is centered on Healthcare and Education. As
   shown in Table 4.A, Loma Linda University and related medical facilities are the four largest
   employers in the community. In addition, these same medical facilities are included in the list of top
   15 major employers in the San Bernardino County. A mobile home manufacturer rounds out the top
   five employers in the City.
   Table 4.A: Major Employers in Loma Linda
                                        Company                                             Employees
   Loma Linda University Medical Center                                                        6,392
   Loma Linda University                                                                       3,700
   Jerry L. Pettis Memorial Veterans Medical Center                                            1,395
   Loma Linda Community Medical Center                                                          560
   Hallmark Southwest                                                                           270
   Source: Loma Linda Chamber of Commerce, November 2002.
   The 2000 Census confirmed that a high proportion of the residents of the City rely on educational and
   medical institutions for employment. The 2000 Census reports a total of 8,679 employed persons
   over the age of 16 living in Loma Linda. Of this number, a little over half works in the fields of
   education, health, and social services. According to the 2000 Census, a total of 4,445 residents in
   Loma Linda were employed in these fields and accounted for 54.2 percent of the workforce.
   Table 4.B shows the top industry areas of employment of the workforce in Loma Linda.
Chapter 4.0                           Economic Development Element                                        4-2

                                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                             Economic Development Element
   Table 4.B: Loma Linda Residents Top Five Employment Industries
                                                                                                             Percent of Total
                                        Industry                                            Number               Industries1
   Education, health, and social services                                                     4,445                   54.2
   Retail trade                                                                                604                    7.4
   Professional, scientific, management, administrative, and waste                             485                     5.9
   management services
   Arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodation and food services                            478                    5.8
   Other services (except public administration)                                               367                    4.5
   1
    Number reflects percentage of all industry categories, not just top five industries and therefore does not total 100%.
   Source: U.S. Census Bureau, http://factfinder.census.gov.
   As shown by the number of jobs and the number of City residents employed in education, health, and
   social services, the economy of the City of Loma Linda is affected by the economic well-being of the
   University and related medical facilities and the Veterans Medical Center. Major reductions or
   expansions in employment at these facilities would affect the fiscal condition of the City, as there
   would be less discretionary spending on retail items and thus less sales tax revenue to the City.
   However, the forecast for employment in the region indicates growth will continue to occur in the
   service industry. It is forecast that the service industry will comprise 41.5 percent of the total jobs in
   the five Counties of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura by the year 2020.
   Table 4.C shows the forecast five-county employment by industry.
   Table 4.C: Five-County1 Employment Forecast by Industry (Jobs Listed in Thousands)
                                                                                                            Share of Total Jobs
                  Industry                    2000        2005         2010          2015        2020                in 2020
   Agriculture                                  55.2        50.8          50.5         49.0         47.6                 0.5%
   Construction                                244.8       261.6        273.8         280.3        286.5                 2.7%
   Financial, Insurance, and Real
                                               399.1       430.9        455.3         470.6        485.9                 4.6%
   Estate
   Government                                  925.5       985.1      1,053.6     1,103.6        1,156.1                11.0%
   Manufacturing                               977.3       952.5        953.2         937.8        915.5                 8.8%
   Mining                                         7.3         5.6           3.6         2.3          1.5                 0.0%
   Self-Employed                               689.3       761.8        807.3         836.5        865.5                 8.3%
   Services                                  2,249.0    2,695.8       3,203.1     3,729.7        4,345.8                41.5%
   Trade                                     1,522.8    1,668.8       1,799.1     1,896.4        1,996.1                19.0%
   Transportation, Communications,
                                               308.9       323.7        343.9         358.1        373.5                 3.6%
   Public Utility
   Total Jobs                                7,739.0    8,136.6       8,943.4     9,664.4      10,483.9               100.0%
   1
    Includes Counties of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura.
   Source: SCAG, 1998 RTP Adopted Forecast.
   4.2.1 Jobs/Housing Balance Concepts
   In the ideal world, jobs/housing balance helps a community achieve important goals. For example, if
   employed residents can work locally, commute times and distances will be reduced; air quality will be
   improved; transportation infrastructure needs will be minimized; and each jurisdiction will have a mix
   of housing types that accommodates the workers in the entire range of income groups created by the
   local jobs. In the real world, achieving a numeric balance between jobs and housing (measured by
   the number of employed local residents) is an often cited but rarely accomplished objective. Although
Chapter 4.0                                 Economic Development Element                                                        4-3
                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                             Economic Development Element
   some cities require that new or expanding companies they provide with financial assistance grant
   local hiring preference, cities cannot ultimately dictate who works at local jobs. The existence of a
   certain number of local jobs does not guarantee that employed residents will choose to work locally or
   that newly hired employees at a company will choose to move to the city they work in. Even if the
   number of housing units in a community is sufficient to accommodate the number of local residents
   who work, some workers at local jobs who live elsewhere may not be able to afford the prices (or
   rents) of new or even existing housing in the community. Most cities have a limited ability to reduce
   the price of market-rate housing to bring it in line with the earnings of local workers. For these and
   other reasons, a city in which there is parity between jobs and housing may still have substantial
   cross-commuting: employed local residents working elsewhere and local job-holders living elsewhere.
   A ratio greater than 1.0 indicates a net in-commute due to the fact there are more jobs than workers
   in the community and a ratio of less than 1.0 indicates a net out-commute of workers. Although the
   term “jobs/housing” is used, a more precise relationship is between local employment and the number
   of employed residents. The primary reason is that some households have no workers, while others
   have multiple workers. Generally, 1.3 jobs per household is often cited as representing a balance
   between jobs and housing, depending on the demographics of a community (e.g., number of retirees
   and resident labor force).
   4.2.2 Jobs/Housing Balance in City of Loma Linda
   As shown in Table 4.D SANBAG projects that Loma Linda will continue to be one of the few jobs-rich
   communities in the Inland Empire; the number of jobs in Loma Linda will continue to be greater than
   the workforce living within the City. Unlike many communities with substantial local employment, a
   large percentage of Loma Linda residents in the workforce are already employed locally. As was
   discussed earlier in this Section, over half of Loma Linda’s workforce is employed in education, health
   fields, or social services, the same fields as the largest employers in the City. Therefore, even though
   the jobs/housing balance is weighted towards jobs, the City actually provides both homes and jobs to
   a majority of its citizens. It is the objective of the General Plan to continue to provide housing for local
   employees and students of the University.
   Table 4.D: SANBAG Jobs/Housing Balance Projections
                                                    2000        2010         2015          2020        2025
   Population                                      18,837      23,225       24,746        26,293      27,613
   Total Jobs                                      14,896      21,018       22,418       23,722       25,046
   Total Civilian Workers                           9,163      12,305       13,630       14,677       15,967
   (Total Jobs/Civilian Workers)                    1.63         1.71         1.64         1.62        1.57
   4.2.3 The Retail Sector
   Another economic indicator for a local area is the amount of taxable retail sales a city provides.
   According to the Inland Empire Quarterly Economic Report, the City of Loma Linda ranked 23rd out of
   the 48 communities in the Inland Empire in per capita sales in 2002, largely due to automobile sales.
   Even with this relatively positive per capita sales ranking, a retail market analysis prepared for the
   City of Loma Linda found the City to have a very large deficiency in taxable retail sales. According to
   the market analysis, Loma Linda residents spend more than Loma Linda businesses sell (net leakage
   of retail sales) in the retail markets of general merchandise, apparel, eating establishments, hardware
   and building materials, home furnishings, and food store categories. Leakage of taxable sales exists
   in all these areas, which means that Loma Linda residents are making substantial retail purchases of
   what they need in these retail categories in other cities, primarily San Bernardino and Redlands. The
   report further indicated Loma Linda residents have the purchasing power to easily support expanded
Chapter 4.0                             Economic Development Element                                           4-4

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                           Economic Development Element
   retail stores in these areas. However, San
   Bernardino and Redlands have successfully
   developed        large-scale       commercial
   developments near Loma Linda’s borders,
   contributing to significant sales tax leakage
   from the City. Thus, although the Loma
   Linda maintains a relatively high per capita
   sales tax ranking, it is not retaining taxable
   sales by City residents within the
   community.
   4.3      REDEVELOPMENT AND
            INLAND VALLEY
            DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES
   The Loma Linda Redevelopment Agency
   (RDA) is a vital component of the fiscal                                   Retail center on Barton Road
   performance of the City. RDA tax revenues
   have provided the City with a substantive, stable, and long-term alternative revenue stream. These
   revenues, which are derived mainly from tax increment financed bonds, have provided the resources
   that enable the City to provide quality public facilities, while the RDA helps fund low- and moderate-
   income housing, as well as capital improvements.
   The RDA has one Merged Project Area in the City (a combination of two project areas), which
   generally covers the entire City north of Barton Road, excluding the University of Loma Linda and
   immediately surrounding areas (see Figure 4.1). The RDA has focused on funding infrastructure
   improvements in the Merged Project Area. Specifically, the RDA has concentrated on sewer system
   rehabilitation/upgrade, water replacements/upgrades, and storm drain improvements. The RDA’s
   annual projects and programs for the next five years continue to include sewer and water pipeline
   replacements, economic development, historic and archaeological preservation, and open
   space/recreational park facilities in addition to affordable housing programs. The RDA’s programs for
   affordable housing will continue to include substantial rehabilitation, new construction, senior housing
   programs, first-time buyer programs, purchase of covenants, and directly related infrastructure to
   support affordable units.
   The Inland Valley Development Agency (IVDA) of which Loma Linda is a member, is a regional Joint
   Powers Authority whose goal is to redevelop the Norton Air Force Base properties and an additional
   14,000 acres within a three-mile radius of surrounding property outside the base. The goal of IVDA is
   to replace the 10,000 jobs that were lost with the closure of the Base. IVDA uses income from bonds
   to encourage the development of businesses that generate employment on the properties under their
   influence. Property in the City of Loma Linda planning areas included in IVDA is shown in Figure 4.1.
   4.4      CITY FISCAL CONDITION
   A city’s operating revenues and expenditures determine its fiscal condition. A fiscal sustainability
   report prepared for the General Plan Update by Agajanian & Associates (2001) revealed the City of
   Loma Linda is fiscally sustainable into the future, but only at a “maintenance” level. This means that
   any development with significant negative fiscal impacts will strain the ability of the operating budget
   to provide needed services at current service levels. Similarly, any significant increase in new capital
   expenditures for public facilities could reduce the amount of revenue available for operations. The
   fiscal analysis found that the City is over-dependent on retail sales tax and motor vehicle in-lieu
   revenue sources. A significant decrease in either of these revenue streams could limit the amount of
Chapter 4.0                           Economic Development Element                                         4-5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                    CANOE AVE
                                                                               TIPPEC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST                            ST
                                                                                                                       RICHARDSON ST
           10                                                                                                                            REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ALABAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JERSEY
                                                                                  ST                                                                       AVE
                                                   ACADEMY ST                                                                                                                                                                                  NEW
                                                                                                ORANGE     POPLAR ST                                        VIEW
                                                                           N                                                                                                                                                                                 CITRUS AVENUE
                                                                                                GROVE ST                               VAN LEUVEN ST                               MI
                                                                                                                                                                                        SS
                                                                         ERSO
                                                                                                                                                                                          IO
                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                       AND                                                                                                                                 RD
                                         STEWART ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ORANGE AVENUE
                              UNIVERSITY AVE                              Y
                                                                                                                                                             MOUNTAIN
                                                                     ERSIT T
                                                              UNIV       C
                                                                                                                                                 PROSPECT AVE
                                                                                                                           BENTON ST
                                                                                                PROSPECT AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BARTON RD
                                                  CAMPUS ST
                                                                                                    BARTON RD
                                                                                                                                             LOMA
                                                                                                                                             LINDA DR
                                                                                                    LAWTON AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HITTIER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                WH
                                                                                                                                                                                           BRYN MAWR AVE
                                                                                                                                                                        BEAUMONT
                                                                                                                                                                                   AVE
          N
      0          1200      2400
       FEET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 4.1
      CITY OF LOMA LINDA AND SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
      MERGED PROJECT AREA
      “IVDA” PROJECT AREA                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                               MERGED PROJECT AND "IVDA" PROJECT AREAS
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig4-1_Merged Project and IVDA areas.cdr (06/21/04)

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                           Economic Development Element
   resources available to maintain the City’s high level of public services and facilities. The City currently
   enjoys a favorable general sense of municipal service satisfaction as reflected in the Community-
   Wide Survey 2000. The few concerns indicated in this survey were largely focused on the need to
   maintain roadways, street lighting, and traffic light regulation.
   4.5       IDENTIFIED ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
   A broad assessment of future fiscal conditions in the City of Loma Linda was projected in the Fiscal
   Sustainability Report (Agajanian 2001). According to this report, future municipal operating costs will
   likely increase for a number of reasons. A growing population will increase the amount of demand for
   municipal services. Operating costs will also increase as new services are added and existing
   municipal service levels are upgraded. Given that the City is not yet built out, Loma Linda is likely to
   face operating cost increases from both sources for some time to come. Depending on the type,
   location and timing of development, the pressure for increasing the operations budget in the future
   will be great.
   Capital improvement expenditures for the City will also increase as the City/RDA budget expands to
   fund both new infrastructure and facility-building programs. Many future capital improvements will be
   paid for by new development in the form of dedicated facilities, in-lieu fees, and/or impact fees. The
   City/RDA budget will continue to fund citywide capital projects, as needed, including the city water
   wells/reservoirs, senior housing, arterial road and bridge projects, freeway interchange
   improvements, storm drain extensions, a senior center facility, a water treatment facility, and related
   future capital improvements.
   Loma Linda can also expect to experience increasing pressure on facility maintenance costs due to
   development. Street maintenance in particular will continue to require additional resources as new
   roadways are built and added to the inventory. Facility maintenance will also increase as parks, public
   buildings, and recreational trails are expanded and added. Additionally, specific capital projects to
   accommodate site reuse, revitalization, and rehabilitation will continue to play an ever-increasing role
   in future capital improvement programs.
   City/RDA budget revenues in the future will be influenced by many factors, including General Plan
   land use, circulation, and public facility choices, and the type and rate of development. The proportion
   of residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional land in the General Plan affects the amount of
   revenue that will be generated for municipal use, and is intended to help the City to continue
   providing services needed by residents. The retail, hotel, R&D, and high-end residential uses
   proposed in the General Plan will all generate municipal revenue in excess of related costs.
   Another factor influencing revenue is the number of property tax-exempt parcels in the City. More
   than half of the parcels of land in the City are tax-exempt and include the Loma Linda University and
   the J.L. Pettis Veterans Memorial Hospital and all public facilities. This high concentration of property
   tax-exempt parcels limits the amount of property tax the City can expect to receive in the future.
   Additionally, any further development of tax-exempt uses on these parcels may add service costs to
   the City without generating property tax revenues to help pay for them. The General Plan has been
   designed to facilitate the development of property tax-generating and sales tax-generating uses on
   many parcels that are now property tax-exempt.
   An analysis of the retail market opportunities in Loma Linda by Marketing for Professionals, Inc.
   (September 1999) revealed that almost every retail store merchandise category is not well
   represented in the City. The one area that is well represented is auto dealers and auto supplies. The
   potential for adding retail stores exists as present vacant retail spaces are available and more
   commercial land is designated in the General Plan. The retail market analysis found the City can
Chapter 4.0                          Economic Development Element                                             4-7

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                          Economic Development Element
   support more retail stores with the purchases coming from local residents and in some areas, such as
   food establishments, from individuals working in the City even though, within a 15-mile radius of the
   center of Loma Linda, customers have a variety of choices from a giant complex such as Ontario Mills
   to smaller, less diverse shopping centers such as Redlands Mall, and large commercial centers in
   San Bernardino. In order to attract new retail businesses, including hotels and restaurants, the study
   recommended that the City develop a more business-friendly image and foster a perception on the
   part of retailers and developers in and outside the area that Loma Linda will not make it difficult to
   start a new retail business.
   One retail opportunity is to create a downtown area or city center, which could provide a focal point
   for the community. A vibrant downtown area could confer a sense of place that would strengthen the
   community’s image and encourage residents as well as visitors and workers to shop, dine, and
   pursue leisure activities locally. As the roots of the community are associated with Loma Linda
   University, the downtown could be located near the University at Anderson Street and Prospect
   Street. Creating a downtown would entail, among other actions, expanding the services and
   businesses presently in the area, providing public parking and improving access to the area for both
   students and the general community of Loma Linda.
   4.6      POLICIES
   The following policies address business attraction and expansion, commercial and industrial lands,
   Loma Linda’s economic base, its fiscal health, and ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
   4.6.1 Guiding Policy for Business Attraction and Expansion
   Foster a climate in which businesses in Loma Linda can prosper, enhancing Loma Linda’s image as a
   good community in which to operate a business.
   4.6.1.1    Implementing Policies for Business Attraction and Expansion
   a. Maintain a development review process that is conducive to establishing new businesses and
        expanding existing businesses within Loma Linda.
        x   Provide excellent customer service to retail business and developers of employment-
            generating projects by focusing on solving problems and providing certainty in the
            development review process.
        x   Streamline the development review process so that it works effectively and efficiently for the
            applicant and the public through:
                Explicit statements of City expectations;
                Early identification of issues;
                Consistent application of community policy;
                An emphasis on expedited problem-solving; and
                Ensuring that detailed regulations facilitate and do not hinder the achievement of
                 community objectives.
   b. Attract and assist the relocation and expansion of firms in high-tech, biotech, research and
        development, and retail trade and services. Capitalize on Loma Linda’s identity in the healing arts
        by working with the Loma Linda University Medical Center and the Veterans Hospital
        Administration to identify health services-related firms and trade organizations that could benefit
        from locating in Loma Linda. These might include those involved in medical research and clinical
Chapter 4.0                            Economic Development Element                                        4-8

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                          Economic Development Element
       trials, and research, development and testing of medical equipment, as well as vendors to these
       and other medical facilities. Provide focused marketing materials to those firms and trade
       organizations.
   c.  Undertake a coordinated effort to “sell” Loma Linda as an ideal community in which to do
       business, stressing its advantages (e.g., highly educated workforce, excellent schools, high-
       quality residential areas, available land for development of employment- and sales tax-generating
       uses).
       x    Publicize positive images of Loma Linda through placement of articles in the local and
            regional media and business and trade journals.
   d. Maintain an Economic Development Advisory Committee to advise the City Council regarding
       economic development, redevelopment, and employment- and sales tax-generation issues and
       activities.
   e. Maintain financial and development review incentives to attract regional and local-serving retail
       and employment-generating businesses to Loma Linda, ensuring appropriate location of such
       businesses along Redlands Boulevard, California Avenue, and Barton Road.
       x    Focus business attraction and expansion efforts on sales tax-generating uses, community
            and regional serving retail, high technology, and research and development industries that
            will enhance the local economy.
       x    Actively seek larger retail businesses the City lacks, such has Home Furnishing and
            Appliance Stores, Hardware and Building Materials, expanded Auto Dealerships, and
            Supermarkets to locate on Redlands Boulevard.
       x    Focus on attracting and maintaining businesses in or serving the medical professions on
            Barton Avenue to continue the existing pattern.
       x    Service industries with restaurants as ancillary uses should be encouraged to locate on
            California Avenue.
       x    Conduct outreach to City vendors or suppliers to attract new businesses to Loma Linda.
   f.  Continue to participate in economic development partnerships such as IVDA, recognizing that job
       creation, both within Loma Linda and surrounding communities will assist in reducing peak hour
       congestion along the I-10 freeway.
   g. Recognize the economic development benefits of, and place emphasis on beautification of major
       arterials and community entries, street cleaning, and consistent enforcement of City regulations.
       x    Undertake urban design improvements described in urban design section of this element.
   h. Periodically survey the business community for evaluation of City services and improvement
       suggestions.
   i.  Work with private sector entities to identify and implement advanced infrastructure technologies
       that will facilitate the relocation of technology-related businesses to Loma Linda, as well as the
       expansion of existing businesses.
   j.  Work with the private sector to maintain an adequate supply of skilled workers and the capital
       needed to attract and maintain business in Loma Linda.
       x    Work with the area schools and the University to establish and maintain education and
            continuing education programs to meet the existing and foreseeable needs of local
            employers.
Chapter 4.0                            Economic Development Element                                      4-9

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                         Economic Development Element
        x   Work with the Redlands Unified School District, Loma Linda Academy, and Loma Linda
            University to identify local educational resources applicable to the labor force needs of
            emerging industries (e.g., telecommunications, fiber optics, and biotechnology) in relevant
            occupational specialties.
        x   Facilitate the entry of lower income Loma Linda residents into job training programs, enabling
            them to hold meaningful, well-paying jobs.
   k.   Provide priority for access to economic development resources to (1) existing businesses seeking
        to expand within Loma Linda, (2) businesses seeking to relocate to Loma Linda from outside of
        the east San Bernardino Valley area, (3) retention of existing businesses, and (4) businesses
        seeking to relocate to Loma Linda from within the east San Bernardino Valley area to help them
        to access:
        x   Capital markets through the use of tax-exempt industrial development bonds and taxable
            bonds;
        x   Below-market rate interest rate business loans through revolving loan programs (e.g., CDBG,
            SBA, CDIF);
        x   Tax increment financing;
        x   County economic development programs aimed at lowering labor costs; and
        x   Programs available through the County’s Small Business Development Center (e.g.,
            business consulting, movie production sites, government procurement, and international
            trade).
   l.   Consider implementation of lease agreements as an incentive for the development of new office
        and multi-tenant business park development. Such agreements could include subsidies of rental
        rates to enhance the economic feasibility of financing development of office and multi-tenant
        business park projects, while increasing the economic attractiveness of the projects for new and
        expanding businesses.
   4.6.2 Guiding Policy for Commercial and Industrial Land
   Provide sufficient land to accommodate planned development, with office, business park, and
   commercial areas complementing residential and public development in location, access, mix of uses,
   attractiveness, and design quality.
   4.6.2.1     Implementing Policies for Commercial and Industrial Land
   a. Maintain a mix of uses on the General Plan land use map providing a variety of housing types,
        commercial development, and employment generating uses.
   b. Promote the establishment of workplace alternatives, including home occupations and
        telecommuting to reduce peak hour congestion. Continue to allow home occupations in all
        residential districts.
   c.   Maintain an inventory of “ready-to-go” sites for commercial and targeted employment-generating
        development, complete with appropriate zoning and in-place infrastructure.
   d. Seek innovative ways to reduce the cost burden of infrastructure provision on new industrial and
        commercial development, without transferring the burden to the residential sector.
   e. Development of commercial/industrial uses with “point of sale: retail sales tax revenues should be
        located in mixed-use areas such as along California Avenue and in the business park on
        Redlands Boulevard.
Chapter 4.0                           Economic Development Element                                       4-10

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                            Economic Development Element
   f.  Encourage the earliest development of a hotel as demand becomes available.
   g. Identify potential sites to develop new overnight accommodation facilities, especially at non-retail
       sites near the freeway on-ramps and off-ramps.
   h. Promote the development of new retail stores at vacant sites, such as the IVDA property, the
       Pacific Theater property, vacant parcels along Redlands Boulevard, and vacant East Side
       parcels.
   i.  Collaborate with Loma Linda University in developing a downtown area that includes small retail
       and service business. Consider creating a Design Overlay Zone for the Area.
   j.  Explore the creation of a multi-modal transportation center to serve the downtown area and
       nearby medical and educational facilities.
   k.  Look for participation opportunities with potential transit center development.
   4.6.3 Guiding Policy for Maintaining and Improving Fiscal Health
   Protect fiscal and financial health of the City of Loma Linda.
   4.6.3.1     Implementing Policies for Maintaining and Improving Fiscal Health
   a. Require new development to pay for its fair share of new infrastructure, public and community
       facilities, and the incremental operating costs it imposes on the City.
       x    Unless the City provides specific economic development incentives, new development shall
            construct and/or pay for new on-site capital improvements required by their projects
            consistent with City standards.
       x    New development shall incorporate such features as to ensure that it will not increase the
            cost of public services provided to existing development.
   b. Create an Economic Development Corporation as a means to acquire property, develop property,
       and issue use rights for the purpose of generating land rent revenue streams to the City’s
       General Fund.
   c.  Create other institutions to promote the generation of new land rent revenues to the General
       Fund including a housing authority, business improvement district, or improvement district.
   d. Coordinate RDA activities with the City or future Economic Development Corporation to link land
       rent or lease opportunities.
   e. Encourage the establishment and expansion of local businesses and development of commercial
       and other properties producing retail sales taxes, transient occupancy taxes, and high assessed
       valuation by providing assistance with financing, local processing, and environmental permitting.
   f.  As a part of the development review of office, business park, and industrial development within
       Loma Linda, seek opportunities for the designation of these uses as “point of sale.”
   g. Encourage and assist the development of hotels, motels, and long-term stay facilities along
       Redlands Boulevard.
   h. Determine the need for a fiscal impact analysis to be conducted as part of the development
       review process to provide input into assessment of the overall fiscal impact of development within
       the City, and to determine what costs to the City, if any, should be mitigated.
   i.  Continue to promote development of the IVDA property with uses that maximize retail sales tax
       revenues and increase assessed valuation.
Chapter 4.0                           Economic Development Element                                       4-11

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                         Economic Development Element
   j.  Continue to promote development of high value housing in the RDA project areas to increase
       assessed evaluation.
   k.  Limit the residential build out of Loma Linda to that which is needed to meet Housing Element
       objectives, develop infill lots, and establish upper-end housing within the southern portion of the
       City.
   4.6.4 Greenhouse Gas
   Local agencies, such as the City of Loma Linda, have an important role to play in California’s fight
   against global warming, which has been identified as one of the most serious environmental effects
   facing the State today. Cities are being encouraged by the State to incorporate sustainable design
   into projects from the start, addressing global climate change considerations at the earliest feasible
   time. Through its General Plan, the City of Loma Linda intends to encourage well-designed,
   sustainable development projects to help move the State away from “business as usual” and toward a
   low-carbon future.
   Assembly Bill (AB) 1493 of 2002 required the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to develop and
   adopt the nation’s first greenhouse gas standards for automobiles. On June 1, 2005, Governor
   Schwarzenegger signed Executive Order S-3-2005, which calls for a reduction in greenhouse gas
   emissions to 1990 levels by 2020, and for an 80 percent reduction in GHG emissions by 2050. In
   addition, Governor Schwarzenegger signed AB 32, the California Climate Solutions Act of 2006
   (Health & Safety Code Section 38500 et seq.), in September 2006. AB 32 codified the State’s
   greenhouse gas emissions target by requiring that California’s greenhouse gas emissions be reduced
   to 1990 levels by 2020. In addition, AB 32 directs CARB to make available a list of early action GHG
   emission reduction measures by June 30, 2007. These measures were updated in October 2007
   (CARB, 2007). Regulations to implement these measures are to be adopted before January 1, 2010,
   and the finalized emissions reduction measures will become operative and enforceable January 1,
   2012.
   To address the issue of global climate change and reducing carbon emissions requires a brad range
   of policies and actions. By providing a balance between local employment and housing, the General
   Plan provides the opportunity for Loma Linda residents and workers to reduce their daily commute,
   with consequent reductions in air pollutant and carbon emissions. Providing for compact, walkable
   communities and infill development in areas served by existing infrastructure, utilizes the resources
   that existing neighborhoods offer, and conserves open space and natural resources.
   Building “green” will reduce energy consumption, reduce carbon emissions, and is a sound financial
   choice. Investments in green buildings pay for themselves, according to a new study for 40 California
   agencies. This study, drawing on national data for 33 green buildings and an in-depth review of
   several hundred existing studies, found that sustainable buildings are a cost-effective investment. The
   report concluded that financial benefits of green design are between $50 and $70 per square foot in
   an LEED building, over 10 times the additional cost associated with building green.
   Much of our built environment is now powered by fossil fuels, which create the greenhouse gases that
   contribute to global warming. Thus, reducing energy consumption and increasing the use of
   renewable energy sources is a key component of addressing global climate change concerns.
   4.6.4.1    Guiding Policy
   Minimize greenhouse gas emissions that are reasonably attributable to the City’s discretionary land
   use decisions and internal government operations, with the goal of reducing Loma Linda’s
   greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020.
Chapter 4.0                           Economic Development Element                                       4-12

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                            Economic Development Element
   4.6.4.2    Implementing Policies
   Compact Community Measures
   a. Encourage the development of vacant and underutilized parcels consistent with neighborhood
       character in a way that best adds value to the surrounding area.
   b. Facilitate employment opportunities that offer low vehicle use and minimize the need for
       automobile trips, such as live/work, telecommuting, satellite work centers, and home occupations,
       in addition to implementation of mixed-use development strategies.
   c.  Encourage patterns of commercial development that support use of public transit, including
       modifying development regulations to facilitate commercial and/or mixed-use projects at sites
       near transit stops.
   Energy Conservation and Air Quality Measures
   d. Encourage energy efficient landscaping for resource conservation by developing guidelines that
       emphasize proper irrigation techniques and sustainable landscaping (organic fertilizers and
       pesticides).
   e. Consider light-colored surfacing on pavements and rooftops where feasible to reduce heat
       absorption.
   f.  As part of the development review process, work with builders to maximize energy conservation
       benefits in the placement of buildings on a site with regard to sun and natural breezes.
   g. Actively support provision of infrastructure needed for alternative fuel vehicles, including fueling
       and charging stations. Review and consider revising applicable codes applying to refueling and
       recharging infrastructure to facilitate their inclusion in new development where appropriate.
   h. Prohibit the installation of wood-burning fireplaces and other devices in new or renovated homes.
   i.  Facilitate implementation of renewable technologies through streamlined planning and
       development rules, codes, processing, and other incentives.
   j.  Incorporate measures to protect solar access from shading by neighboring structures and trees,
       thereby facilitating the use of passive or active solar systems.
   k.  Provide incentives such as expedited processing for facilities that use renewable energy sources.
       Work with State and Federal agencies to secure tax exemptions, tax rebates, or other financial
       incentives for such facilities.
   l.  Preserve and encourage planting trees in neighborhoods to provide shade in summer and reduce
       heat loss in winter. Successful methods include placing trees to the west and northwest of houses
       to shade from the hot summer sun and grouping trees to protect them from harsh elements and
       support their longevity. Trees can reduce air temperatures 5–10° F from shading and evapo-
       transpiration (water in leaves converting into vapor, cooling the air).
   Transportation Measures
   m. Promote transit routes and link neighborhoods with transit.
   n. Encourage businesses and public agencies to offer telecommuting as a work alternative, and
       allow corporate satellite work centers near housing concentrations to enable residents who are
       employees of out-of-city businesses to reduce their commutes.
   o. Require new development to incorporate features that reduce energy used for transportation,
       including pedestrian and bicycle pathways, and access to transit (where available).
Chapter 4.0                            Economic Development Element                                      4-13

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                           Economic Development Element
   p. Include recycled and energy-conserving materials for road construction and repair, as well as
       resource-efficient materials, such as rubberized asphalt concrete and pervious pavement, in road
       repair and construction where it is cost-effective and feasible.
   q. Work with Omnitrans to provide turnouts for transit stops.
   r.  Pursue traffic signal timing coordination as a means of improving traffic and reducing vehicle
       idling times.
   s.  As appropriate, require new development and redevelopment projects to address the following:
       bicycle and pedestrian access internally and to other areas; safe access to public transportation
       and construction of paths that connect with other non-motorized routes; safe road crossings at
       major intersections for schoolchildren and seniors; and secure, weatherproof bicycle storage
       facilities. Ensure that such facilities will have ongoing maintenance.
   t.  Support and participate in the development of intermodal transit hubs that expand alternative
       transportation use.
   u. Encourage the use of public transit and alternative modes of transportation through land use
       designations and zoning which cluster employment centers with a mix of other uses, and project
       design that incorporates car pool areas, “park and ride” facilities and similar incentives.
   v.  Ensure that transit systems provide for the storage of bicycles on transit as well as at transit
       centers.
   w. Work with Omnitrans to post current schedules and maps at all transit stops and other key
       locations, to make real-time arrival information available to riders, and to provide shelters that
       adequately protect riders from inclement weather.
   City Operations Measures
   x.  Minimize Loma Linda’s contributions to greenhouse gas emissions by shifting to low-carbon and
       renewable fuels, and employing zero-emission technologies, where feasible in City purchasing
       and ongoing operations and maintenance activities.
   y.  Provide incentives for City employees to carpool to work.
   z.  Incorporate energy efficiency as a key criterion in the City’s procurement process.
Chapter 4.0                           Economic Development Element                                      4-14

City of Loma Linda
    2014-2021
 Housing Element
      City of Loma Linda
     25541 Barton Road
    Loma Linda, CA 92354
        February 2014

                                                                                                                        Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                    Housing Element
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................... 5-1 
  Overview and Purpose of the Housing Element .................................................................................... 5-1 
  Policies and Programs............................................................................................................................ 5-4 
5.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................... 5-5 
  5.1.1 Regional Location .......................................................................................................................... 5-5 
  5.1.2 Purpose of the Housing Element................................................................................................... 5-5 
  5.1.3 Scope and Content of the Housing Element ................................................................................. 5-5 
  5.1.4 Consistency with Other General Plan Elements ........................................................................... 5-6 
  5.1.5 Citizen Participation ....................................................................................................................... 5-6 
  5.1.6 Definition of Terms ........................................................................................................................ 5-7 
5.2 Housing Resources............................................................................................ 5-11 
  5.2.1 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) .......................................................................... 5-11 
  5.2.2 Unaccommodated RHNA ............................................................................................................ 5-11 
  5.2.3 Sites Inventory ............................................................................................................................. 5-13 
5.3 Housing Plan ...................................................................................................... 5-24 
  5.3.1 Housing Opportunities ................................................................................................................. 5-24 
  5.3.2 Housing to Meet the Needs of All Income Levels ....................................................................... 5-25 
  5.3.3 Removal of Government Constraints .......................................................................................... 5-27 
  5.3.4 Conserve, Preserve, and Improve the Housing Stock ................................................................ 5-28 
  5.3.5 Promote Equal Housing Opportunity ........................................................................................... 5-30 
  5.3.6 Quantified Objectives .................................................................................................................. 5-31 
Appendix 5.A: Housing Needs Assessment .......................................................... 5-34 
  5.A.1 Population Trends ....................................................................................................................... 5-34 
  5.A.2 Household Characteristics .......................................................................................................... 5-35 
  5.A.4 Special Needs Groups ................................................................................................................ 5-39 
  5.A.5 Housing Characteristics .............................................................................................................. 5-43 
  5.A.6 Housing Affordability and Overpayment ..................................................................................... 5-45 
  5.A.7 Affordable Housing...................................................................................................................... 5-47 
  5.A.8 Estimates of Housing Need ........................................................................................................ 5-48 
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints ....................................................................... 5-50 
  5.B.1 Government Constraints ............................................................................................................. 5-50 
November 2013                                                        toc-i                                                      Executive Summary

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
   5.B.2 Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints ............................................................................ 5-63 
   5.B.3 Market Constraints ...................................................................................................................... 5-65 
Appendix 5.D: Sites Inventory
Appendix5.E: Public Outreach
Executive Summary                                                  5-ii                                                           November 2013

                                                                                                    City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                      Housing Element
                                          List of Tables
Table 5.A: 2013-2021 RHNA 2014 ............................................................................. 5-11 
Table 5.B: RHNA and RHNA Credits ......................................................................... 5-12 
Table 5.C: Summary of Residential Capacity on Vacant Residential Sites ................ 5-16 
Table 5.D: Summary of Residential Capacity on Underutilized Residential Sites ...... 5-16 
Table 5.E: Special Planning Area B: Estimated Development Scenario .................... 5-18 
Table 5.F: Special Planning Area D: Estimated Development Scenario .................... 5-19 
Table 5.H Comparison of Sites Inventory and RHNA ................................................. 5-20 
Table 5.J: 2014-2021 Quantified Objectives ............................................................. 5-31 
Table 5.A.A: Population Trends and Projections ........................................................ 5-34 
Table 5.A.B: Age Distribution ..................................................................................... 5-35 
Table 5.A.C: Race and Ethnicity ................................................................................ 5-35 
Table 5.A.D: Household Characteristics..................................................................... 5-36 
Table 5.A.E: Households by Income Category ........................................................... 5-38 
Table 5.A.F: Tenure By Income Category by Household Type ................................. 5-38 
Table 5.A.G: Industry Employment and Earnings ..................................................... 5-39 
Table 5.A.H: Disability by Age .................................................................................... 5-40 
Table 5.A.I: Composition of the Housing Stock, 2010 ................................................ 5-43 
Table 5.A.J: Age of Housing Stock, 2011 ................................................................... 5-44 
Table 5.A.K: Overcrowding by Tenure ....................................................................... 5-44 
Table 5.A.L: Loma Linda Area Home Prices, 2012 and 2013 .................................... 5-45 
Table 5.A.M: Rental Costs ......................................................................................... 5-45 
Table 5.A.N: Housing Affordability ............................................................................. 5-46 
Table 5.A.O: Households Experiencing Cost Burden ................................................. 5-47 
Table 5.A.P: Assisted Housing Developments ........................................................... 5-48 
Table 5.A.Q: Summary of Existing Housing Need ...................................................... 5-48 
Table 5.A.R: City of Loma Linda RHNA 2014 to 2021 ............................................... 5-49 
Table 5.B.A: Residential Land Use Designations and Zoning Districts ...................... 5-51 
Table 5.B.B: Zoning District Development Standards ................................................ 5-52 
Table 5.B.C: Residential Off-Street Parking Standards .............................................. 5-56 
Table 5.B.D Comparison of Planning Fees ................................................................ 5-60 
Table 5.B.E: Residential Development Impact Fees .................................................. 5-61 
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element) ... 5-67 
Executive Summary                                  5-iii                                                November 2013

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Table 5.C.B: Summary of 2008-2014 Quantified Objectives and Progress ............... 5-74 
                                       List of Figures
Figure 5.1: Sites Inventory Map ................................................................................. 5-13 
Figure 5.A.1: Income Distribution ............................................................................... 5-37 
Executive Summary                                5-iv                                                 November 2013

                                                                                          Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                 Housing Element
Executive Summary
The City of Loma Linda continues to grow, and with that growth comes the need for more housing–not
only more units, but a broader array of housing types to meet evolving household types and sizes, and a
greater variety of housing price points that people at all income levels can afford. The City’s General Plan
lays out the strategy to meet this challenge by directing growth to future mixed-use neighborhoods
strategically located to provide opportunities for housing, jobs, transit, and basic amenities in cohesive
districts. By integrating the City’s housing strategy, with its growth strategy the City can promote
economic development, put strategies in place to reduce housing costs, minimize environmental impacts,
and enhance the quality of life.
The 2014-2021 Housing Element of the General Plan is the City’s blueprint for meeting its housing and
growth challenges. It identifies housing conditions and needs; reiterates goals, objectives, and policies
that are the foundation of the City’s housing and growth strategy; and provides programs the City has
committed to implement to provide an appropriate range of housing opportunities.
Overview and Purpose of the Housing Element
The Housing Element identifies housing needs in Loma Linda, the sites that can accommodate these
needs, and the policies and programs to assure that the housing units necessary to meet these needs
can be provided. The primary goal of the Housing Element is to provide a range of housing opportunities
for all income groups.
The Housing Element covers the planning period of October 15, 2013 to October 15, 2021, and identifies
strategies and programs to: 1) encourage the development of a variety of housing opportunities, 2)
provide housing opportunities for persons of lower and moderate incomes, 3) preserve the quality of the
existing housing stock in Loma Linda, 4) minimize governmental constraints, and 5) promote equal
housing opportunities for all residents.
By law, the Housing Element must contain these following major components:
         An analysis of demographic and housing characteristics and trends
         A review of potential market, governmental, and environmental constraints to meeting identified
          housing needs
         An evaluation of land, administrative, and financial resources available to address the housing
          goals
         A review of past accomplishments under the previous Housing Element
         A housing plan to address the identified housing needs, including housing goals, policies, and
          programs
The California Government Code also requires that General Plans contain integrated, consistent sets of
goals and policies. The Housing Element is, therefore, affected by development policies contained in the
Land Use Element and Circulation Element. The Housing Element is internally consistent with the
1
  The Housing Element planning period is different from the RHNA planning period. While the Housing Element
covers the period of October 15, 2013 to October 15, 2021, the RHNA covers the period of January 1, 2014 to
October 31, 2021.
November 2013                                           5-1                                   Executive Summary

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
balance of the General Plan. As portions of the General Plan are amended in the future, each of the
elements of the General Plan, including the Housing Element, will be reviewed to ensure internal
consistency is maintained.
Demographic Overview
The Housing Needs Assessment (Appendix A) provides a comprehensive overview of Loma Linda’s
population, household, and housing stock characteristics, and an analysis of these factors in order to
identify housing needs of the variety of household types and special needs across the City. The Needs
Assessment indicates that while local households earn higher incomes than households countywide,
issues with affordability of housing persist. Specifically:
         The median household income in Loma Linda is $61,116 according to 2011 Census data, higher
          than the median household income for San Bernardino County ($55,583). Overall, Loma Linda
          has a larger proportion of residents earning over $75,000 than the County, and a smaller
          proportion of residents earning between $35,000 and $74,999 per year.
         Due to the large student population, over 60 percent of households live in rental housing.
         Forty percent of households are considered low- or moderate-income households, meaning these
          households earn 80 percent or less of the area median income (AMI) for the County ($65,000).
         Close to half (47 percent) of renters pay over 30 percent of their income for housing (compared to
          30 percent of owners).
         Median home sale prices in Loma Linda were higher than in neighboring and surrounding
          jurisdiction.
         Single-family home ownership is beyond the reach of low- and moderate-income households. For
          home ownership, some of these households may be able to afford a condominium, but the unit
          may not be adequately sized for them. In the rental market, generally only moderate-income
          households cannot afford the market rents in Loma Linda without experience cost burden (paying
          over 30 percent of their income for housing).
Like other cities, Loma Linda has a special needs population that has more difficulty finding decent,
affordable housing due to their special circumstances. In particular:
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
         The 2009 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) report revealed that 72 percent
          of renting seniors in Loma Linda paid more than 30 percent of their income on housing,
          experiencing a housing cost burden, compared with only 26 percent of elderly owner-occupied
          households.
         In 2010, 43.7 of the elderly population were disabled.
         2011 Census data indicate that Loma Linda has 2,546 (11 percent of the total population) civilian,
          non-institutionalized residents aged 5 or over with disabilities. Approximately half of disabled
          residents are over the age of 65.
         2011 Census data indicate that 3,461 Loma Linda residents were enrolled in undergraduate or
          graduate studies.
Therefore, there is a need within the City for affordable housing for the elderly, disabled, and students.
For the elderly and disabled, housing equipped with handicapped access and facilities is important.
Housing Constraints
Governmental, infrastructure, environmental, and market factors may constrain the provision of adequate
and affordable housing in a city. State law requires that Housing Elements analyze potential and actual
governmental and non-governmental constraints to the production, maintenance and improvement of
housing for all persons of all income levels and disabilities.
Executive Summary                                      5-2                                     November 2013

                                                                                              City of Loma Linda
                                                                                               Housing Element
While governmental regulations are established to protect the health and safety of residents, they also set
limits on residential development; these regulations include zoning, land use entitlement processing, and
growth limits. Specific constraints to housing development in Loma Linda include:
        Development guidelines that are inconsistent with state laws addressing second units and density
         bonuses)
        Lack of zoning provisions related to housing for persons with disabilities, including provisions
         facilitating or constraining the production of housing that is designed for persons with disabilities
        The City’s zoning code does not address the requirement under Senate Bill 2 (SB2, in effect
         since 2008). SB 2 strengthens existing housing element requirements to provide the opportunity
         for the development of emergency shelters and transitional and supportive housing. SB 2 ensures
         that zoning, development, and management standards and permit procedures limit the denial of
         emergency shelters.
        Market conditions also pose significant constraints, including high land, construction, and
         financing costs. Also, restricted financing availability is of concern, although the City has little
         ability to reduce these constraints.
Meeting the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA)
A core component of the Housing Element is the Regional Housing Needs Assessment, or RHNA. The
RHNA, developed through a process directed by the Southern California Association of Governments,
represents the number of housing units–divided into various household income categories–that have
been calculated to represent Loma Linda’s “fair share” of the regional housing need during the Housing
Element planning period. By law, the City is required to show in the Housing Element that adequate sites
are available in Loma Linda to accommodate the construction of new housing units consistent with the
RHNA. Recognizing that development is often constrained by the market and environmental and other
factors, the law makes no mandate that these units actually be built. Rather, housing law merely requires
that the City do its part to facilitate housing construction by identifying “adequate sites.”
Loma Linda’s RHNA for the 2014-2021 planning period has been determined by SCAG to be 1,095
housing units, including 254 units for extremely/very low-income households, 177 units for low-income
households, 202 units for moderate-income households, and 462 units for above moderate-income
households. Because the City of Loma Linda adopted a Housing Element for the 2008-2014 Housing
Element planning period that was not found in compliance by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD), state law requires the City’s current (2013-2021) Housing Element to
analyze any very low and low income unaccommodated housing needs for the previous planning period
(2008-2014), in addition to the current needs. That is, any deficit in very low and low income housing units
from the 2008 RHNA must be accommodated in this Housing Element. With credit for the 463 units
developed, under construction, or approved, the remaining unaccommodated RHNA (2008) of 701 very
low and low income units, in addition to the current RHNA of 1,095 units, yields a RHNA of 1,796 units
that must be accommodated during the 2013 to 2021 planning period. These units are distributed as
follows: 671 extremely low/very low-income units, 461 low-income units, 202 moderate-income units and
462 above moderate-income units.
Many residential development opportunities are available to address the RHNA. The opportunities shown
in this Element consist predominantly of vacant residential sites and vacant and underutilized land within
Special Planning Areas. The site inventory has identified capacity for 2,390 units, 1,538 of which are on
sites suitable for development of lower-income housing. The sites and RHNA comparison indicates that
there are adequate sites to accommodate the total RHNA (2014 RHNA and 2008 unaccommodated
RHNA).
Executive Summary                                       5-3                                      November 2013

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Policies and Programs
Housing policies and eight implementing programs (with multiple action items each) have been developed
in response to the analysis. A summary of actions–including identification of funding sources, responsible
entities, and time frames for implementation–is also presented. They are organized under the following
goals:
     1. Provide adequate sites to meet the 2014-2021 RHNA.
     2. Assist in the development of housing to meet the needs of lower income households.
     3. Address and where appropriate, and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to
          housing development.
     4. Conserve, preserve, and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock.
     5. Promote equal housing opportunity.
The goals and corresponding policies and programs address the objectives required by and delineated in
state law (California Code Section 65583 [c][1]).
Executive Summary                                  5-4                                      November 2013

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                           Housing Element
HOUSING ELEMENT
5.1 Introduction
Housing has been and will continue to be one of the basic needs that must be accommodated within the
City of Loma Linda. The Housing Element describes the existing housing available, as well as the goals
and supporting policies the City will follow to ensure that adequate provisions are made to meet the
housing needs of all segments of the community.
5.1.1 Regional Location
The City of Loma Linda is located within western San Bernardino County approximately 60 miles east of
the City of Los Angeles, California. Jurisdictions that border Loma Linda include the cities of Redlands
and San Bernardino to the north; the city of Redlands and unincorporated San Bernardino County to the
east; unincorporated Riverside and San Bernardino Counties to the south; and unincorporated San
Bernardino County and the cities of Colton and San Bernardino to the west.
The Planning Area for the Housing Element includes the existing City limits, which encompass eight
square miles. The City is approximately 40 percent developed, with the remainder comprising agricultural
areas, open space, and vacant lands. Much of the remaining land is located in hillside areas that provide
an important scenic backdrop to the City. According to the California Department of Finance, the 2013
population of the City of Loma Linda is 23,476.
5.1.2 Purpose of the Housing Element
The California Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and suitable living environment
for every Californian as the state’s main housing goal. Recognizing the important part that local planning
programs play in pursuit of this goal, the Legislature has mandated that all cities and counties prepare a
Housing Element as part of their comprehensive General Plans. The Housing Element is a mandatory
General Plan element. It identifies ways in which the housing needs of existing and future residents can
be met. This Housing Element responds to those requirements, and responds specifically to conditions
and policy directives unique to Loma Linda.
5.1.3 Scope and Content of the Housing Element
The Housing Element covers the planning period of October 15, 2013 to October 15, 2021 and identifies
strategies and programs to: 1) encourage the development of a variety of housing opportunities; 2)
provide housing opportunities for persons of lower and moderate incomes, 3) preserve the quality of the
existing housing stock in Loma Linda, 4) minimize governmental constraints, and 5) promote equal
housing opportunities for all residents.
Toward these ends, the Housing Element consists of:
        An introduction of the scope and purpose of the Housing Element
        An evaluation of land, administrative, and financial resources available to address the housing
         goals
November 2013                                        5-5                                        Introduction

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
         A Housing Plan to address the identified housing needs, including housing goals, policies, and
          programs
         Appendices that include an analysis of the City’s demographic and housing characteristics and
          trends; a review of potential market, governmental, and environmental constraints to meeting the
          City’s identified housing needs; and a review of past accomplishments under the previous
          Housing Element
In response to updated Housing Element law, this Housing Element addresses SB 812 that requires an
assessment of the housing needs of developmentally disabled persons. SB 244 requires cities and
counties, prior to adoption of the Housing Element, to address the infrastructure needs of disadvantaged
unincorporated communities outside the city’s limits but within the city’s planning area. According to the
maps from the California Department of Water Resources, Loma Linda contains no disadvantaged
communities within its sphere of influence.
5.1.4 Consistency with Other General Plan Elements
The California Government Code requires that General Plans contain integrated, consistent sets of goals
and policies. The Housing Element is, therefore, affected by policies in the Land Use Element and
Circulation Element. The Housing Element is internally consistent with the balance of the General Plan.
As portions of the General Plan are amended in the future, each of the elements of the General Plan,
including the Housing Element, will be reviewed to ensure internal consistency is maintained.
State law requires that the Safety and Conservation Elements include an analysis and policies regarding
flood hazard and management information upon revisions to the Housing Element. The City of Loma
Linda completed a comprehensive General Plan update in 2009. As such, information on flood hazard
and management is up to date. Moving forward, the City will ensure compliance with this requirement by
reviewing its Safety and Conservation Elements upon future Housing Element revisions.
5.1.5 Citizen Participation
The legislature requires that local Housing Elements be prepared with the participation of all economic
segments of the community. All segments of the Loma Linda community were encouraged by the City to
participate in the preparation of the Housing Element through a combination of public notices and direct
contacts with organizations serving low-income and special needs groups. They were invited to a joint
City Council and Planning Commission Housing Element study session at City Hall on September 10,
2013. The focus of the study session was to provide information on the Housing Element update and to
identify potential issues and topics for inclusion into the Housing Element. To reach all economic
segments of the community, the following non-profit and community services organizations were
contacted during the preparation of the Housing Element and invited to attend the Housing Element study
session to provide input and during the hearing process. In addition, invitations to the study session were
sent to a variety of non-profit and for-profit developers.
Introduction                                           5-6                                    November 2013

                                                                                          City of Loma Linda
                                                                                            Housing Element
            Adventist Community Team Services                    Loma Linda University
            American Pacific Homes                              Loma Linda University Foundation -
            Catholic           Charities            San          Housing
             Bernardino/Riverside                                Loma Linda University Student Affairs
            Community Action Partnership of San                 Mary Erickson Community Housing
             Bernardino County                                   Mary's Mercy Center
            Corporation for Better Housing                      Neighborhood Housing Services of the
            Department of Aging and Adult Services               Inland Empire
            Frazee Community Center                             Obershaw Transitional Housing Program
            Granite Homes                                       Option House
            Habitat for Humanity - San Bernardino               Richmond American Homes
            Housing Authority County of San                     Ryland Homes
             Bernardino                                          S.B. County Office of Homeless Services
            Housing Authority County of San                     Salvation     Army    Redlands      Corps
             Bernardino                                           Community Center
            Inland Empire United Way                            San Bernardino County Homeless
            Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board              Partnership
            Inland Regional Center                              Senior and Disabled Fund of San
            Inland Temporary Homes                               Bernardino County
            KB Home                                             The Spanos Corporation
            Loma        Linda       Senior      Center          VA Loma Linda Health Care System
The draft Housing Element was made available to the public at the following locations:
       Loma Linda City Hall
       City of Loma Linda website
       Loma Linda Senior Center
       Loma Linda Public Library
The study session elicited questions and comments from City Council and Planning Commission
members, including questions regarding the statutory requirements regarding the default density
provision allowed under Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B) and the requirements of Senate Bill
2. The Council and Commission also expressed a desire to focus new housing development at higher
densities within specific areas adjacent to Loma Linda University. A representative from Inland Temporary
Home commented that at the time of the 2013 San Bernardino Homeless Partnership homeless census,
there was no unsheltered homeless need in the City.
5.1.6 Definition of Terms
Several terms are used throughout this Housing Element that have particular meanings under California
law. The following presents definitions of key terms to facilitate understanding of the Housing Element.
Words appearing in italics in a definition are defined elsewhere in this section.
At-risk Units                     Existing assisted housing developments that are eligible to change from
                                  income-restricted low-income housing to market rate housing during the
                                  next 10 years due to termination of funding contracts, mortgage
                                  prepayment, or expiration of restrictions on use
Dwelling Unit                     A room or group of rooms occupied or intended for occupancy as
                                  separate living quarters
Emergency Shelter                 Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is
                                  limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No
November 2013                                         5-7                                Housing Resources

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
                                       individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an
                                       inability to pay (as defined in subdivision (e) of Section 50801 of the
                                       Health and Safety Code).
Existing (Housing) Need                The unmet potential demand for affordable housing in a community;
                                       assumed to be the number of very low- and low- income households that
                                       are overpaying for housing (spending more than 30 percent of their gross
                                       income on housing costs)
Family                                 A household consisting of two or more persons who are related by blood
                                       or marriage or who constitute a single bona fide housekeeping unit
Future (Housing) Need                  New construction needed to provide housing for all income groups that
                                       will accommodate new households (growth), replace housing inventory
                                       lost to demolition or other causes, and achieve a vacancy rate that will
                                       allow the housing market to operate efficiently and provide mobility
                                       opportunities
Goal                                   A statement describing the desired condition that should exist in the
                                       housing environment. A goal is typically not stated in quantitative terms,
                                       in contrast to an objective.
Household Unit                         All the persons who occupy a single dwelling unit, such as a detached
                                       house, townhouse, or apartment. A household may consist of one
                                       person, unrelated individuals, or a family.
Household, Extremely Low               A household with an income of less than 30 percent of the San
                                       Bernardino County median income ($65,0002). For Loma Linda, a very
                                       income-low household of four persons is one having an income of less
                                       than $20,100 (2013). “Extremely low income” is defined as a subset of
                                       “very low income.”
Household, Very Low Income A household with an income of between 30 and 50 percent of the San
                                       Bernardino County median income ($65,000). For Loma Linda, a very
                                       low-income household of four persons is having an income between
                                       $20,100 and $33,500 (2013).
Household, Low Income                  A household with an income between 50 and 80 percent of the San
                                       Bernardino County median income ($65,000). For Loma Linda, a low-
                                       income household of four persons is one having an income between
                                       $33,500 and $53,600 (2013).
Household, Moderate Income A household with an income between 80 and 120 percent of the San
                                       Income Bernardino County median income ($65,000). For Loma Linda, a
                                       moderate-income household of four persons is one having an income
                                       between $53,600 and $78,000 (2013).
Household, Above
Moderate Income                        A household with an income more than 120 percent of the County
                                       median income ($65,000). For Loma Linda, an above moderate-income
                                       household of four persons is one having an income more than $78,000
                                       (2013).
Housing Production Needs               See existing need and future need.
2
     California Department of Housing and Community Development, Income Limits, 2013, family of four.
Introduction                                               5-8                                        November 2013

                                                                                  City of Loma Linda
                                                                                   Housing Element
Live/Work Housing     Dwelling units that are designed to accommodate both residential and
                      business use
Manufactured Housing  A home built entirely in the factory under a federal building code
                      administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
                      Development (HUD). The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and
                      Safety Standards (the HUD Code) went into effect June 15, 1976.
                      Manufactured homes may be single- or multi-section and are transported
                      to the site and installed.
Mobile Home           A home built entirely in the factory and transported to the site and
                      installed. Manufactured homes may be single- or multi-section. Mobile
                      Home is the term used for homes built prior to June 15, 1976, which is
                      when Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards
                      went into effect.
Objective             The numerical target for some measurable outcome to be achieved by
                      the end of the planning period (2021). Objectives must be stated for the
                      rehabilitation, conservation, and development of housing.
Overcrowding          As defined by the U.S. Census, a household with more than
                      1.01 persons per room, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, hallways, and
                      porches. Severe overcrowding is defined as households with more than
                      1.51 persons per room.
Overpayment           A household that is paying more for housing than it can reasonably
                      afford, given other life necessities such as food, transportation, health
                      care, and child care. The rate of overpayment is measured by the
                      proportion of households that are spending more than 30 percent of their
                      gross income on housing costs. The problem of overpayment by very
                      low- and low-income is often cited as an indicator of housing assistance
                      needs.
Policy                A broad statement, consistent with a goal, that guides and shapes
                      actions in order to achieve an objective under that goal
Program, Implementing Specific actions that will be taken in order to achieve an objective
Supportive Housing    Housing with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by the target
                      population (persons, including persons with disabilities, and families who
                      are homeless) and is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the
                      supportive housing resident in retaining housing, improving his or her
                      health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when
                      possible, work in the community (as defined in subdivision (e) of Section
                      50675.14 of the Health and Safety Code)
Transitional Housing  Transitional housing is a type of supportive housing used to facilitate the
                      passage of individuals and families from homelessness to permanent
                      housing. Under Senate Bill 2 (see Health and Safety Code Section
                      50675.2), “’transitional housing and transitional housing development
                      mean buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated
                      under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance
                      and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient
                      at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than
November 2013                             5-9                                    Housing Resources

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
                   six months.” Transitional housing may occur in any housing type, subject
                   to the regulations adopted for other residential uses.
Introduction                          5-10                                  November 2013

                                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                           Housing Element
5.2 Housing Resources
The resources available for the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in Loma Linda
are addressed here. This section provides an overview of available land resources and residential sites
for future housing development, and evaluates how these resources can work toward satisfying future
housing needs. Also discussed are the financial and administrative resources available to support
affordable housing and energy conservation opportunities.
5.2.1 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA)
A core component of the Housing Element is the Regional Housing Needs Assessment, or RHNA. The
RHNA, developed through a process directed by the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG), represents the number of housing units–divided into various household income categories–that
have been calculated to represent Loma Linda’s “fair share” of the regional housing need during the
Housing Element planning period. By law, the City is required to show in the Housing Element that
adequate sites are available in Loma Linda to accommodate the construction of new housing units
consistent with the RHNA. Recognizing that development is often constrained by the market and
environmental and other factors, the law makes no mandate that these units actually be built. Rather,
housing law merely requires that the City do its part to facilitate housing construction by identifying
“adequate sites.” Under state law (California Government Code section 65583[c][1]), adequate sites are
those with appropriate zoning and development standards, with services and facilities, needed to facilitate
and encourage the development of a variety of housing for all income levels. Loma Linda’s RHNA for the
2014-2021 planning period has been determined by SCAG to be 1,095 housing units, including 254 units
for extremely/very low-income households, 177 units for low-income households, 202 units for moderate-
income households, and 462 units for above moderate-income households.
                  Table 5.A: 2014-2021 RHNA
                                                                     2014 RHNA
                                                    % of           Total Housing         Percentage of
                      Income Group             County MFI         Units Allocated             Units
                  Extremely/Very Low               0-50%                 254                  23.2%
                  Low                             51-80%                 177                  16.2%
                  Moderate                       81-120%                 202                  18.4%
                  Above Moderate                  120% +                 462                  42.2%
                  Total                                                 1,095                 100%
                  Note: Pursuant to AB 2634, local jurisdictions are also required to project the housing
                  needs of extremely low-income households (0-30% AMI). In estimating the number of
                  extremely low-income households, a jurisdiction can use 50% of the very low-income
                  allocation or apportion the very low-income figure based on Census data. There are 1,950
                  extremely low- and very low-income households, with extremely low-income households
                  comprising 48.5% of the total. Therefore, the City’s very low-income RHNA of 254 units
                  can be split into 123 extremely low-income and 131 very low-income units.
5.2.2 Unaccommodated RHNA
The City of Loma Linda adopted a Housing Element for the 2008-2014 Housing Element planning period
that the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) found did not fully comply
with state law. As such, Government Code Section 65584.09 requires Loma Linda’s 2014-2021 Housing
Element to analyze any unaccommodated housing needs for the previous planning period, in addition to
November 2013                                                5-11                                        Housing Resources

   City of Loma Linda
   Housing Element
   the current needs. That is, any deficit in the very low and low income housing units from the 2008 RHNA
   must be accommodated in this Housing Element. The 2008 RHNA for the City of Loma Linda is 2,646
   units divided into the following affordability levels: 610 extremely low/very low-income units, 432 low-
   income units, 501 moderate-income units, and 1,103 above moderate-income units.
   The 2008 RHNA used January 1, 2006 as the baseline date. As a result, housing units constructed,
   permitted, or entitled since this baseline date can be credited toward the RHNA for the 2008-2014
   Housing Element cycle. Based on City records, since the beginning of 2006, 463 units have been
   developed, under construction, or approved (Table 5.B). With credit for the 463 units developed, under
   construction, or approved, the remaining unaccommodated RHNA (2008) of 701 very low and low income
   units, in addition to the current RHNA of 1,095 units, yields a RHNA of 1,796 units that must be
   accommodated during the 2013 to 2021 planning period. These units are distributed as follows: 671
   extremely low/very low-income units, 461 low-income units, 202 moderate-income units and 462 above
   moderate-income units.
Table 5.B: RHNA and RHNA Credits
                                                          Extremely/                            Above
                                                           Very Low      Low    Moderate      Moderate
                                          Funding         Income (0-   Income  Income (80-     Income
                                        Mechanism            50%)     (51-80%)    120%)       (120% +)   Total
2008-2014 RHNA                                                610        432       501          1,103    2,646
Units Constructed/Under Construction/Permits Issued:
11053 San Juan Street Apartments              NA               --         --        --             4        4
24940 Mound Street Multi Family               NA               --         --        --             2        2
11240 San Mateo Drive Multi Family            NA               --         --        --             2        2
                                        RDA Housing
                                        Fund, HOME
Loma Linda Commons                       Funds, Tax
10799 Poplar Street                         Credits            72         47        1                     120
Cole Street Condos                            NA               --         --        --             5        5
Loma Linda Terrace Senior Housing      HOME Funds,
10846 Poplar Street                     State Bonds            63         86        --            3       152
                                        RDA Housing
                                          Fund, Tax
Poplar Street Apartments                Credits-MHP
10777 Poplar Street                          Loan              37          6        1             --       44
Loma Sierra Apartments                  RDA Housing
25421 Cole Street                            Fund              17          3        4                      24
Inland Temporary Homes                  RDA Housing
10875 Poplar Street                          Fund               4         --        --            --        4
                                        RDA Housing
Single Family 10599 Lind Avenue              Fund              --          1        --            --        1
                                        RDA Housing
Single Family24966 Court Street              Fund              --          1        --            --        1
                                        RDA Housing
Single Family10605 Lind Avenue               Fund              --          1        --            --        1
                                        RDA Housing
Single Family10655 Lind Avenue               Fund              --          1        --            --        1
Single Family 25564 Van Leuven          RDA Housing
Street                                       Fund              --          1        --            --        1
                                       City Assistance
25259 Van Leuven Street Apartments       Agreement             --          1        --            86       87
Daniells Hall East Student                    NA
Apartments                                                     --         --        --            14       14
TOTAL Units Constructed/Under
Construction/Permits Issued                                   193        148        6            116      463
2008-2014 Remaining RHNA                                      417        284       NA*           NA*     701*
   Housing Resources                                     5-12                                  November 2013
                                                                                               City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                 Housing Element
2013-2021 RHNA                                              254        177           202            462       1,095
Total RHNA 2008 and 2013                                    671        461           202            462       1,796
*Note: The unaccommodated RHNA units in the Moderate and Above Moderate Income category are not required be
accommodated in this Housing Element. Only the 1,196 unaccommodated units in the very low and low income
categories must be accommodated in this Housing Element.
  5.2.3 Sites Inventory
  Many residential development opportunities exist in the City with sufficient capacity to meet and exceed
  the identified housing need (Figure 5.1). The opportunities consist predominantly of vacant residential
  sites and vacant and underutilized land within two Special Planning Areas. Altogether, these sites ensure
  that adequate sites beyond the remaining RHNA are provided for in the planning period.
  5.2.3.1 Sites Inventory Considerations: Realistic Capacity
  Consistent with HCD Guidelines, methodology for determining realistic capacity on each identified site
  must account for land use controls and site improvements. A realistic density calculation of 80 percent of
  the maximum density has been applied to the residentially zoned sites and Special Planning Areas. The
  80 percent realistic capacity figure is also consistent with development standards in areas such as Loma
  Linda where required site improvements and standards are conducive to achieving higher densities.
  Achievable density on a property is often influenced by how much a developer is willing to spend on a
  development, which is beyond the discretion of the local agency. In a tight housing market, achieving
  maximum density is financially feasible because the developer is able to recoup the investment even at
  high density products that do not usually command the highest market value. On sites zoned for lower
  densities (from 0.1 units per acre to 1 unit per acre), realistic capacity is calculated at the maximum
  allowed. In these areas (such as the Hillside Conservation areas, South Hills, and Residential Estate), it is
  reasonable to estimate that developing housing below the maximum allowed densities would not be
  practical.
  Sites located in two Special Planning Areas (SPAs) are included in the sites inventory. Each SPA is
  intended to provide a different variety of uses at varied densities according to each area’s location,
  access, size, and adjacent land use designations. Future mixed used development in SPAs is estimated
  to occur at densities of at least 20 units per acre. Since 2008, four multi-family housing developments
  (with a total of 238 affordable units) have been approved or built in Loma Linda at densities ranging from
  18.5 to 27.8 units per acre. These developments have an average density of 22.7 units per acre. Given
  that residential uses in future mixed use development will have a multi-family character, the assumption
  that new mixed use development may occur at residential densities of at least 20 units per acre
  represents a realistic and reasonable assumption. Development of the mixed use capacity at lower
  densities than reflected in this sites inventory is not expected. The SPA land use plans reflect the
  understanding that some parts of the SPAs would develop at varying densities. As such the SPA land use
  plans include a mix of housing types and densities. This planning approach ensures that if a developer
  prefers to develop housing at lower densities they can do so without using land intended for mixed use or
  higher density development. For example, the land use plan for SPA B as detailed in the General Plan
  Land Use Element includes mixed use (up to 20 units per acre), high density residential development (up
  November 2013                                        5-13                                   Housing Resources

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Housing Resources  5-14 November 2013
                                                                                             City of Loma Linda
                                                                                              Housing Element
to 13 units per acre), very high density residential (up to 20 units per acre) and senior housing (up to 25
units per acre) as well as non-residential uses. SPA D land uses account for development of lower
density housing (up to 4 units per acre).
Higher densities for mixed use developments are also supported by the high demand for housing from the
Loma Linda University and Medical Center community. With student enrollment of over 4,000 and over
13,000 employees, the University and Medical Center are seeking to expand housing opportunities in the
City. Because of the large staff at the University and Medical Center and the large proportion of graduate
and professional school students (over 70 percent of all students), there is a high demand for non-
dormitory housing units in Loma Linda. The types of units in demand are multifamily housing—both rental
and ownership—at higher densities that make the units affordable. As a nearby example in the city of
Riverside (10 miles south of Loma Linda) demonstrate, mixed use projects adjacent to universities can be
very successful and yield high densities. Near the University of California, Riverside (UCR), the recent
University Village Towers development, a 166-unit mixed use development with a density of 100 units per
acre, is fully occupied.
The Loma Linda University Medical Center (LLUMC) recently initiated a major campus transformation
planning program. The master plan calls for multi-phased development of new facilities and
improvements to the existing campus to accommodate growing demand for the services provided and to
meet regulatory requirements regarding seismic retrofit of hospitals. The master plan provides for the
construction of new facilities, modernization of existing facilities, and replacement of a portion of the main
hospital. The plan includes a new 13-story hospital and seven-story parking structure directly across from
SPA C. This significant intensification of uses on the LLUMC, as well as University ownership of large
portions of properties within the SPAs, will serve as a catalyst for redevelopment of the SPA areas, and
specifically SPA B, located across the street from the Medical Center. This area currently is developed
with older and small-scale residential and office uses, many of which show signs of deferred maintenance
and deterioration.
In addition to mixed use sites identified in the SPAs, additional high density mixed use sites exist in Loma
Linda where more residential development could occur. Because they are not vacant, those sites were
not included. The sites identified in were those that are predominately vacant, and therefore most ripe for
redevelopment especially in a City with high housing demand. As such, each site’s identified capacity
reflects realistic projections related to future development.
5.2.3.2 Sites Inventory Considerations: Zoning Appropriate to Accommodate
Housing Affordable to Lower-Income Households
The capacity of sites that allow development densities of at least 20 units per acre has been credited
toward the lower-income RHNA based on state law. The California Government Code states that if a local
government has adopted density standards consistent with the population based criteria set by state law
(at least 20 units per acre for Loma Linda), HCD is obligated to accept sites with those density standards
(20 units per acre or higher) as appropriate for accommodating the jurisdictions share of regional housing
need for lower-income households. Per Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B), the City’s Very High
Density designation and the estimated density in the mixed use areas of the SPAs are consistent with the
default density standard (20 units per acre) for suburban jurisdictions such as Loma Linda, and therefore
considered appropriate to accommodate housing for lower-income households.
Additionally in Loma Linda the moderate-income need can be met by private market construction of non-
subsidized rental units and entry-level condominiums. As indicated in the Housing Needs Assessment of
this Housing Element, based on 2013 housing prices and rental rates and the housing affordability
thresholds presented in Appendix A (Tables 5.A.L and 5.A.M), townhomes, condominiums, and
apartment units are considered affordable to moderate-income households. The High Density Residential
designations allows up to 13 units per acre and is intended to accommodate development of multifamily
uses consisting of townhouse, condominiums, and low-rise apartment style developments. As such, sites
November 2013                                          5-15                                 Housing Resources

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
identified in zones allowing at least 13 units per acre are considered appropriate to accommodate
housing affordable to moderate-income households.
5.2.3.3 Vacant Residential Land
The inventory of vacant residential land (exclusive of those in Special Planning Areas) in Loma Linda
totals 756 acres. The majority of these vacant parcels are designated for lower-density development.
These vacant properties, identified in Table 5.C, have the potential to yield 583 units, 173 of which can
facilitate lower-income housing, as defined by state law. A detailed listing of these sites is included in
Appendix D, Table 5.D.A.
 Table 5.C: Summary of Residential Capacity on Vacant Residential Sites
                                                                                                  Realistic
                                                                      Max.                        Capacity            Affordability
             General Plan                         Zoning            Density          Acres          (units)                Level
 South Hills                                   Hillside/R-1        1 du/10 ac         333.0            51          Above Moderate
 Hillside Conservation Area                    Hillside/R-1        1 du/10 ac         290.0            31          Above Moderate
 Rural Estate                                        R-1            1 du/ac           34.2             34          Above Moderate
 Low Density Residential                             R-1            4 du/ac            82.0           264          Above Moderate
 Medium Density Residential                       R-3/R-1            9 du/ac           4.1             30          Above Moderate
 High Density Residential                         R-3/R-1           13 du/ac           5.5             58          Moderate
 Very High Density Residential                       R-3            20 du/ac           7.2            115          Very Low/Low
 Total                                                                                756.0           583
 Notes:
 1) Potential Units do not reflect straight application of maximum density to vacant land. A realistic density calculation of 80 percent
 of the maximum density has been applied to most residentially zoned sites outside of Special Planning Areas. Due to the very low
 densities allowed, for sites zoned for lower densities (from 0.1 units per acre to 1 unit per acre) a realistic capacity is calculated at
 the maximum allowed.
5.2.3.4 Underutilized Residential Land
In addition to vacant sites, future housing units can be accommodated on underutilized lots currently
developed at less than the maximum permitted density. Many of the identified sites are located in areas
intended for high density development yet the sites are developed with single-family homes. The analysis
of residentially zoned land reveals that underutilized residential properties in Loma Linda have the
potential for development of at least 352 dwelling units (198 units on properties with appropriate densities
to facilitate lower-income housing). The City acknowledges that small lot development may be more
difficult; thus, the City has included only those properties that have the potential for sufficient added
capacity to make recycling of land economically feasible. As further evidence of the recycling potential in
the City, since 2006 higher density units built or approved have involved recycling of land to achieve
additional units. This trend demonstrates that the City facilitates and encourages recycling, and that there
is a demand and market for recycling of land to higher densities. Table 5.D presents a summary of
residential capacity on underutilized residential land. A detailed listing of the underutilized properties is
included in Appendix D, Table 5.D.A.
 Table 5.D: Summary of Residential Capacity on Underutilized Residential Sites
                                                                                                  Realistic
                                                                      Max.                        Capacity            Affordability
             General Plan                         Zoning            Density          Acres          (units)                Level
 Low Density Residential                             R-1            4 du/ac            9.6             31          Above Moderate
 Medium Density Residential                       R-3/R-1            9 du/ac           17.1           123          Above Moderate
 High Density Residential                         R-3/R-1           13 du/ac           9.1             95          Moderate
 Very High Density Residential                       R-3            20 du/ac           6.4            103          Very Low/Low
 Total                                                                                 42.2           352
 Notes:
 1) Potential Units do not reflect straight application of maximum density to vacant land. A realistic density calculation of 80 percent
 of the maximum density has been applied to most residentially zoned sites outside of Special Planning Areas.
Housing Resources                                                5-16                                                 November 2013
                                                                                           City of Loma Linda
                                                                                            Housing Element
5.2.3.5 Vacant and Underutilized Land in Special Planning Areas
Two Special Planning Areas (SPAs) in Loma Linda offer residential development opportunities in a
higher-density, mixed use environment. In addition to vacant land intended for residential and mixed use,
underutilized land that is developed at lower densities than allowed by the General Plan and Zoning Code
are also included. With the SPAs, established in 2006, the City intended to create areas in which a mix of
uses can come together to meet the commercial, employment, institutional, and residential needs of the
neighborhood and community through efficient patterns of land use. As established in the Land Use
Element, each SPA has its own purpose and intent. To those ends, specific parameters for future
developments have been established. The intent for developments within the SPAs and detailed
development parameters are included in the General Plan Land Use Element. These parameters include
the type and density of residential uses to be developed as well as the total number of housing units
expected to be developed. In this respect, the City’s approach to development within in the SPAs is more
focused than a traditional zoning approach. The zoning designations do not include a description of
expected land uses in the SPA; instead the zoning code defers to the detailed land use scenarios in the
General Plan. The land use scenarios reflect the City’s plans for future development in these
undeveloped areas. Similar to a more traditional zoning approach, to deviate from the established
development scenario would require a General Plan amendment, a more complex and costly process
than a zone change.
The City’s land use planning approach is intended to provide flexibility for development of the large many
acres of underutilized and vacant land within the SPAs while maintaining a specific intent and vision for
the SPAs. Future development is intended to occur in the context of a coordinated process so that
specific siting of land uses/buildings, architectural design, landscaping, road infrastructure, utilities, and
other elements can be planned in a comprehensive, rather than piecemeal, manner throughout the SPA.
For this reason, a development scenario as adopted in the General Plan is presented for each area, and
capacity is not calculated on a parcel basis since the exact type of development on each parcel is not
established. This provides flexibility in design for future development. A list of the parcels with
corresponding land use and existing use information is included in Appendix D, Table 5.D.A.
Future mixed used development within the SPAs included in this sites inventory is projected to occur at
densities of at least 20 units per acre. This assumption is included in the General Plan where residential
densities in Mixed Use developments are indicted as having the same character as the Very High Density
Residential land use category which allows densities of 20 units per acre. The high demand for
moderately priced housing, especially from the Loma Linda University community (students, faculty, and
staff) will catalyze development of the higher density component for each SPA, as presented in the
General Plan. The University has indicated that it is committed to expanding housing opportunities for the
University and Medical Center students, faculty and staff. LLUMC and the Children’s Hospital (LLUCH)
together operate one of the largest and most prestigious academic teaching and clinical programs in the
United States. In addition to the large staff at the University and Medical Center and the large proportion
of graduate and professional school students (over 70 percent of all students), there is a high demand for
non-dormitory housing units in Loma Linda which will support higher density development in the City. As
noted above, high demand for housing in the city of Riverside near UCR has resulted in construction of
successful mixed use projects at densities approaching 100 units per acre. Furthermore, as residential
uses in future mixed use development are expected to have a multifamily character, recent multifamily
housing development trends have shown that residential mixed use densities of at least 20 units per acre
represent a realistic and reasonable assumption. Given that the SPAs included in this sites inventory
represent the last large tracts of developable land, property owners have a strong financial incentive to
develop these areas to the capacity allowed under the City’s land use regulations. The SPA capacity
calculations also take into account the development of non-residential uses and are detailed below.
The parcels included in the following two SPAs have the capacity to accommodate 1,455 units.
Special Planning Area B
This Special Planning Area is located east of Anderson Street, north of Van Leuven Street, south of San
Timoteo Creek, and west of residential uses and vacant parcels along Poplar Street. This area is
November 2013                                        5-17                                 Housing Resources

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
currently characterized by low-scale single-family residential uses located along Anderson Street and
Parkland Street (which splits off from and runs roughly parallel to Anderson Street). Elmer Digneo Park,
which is not included in the sites inventory, is located on the east side of Anderson Street, north of the rail
line. Agricultural uses occupy the remainder of the area, with a small telephone utility use at the corner of
Van Leuven and Orange Grove Streets. The current agricultural uses are marginal and development of
the site for a mixed use village is expected. On the east side and outside of SPA boundaries, three large
multifamily developments–Loma Linda Commons, Loma Linda Terrace and Poplar Street Apartments–
have been built in the last five years. These developments have a total of 316 units, 313 of which are
affordable.
The intent is for this area to develop into a mixed
use village with residential, office, retail, cultural,
medical/health care, educational, and park and
recreation uses. Implementing policies for the
SPA include encouraging mixed use as well as
medium high (0–13 du/ac) to very high (0–20
du/ac) density residential, as well as senior
housing (0–25 du/ac).
Within SPA B, there are currently 0.47 acres of
vacant land, 5.6 acres of underutilized land
developed with residential, and 38.3 acres of
agricultural and utility uses. The majority of the
42.5 acres of SPA B parcels included in the sites
inventory are owned by Loma Linda University,
with the exception of one parcel 0.96-acre parcel
owned by Verizon Communications. Loma Linda
University anticipates development of the area in
the near future based on high demand for
housing from the Loma Linda University and
Medical Center community. Recent high density
developments in the area just to the east of SPA
have resulted in densities of at least 19 units per
acre and upwards of 27 units per acre.                       Special Planning Area B
The SPA B parcels identified in this site inventory have the potential to yield approximately 499 units at
densities appropriate to encourage affordable housing. The realistic capacity calculations for SPA B have
been scaled back 25 percent to account for non-residential development and any potential dormitory
development. The units presented in Table 5.E do not include dormitory units.
    Table 5.E: Special Planning Area B: Estimated Development Scenario
                Type of Development                         Acres         Capacity (units)      Affordability Level
    Mixed Use (expected 20 du/ac)                            7.98               128            Very Low/Low
    High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)                 7.98                83            Moderate
    Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac)            7.98                128           Very Low/Low
    Senior Housing (0 to 25 du/ac)                           7.98                160           Very Low/Low
    Non Residential Uses                                     10.6                 --           NA
    Total                                                   42.54                499
    Notes: Reflecting the development intent established in the General Plan for SPA B as a mixed use village,
    only 75 percent of land included in the sites inventory is used to calculate residential capacity (including mixed
    use).
Housing Resources                                          5-18                                           November 2013

                                                                                                                 City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                                   Housing Element
Special Planning Area D
SPA D is bordered by Redlands Boulevard
on the north, California Street on the east,
Mission Road on the south, and the
Southern California Edison transmission
towers to the west. This area currently
consists of scattered residential uses,
primarily along Mission Road and Redlands
Boulevard. The majority of the site consists
of marginal agricultural uses and vacant
land. A school facility and mobile home
park located at the corner of Redlands
Boulevard and California Street and
residential and recreational uses located on
the west side of the SPA are not included in
this inventory. The agricultural uses
(orange groves) in the site are expected to
be redeveloped. 58 acres of the groves in
SPA D are owned by a real estate
investment company, and 52 acres are
owned by the City of Loma Linda.
The General Plan envisions future
development in this area to be
characterized by a horizontal and vertical
mixed uses developed along the frontages
of Redlands Boulevard and California
Street, including commercial, office,
structured parking, and very high-density                   Special Planning Area D
residential dwelling units within a mixed
use context. Implementation of development within Special Planning Area D shall be through a
coordinated process so that specific siting of land uses/buildings, architectural design, landscaping, road
infrastructure, utilities, and other elements can be planned and implemented in a comprehensive, rather
than piecemeal, manner throughout the Special Planning Area
Currently, orange groves comprise 218 acres of the site, 43 acres are considered vacant, and seven
acres are developed with low-scale residential uses. A large portion of the site (63 acres of the site which
are either vacant or have agricultural uses) are owned by the City of Loma Linda. The SPA D parcels
identified in this site inventory have the potential to yield approximately 966 units, a majority of which will
be at densities appropriate to encourage affordable housing.
    Table 5.F: Special Planning Area D: Estimated Development Scenario
                  Type of Development                              Acres           Capacity (units)        Affordability Level
    Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)                                                 288           Above Moderate
    High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)                                               119           Moderate
                                                                  268.73*
    Mixed Use (expected 20 du/ac)                                                          358           Very Low/Low
    Senior Housing (0 to 25 du/ac)                                                         191           Very Low/Low
    Total                                                         268.73                   956
    Notes: Close to 87 percent of the land in SPA D is included in the sites inventory. The capacity represented reflects 87
    percent of the specific development parameters established In the General Plan for each land use type. As mentioned
    previously, capacity is not calculated on a parcel basis – as the exact type of development on each parcel is not established.
    This provides flexibility in design for future development. A list of the parcels with corresponding land use and existing use
    information is included in Appendix D.
5.2.4 Adequacy of Sites for RHNA
November 2013                                                     5-19                                          Housing Resources

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
The site inventory has identified capacity for 2,390 units, 1,538 of which are on sites suitable for
development of lower-income housing. The sites and RHNA comparison indicates that there are
adequate sites to accommodate the total RHNA (2014 RHNA and 2008 unaccommodated RHNA).
    Table 5.G Comparison of Sites Inventory and RHNA
                                                              Income Category
                                            Extremely/                               Above
                 Unit Capacity               Very Low         Low      Moderate    Moderate       Total
    Vacant Residential Sites                    115             --         58          410         583
    Underutilized Residential Sites             103             --         95          154         352
    Vacant/Underutilized SPA B Sites            416             --         83           --         499
    Vacant/Underutilized SPA D Sites            549             --        119          288         956
    Total                                      1,183            --        355          852        2,390
    RHNA (2014–2021 and
    unaccommodated 2008 RHNA)                   671           461         202          462        1,796
    Redistributed Surplus/Shortfall (+/-)              +51               _+153        +390      +594
5.2.5 Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints
The capacity on identified sites is not constrained by any environmental conditions. The sites inventory
analysis reflects land use designations and densities established in the Land Use Element of the General
Plan. Thus, any environmental constraints that would lower the potential yield (e.g., steep slopes) have
already been accounted for. Any additional constraints that would occur on a more detailed site review
basis would be addressed as part of the individual project review process. Full urban-level services are
available throughout the City and specifically to each site in the inventory. Site development potential
analyzed indicated in the sites inventory is consistent with the development capacity reported in the Land
Use Element. Such services are more than adequate for the potential unit yield on each site. Specifically,
water and sewer service are available or are programmed to be made available for all the sites included
in the inventory.
Housing Resources                                    5-20                                   November 2013

                                                                                             City of Loma Linda
                                                                                               Housing Element
5.2.6 Financial Resources
In light of the elimination of redevelopment agencies in the State of California, the City of Loma Linda has
limited access to funding sources for affordable housing activities. This section describes two housing
funding sources currently used in Loma Linda.
Housing Choice Voucher
The Housing Authority of the County of San Bernardino (HACSB) administers the Housing Choice
Voucher Program (formerly the Section 8 Rental Assistance Program) that extends rental subsidies to
very low-income households in Loma Linda. The subsidy represents the difference between the excess of
30 percent of the recipient’s monthly income and the federally approved fair market rents. In 2012, the
HACSB provided rental assistance to 127 households.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Grants
In the 2011-2012 program year, the City of Loma Linda received just under $113,000 of federal funding
for the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program through the County of San Bernardino
Consortium. Funds were directed at street improvements, homeless services through Inland Temporary
Homes, and literacy education.
Successor Agency to the Loma Linda Redevelopment Agency
The elimination of redevelopment agencies in the State of California prompted the creation of the
Successor Housing Agency to the Loma Linda Redevelopment Agency to administer Recognized
Obligation Payment Schedule (ROPS), liquidate the Redevelopment Agency’s (RDA) assets, and pay off
debts. The ROPS, as well as other activities of the Successor Agency, are subject to review by an
oversight board and by the State Department of Finance. The loss of redevelopment funding will
significantly impair the production of affordable housing in the future unless the City can identify an
alternate funding source.
5.2.7 Administrative Resources
Agencies with administrative capacity to implement programs contained in the Housing Element include
the City of Loma Linda, other public agencies, and local and national non-profit private developers.
City of Loma Linda Community Development Department
The City of Loma Linda Community Development Department is the lead department implementing a
number of the programs outlined in this Housing Element. The department is comprised of the Planning
Division and the Building and Safety Division. The Planning Division implements the Loma Linda
Municipal Code and the City’s General Plan. This ensures that new development is attractive, compatible
with its surroundings, and meets the City’s standards for development. The Building and Safety Division
implements the Uniform Building Code and other applicable rules and guidelines. This ensures the proper
construction of buildings within Loma Linda, protects the public’s health and safety, and protects and
improves property values by enforcing standards for high-quality construction.
Public Safety Department
The Public Safety Department provides for fire protection/suppression, emergency medical services, and
other programs to reduce the risk of fire and other hazards. This department also provides animal control,
code enforcement, and parking control.
Non-Profit Developers
The City collaborates with a number of affordable housing developers. The following are housing
developers active in the City. Mary Erickson Community Housing is included in the state’s list of entities
with the legal and managerial capacity to acquire and manage affordable projects at risk of converting to
market-rate housing.
         Mary Erickson Community Housing
November 2013                                       5-21                                    Housing Resources

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
         Corporation for Better Housing
         Inland Temporary Homes
5.2.8 Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Energy-related housing costs can directly impact the affordability of housing. While state building code
standards contain mandatory energy efficiency requirements for new development, the City and utility
providers are also important resources to encourage and facilitate energy conservation and to help
residents minimize energy-related expenses. Policies addressing climate change and energy
conservation are integrated throughout the Loma Linda General Plan. The primary avenues to address
climate change in Loma Linda are through lowering of transportation emissions (through better use of
transit and walkable residential and commercial environments) and encouraging energy conservation and
efficiency (through energy efficient appliance, green building, and sustainable water policies).
Implementing policies in the General Plan related to climate change and energy conservation include:
         Facilitate employment opportunities that offer low vehicle use and minimize the need for
          automobile trips, such as live/work, telecommuting, satellite work centers, and home occupations,
          in addition to implementation of mixed-use development strategies.
         Encourage patterns of commercial development that support use of public transit, including
          modifying development regulations to facilitate commercial and/or mixed use projects at sites
          near transit stops
         Encourage energy-efficient landscaping for resource conservation by developing guidelines that
          emphasize proper irrigation techniques and sustainable landscaping.
         As part of the development review process, work with builders to maximize energy conservation
          benefits in the placement of buildings on a site with regard to sun and natural breezes.
         Incorporate measures to protect solar access from shading by neighboring structures and trees,
          thereby facilitating the use of passive or active solar systems.
         Provide incentives such as expedited processing for facilities that use renewable energy sources.
          Work with State and Federal agencies to secure tax exemptions, tax rebates, or other financial
          incentives for such facilities.
         Preserve and encourage planting trees in neighborhoods to provide shade in summer and reduce
          heat loss in winter.
         Require new development to incorporate features that reduce energy used for transportation,
          including pedestrian and bicycle pathways, and access to transit (where available).
         Reduce the waste of potable water through efficient technologies, conservation efforts, and
          design and management practices, and by better matching the source and quality of water to the
          user’s needs.
Presently, Southern California Edison offers various energy conservation programs. The Energy Savings
Assistance Program helps income-qualified customers with free appliances and installation of energy-
efficient refrigerators, air conditioners and more, as well as home efficiency solutions like weatherization.
The Energy Upgrade California program offers financial incentives for installing approved energy
upgrades. The Residential Multifamily Energy Efficiency Rebate Program offers property owners and
managers incentives on a broad list of energy efficiency improvements in lighting, HVAC, insulation and
window categories. These improvements are to be used to retrofit existing multifamily properties of two or
more units. Additionally, the Southern California Gas Company offers various rebate programs for
energy-efficient appliances and makes available to residents energy efficient kits at no cost. The Gas
Company also offers no-cost weatherization and furnace repair or replacement services for qualified
limited-income customers.
Housing Resources                                      5-22                                    November 2013

                                                   City of Loma Linda
                                                    Housing Element
              This page intentionally left blank.
November 2013               5-23                  Housing Resources
                                                                                       Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                               Housing Element
5.3 Housing Plan
The intent of the Housing Element is to ensure that the City makes a good effort and commits available
resources to meeting the housing needs of all economic segments of the community. The Housing
Element sets forth long-term goals and policies, as do other General Plan Elements, but also provides
specific program to meet those needs, as specified in state law. The housing goals and policies included
in the Loma Linda Housing Element, as well as the actions that the City will undertake to meet its housing
needs, are discussed in this Chapter. A summary of actions–including identification of funding sources,
responsible entities, and time frames for implementation–is also presented.
The Housing Element objectives, policies, and programs aim to:
        Provide adequate sites to meet the 2014-2021 RHNA;
        Assist in the development of housing to meet the needs of lower-income households
        Address and where appropriate, and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to
         housing development;
        Conserve, preserve, and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock; and
        Promote equal housing opportunity.
These objectives are required by and delineated in state law (California Code Section 65583 [c][1]).
5.3.1 Housing Opportunities
Goal 1:           Enhance housing opportunities for all Loma Linda residents.
Policy 1.1        Provide a range of different housing types and unit sizes for varying income ranges and
                  lifestyles.
Policy 1.2        Encourage the provision for housing which meets the needs of residents with special
                  housing needs, including the elderly, disabled, developmentally disabled, large families,
                  the homeless, and students.
Policy 1.3        Encourage mixed use development and student and workforce housing in appropriate
                  locations to allow for increased housing opportunities.
Policy 1.4        Work closely with the Loma Linda University and Medical Center to encourage the
                  provision of housing that meets the needs of its students, faculty, and staff.
Policy 1.5        Encourage and support efforts by large employers to participate in programs to assist
                  employees with housing needs, including, but not limited to, employer assisted housing.
Program 5.1: Adequate Sites
The City of Loma Linda has an unaccommodated RHNA from 2008 of 701 units in addition to the current
RHNA (2013) of 1,095 units, which yields a total RHNA of 1,796 units that must be accommodated during
the 2013 to 2021 planning period. The residential sites inventory consists of vacant residential land,
underutilized residential land, and vacant and underutilized land in Special Planning Areas with capacity
to yield at least 2,390 new units. The sites and RHNA comparison indicates that there are adequate sites
to accommodate the total RHNA (2014 RHNA and 2008 unaccommodated RHNA). The City will maintain
an inventory of available sites for residential development and provide it to prospective residential
developers upon request.
November 2013                                        5-24                                         Housing Plan

                                                                                             City of Loma Linda
                                                                                              Housing Element
Government Code §65863 states that no jurisdiction shall “reduce, or require, or permit the reduction of,
the residential density for any parcel to, or allow development of any parcel at, a lower residential density,
than projected” for sites identified in the Housing Element sites inventory unless the jurisdiction makes
written findings that the reduction is consistent with the General Plan, and that the remaining sites
identified in the Housing Element are adequate to accommodate the jurisdiction’s need. The City will
evaluate residential development proposals for consistency with goals and policies of the General Plan
specifically as they relate to the housing needs of the community.
     Actions:
      Continue to provide appropriate land use designations and maintain an inventory of suitable sites
         for residential development.
      Annually update an inventory that details the amount, type, and size of vacant and underutilized
         parcels to assist developers in identifying land suitable for residential development and that also
         details the number of extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income units constructed
         annually. If the inventory indicates a shortage of available sites, the City shall identify and zone
         sufficient sites to accommodate the City’s RHNA.
      To ensure sufficient residential capacity is maintained to accommodate the RHNA need, the City
         will develop and implement a project-by-project evaluation procedure pursuant to Government
         Code Section 65863. Should an approval of development on parcels identified in the Residential
         Sites Inventory result in a reduction of capacity below the residential capacity needed to
         accommodate the remaining need for lower-income households, the City will identify and zone
         sufficient sites to accommodate the shortfall.
      Provide technical assistance and information on available City-owned parcels for lower-income
         developments to private or non-profit housing providers.
      Maintain a database of available housing sites, and conduct targeted outreach to multifamily
         housing developers to promote private development and redevelopment efforts.
      Conduct a biennial update of the inventory of available sites, and ensure an ongoing supply of
         sites at appropriate densities.
     Timeframe:                    Implementation and annual reporting throughout the planning period;
                                   Development of evaluation procedure to implement Government Code
                                   section 65863 within 3 months from Housing Element adoption;
                                   developer incentives and technical assistance to occur on a case-by-
                                   case basis and in pre-application conferences; biennial review of sites
                                   inventory
     Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
     Funding Sources:              General Fund
Program 5.2: Housing Opportunities for Special Needs Groups
Provide housing opportunities to meet the special housing needs of special needs residents (including the
elderly, disabled, developmentally disabled, large families, the homeless, extremely low income
households, and students) by giving priority to development projects that include a component for special
needs groups in addition to other lower-income households. The City will implement priority based on
community needs to ensure adequate housing for all residents within special needs groups.
     Timeframe:                    Implementation throughout the planning period
     Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
     Funding Sources:              General Fund
5.3.2 Housing to Meet the Needs of All Income Levels
Goal 2:           Assist in the provision of adequate housing to meet the needs of the community.
November 2013                                         5-25                                         Housing Plan

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Policy 2.1        Facilitate the development of extremely low, very low, low and moderate income housing
                  by offering developers incentives such as density bonuses, City participation in on and
                  off-site public improvements, and flexibility in zoning and development standards.
Policy 2.2        Work with the Loma Linda University and Medical Center to facilitate the development of
                  workforce and student housing.
Policy 2.3        Assist and cooperate with nonprofit, private, and public entities to maximize opportunities
                  to develop affordable housing.
Policy 2.4        Encourage sustainable building practices for new construction and rehabilitation of
                  residential and mixed-use developments.
Program 5.3: Affordable Housing Development
For-profit and non-profit developers can play a significant role in providing affordable housing in Loma
Linda. On a case-by-case basis, the City will assess the incentives needed to facilitate the development
of affordable housing.
     Actions:
      Encourage the development of rental projects that meet the needs of lower-income renters,
          seniors, and persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities.
      Encourage the development of housing units for extremely low income households.
      Assist developers in identifying available sites for residential and mixed-use developments.
      Offer local non-profit developers and agencies technical assistance and information on City
          funding sources.
      Encourage use of the Density Bonus provisions through technical assistance and information
          dissemination.
      Alert housing developers with known interest in developing within the City when opportunities are
          available (e.g. sites, partnerships, City-owned land, availability of funding).
      Continue buying resale properties that are not being sold at market value due to restrictive
          covenants. These units can be sold at affordable housing prices with covenants placed on future
          resale prices.
      Continue using CDBG funds for infrastructure improvements in low- and moderate-income
          neighborhoods.
     Timeframe:                      Implementation throughout the planning period; meet with developers at
                                     least once a year with technical assistance and information
                                     dissemination as well as in pre-application conferences and on a case-
                                     by-case basis
     Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
     Funding Sources:                General Fund
Program 5.4: Housing Choice Voucher Program
The Housing Choice Voucher (formerly known as Section 8) program, administered by the County of San
Bernardino Housing Authority, extends rental subsidies to very low-income (up to 50 percent of AMI) and
special needs households that spend more than 30 percent of their income on rent. The subsidy
represents the difference between the excess of 30 percent of the monthly income and the actual rent.
Rental assistance is issued to recipients as vouchers, which permit tenants to locate their own housing
and rent units beyond the federally determined fair market rent in the area, provided the tenants pay the
extra rent increment. As of September 2013, the Housing Authority provides Housing Choice Voucher
rental assistance to 137 households in Loma Linda, and there are 31 applicants on the waiting list
residing in Loma Linda.
     Actions:
      Continue to work closely with the County of San Bernardino Housing Authority to administer the
          Housing Choice Vouchers Program; support the County Housing Authority’s applications for
          additional allocations.
Housing Plan                                           5-26                                   November 2013

                                                                                              City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                Housing Element
        Assist the Housing Authority in marketing the program to home seekers and property owners.
    Timeframe:                      Implementation throughout the planning period
    Responsible Agencies:           Community Development Department, County of San Bernardino
                                    Housing Authority
    Funding Source:                 HUD Housing Choice Vouchers
5.3.3 Removal of Government Constraints
Goal 3:            Mitigate potential      governmental     constraints     to  housing      production     and
                   affordability.
Policy 3.1         Periodically review City regulations, ordinances, permitting processes, and residential
                   fees to ensure that they do not constrain housing development and are consistent with
                   state law.
Policy 3.2         Accommodate housing needs for extremely low-income households and special needs
                   persons in the City’s development regulations.
Program 5.5: Comprehensive Development Code Update
Undertake a comprehensive update of the City’s zoning and subdivisions ordinances to achieve
consistency with the General Plan, encourage affordable and special needs housing, and conform to
state law.
    Actions:
    Amend the Zoning Ordinance to:
     Bring the Second Unit Ordinance into compliance with state law. Remove the rental prohibition
         and age requirements currently in place for second units.
     Bring the Density Bonus Ordinance into compliance with state law.
     Modify permit procedures for all multifamily development within multifamily zones to permit these
         developments ministerially rather than administratively.
     Explicitly address emergency shelters. The City will permit homeless shelters by-right in the
         Commercial Manufacturing zone. If the City determines (based on the most recent publically
         available homeless census and in consultation with local homeless service providers) that the
         number and type of emergency shelter beds available within the City of Loma Linda exceeds the
         City’s unsheltered homeless need, a conditional use permit will be required.. The adopted
         ordinance related to emergency shelters will not include a sunset clause. Coordinate with
         agencies serving the homeless regarding the emergency shelter ordinance.
     Define transitional/supportive housing. Transitional and supportive housing will be permitted by
         right in all zones allowing residential uses and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other
         residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
     Facilitate the provision of single-room occupancy (SRO) units consistent with state law.
     Facilitate the development of student and employee housing within lands designated Institutional
         and Health Care.
     Evaluate, and modify if necessary, development standards in the R-2 and R-3 zone to facilitate
         higher density and affordable housing.
     Evaluate, and modify if necessary, parking standards to ensure that they do not constrain the
         development of housing, specifically senior housing and multi-family housing.
     Remove or modify the definition of “Family.”
     Explicitly address the siting of residential care facilities.
    Timeframe:                      2014
    Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
    Funding Sources:                General Fund
November 2013                                         5-27                                          Housing Plan

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Program 5.6: Lot Consolidation and Subdivision
The residential sites inventory includes Special Planning Areas that contain a mix of very large and small
parcels. In addition, higher density areas of the City contain many smaller sized lots. Assistance with lot
consolidation and subdivision can encourage residential development.
     Actions:
            Continue offering higher lot coverage for small lot development. Consider establishing
             alternative development standards for small lot development.
            Continue to encourage the consolidation of lots in order to encourage the development of
             residential and mixed-use projects. Work with developers to explore lot consolidation
             opportunities and site designs to maximize lot use. Offer technical assistance and consider
             offering regulatory incentives for lot consolidation. Communicate opportunities for lot
             consolidation to interested developers.
            Work with developers and property owners to assist in lot subdivision in areas with large
             parcels. Offer technical assistance.
     Timeframe:                    Implementation of currently available incentives: throughout the planning
                                   period. Evaluation and establishment of new incentives: concurrent with
                                   the Comprehensive Land Use Code update (2014)
     Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
     Funding Sources:              General Fund
Program 5.7: Water and Sewer Service Providers
In accordance with Government Code Section 65589.7 as revised in 2005, immediately following City
Council adoption, the City must deliver to all public agencies or private entities that provide water or
sewer services to properties within the City of Loma Linda a copy of the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
     Actions:
           Within 30 days of adoption of the Housing Element, deliver the Loma Linda Housing Element
             to all providers of sewer and water service within the City of Loma Linda.
     Timeframe:                    Within 30 days of adoption of the Housing Element
     Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
     Funding Sources:              General Fund
5.3.4 Conserve, Preserve, and Improve the Housing Stock
Goal 4:           Maintain and improve the quality              of   existing   housing    and   residential
                  neighborhoods in Loma Linda.
Policy 4.1        Encourage the maintenance, enhancement, and rehabilitation of the existing housing
                  stock.
Policy 4.2        Continue to utilize the City’s code enforcement program to improve overall housing
                  conditions in Loma Linda.
Policy 4.3        Promote increased awareness among property owners and residents of the importance
                  of property maintenance.
Program 5.8: Code Enforcement
Housing Plan                                         5-28                                    November 2013

                                                                                            City of Loma Linda
                                                                                             Housing Element
Code enforcement is an important tool for maintaining the quality of residential neighborhoods. Loma
Linda building officials provide inspection services on a complaint basis. Examples of code violations
include families living in illegal units, such as garages and recreational vehicles, construction of illegal
buildings, households living in unsafe buildings, and water conservation violations.
     Action:
      Provide ongoing inspection services to review code violations on a survey and complaint basis.
     Timeframe:                    Implementation throughout the planning period
     Responsible Agency:           Public Safety Department
     Funding Sources:              General Fund
Program 5.9: Housing Rehabilitation Program
The City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program was active up until the elimination of the redevelopment
agency as it relied solely on redevelopment funds. In addition, the County of San Bernardino has also
discontinued its rehabilitation and repair programs which were available to Loma Linda residents.
Alternative funding to continue the City of Loma Linda Housing Rehabilitation Program has not yet been
identified.
     Action:
      Identify and pursue alternative sources of funding for the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program.
      Reinstate the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program when funding becomes available.
     Timeframe:                    Implementation throughout the planning period
     Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
     Funding Sources:              General Fund
Program 5.10: Housing At-Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Housing
Housing Element law requires jurisdictions to provide an analysis and program for preserving affordability
of assisted housing developments for the next 10 years. Based on City records and information from the
California Housing Partnership Corporation, in the next 10 years (2014-2024) no assisted housing
developments in Loma Linda are at risk of losing their affordability status.
     Action:
      Although the City has not identified any housing units at risk of converting to market rate during
         the 2014-2024 period, City staff will monitor the status of existing and future affordable housing.
         Should any of the properties become at risk of converting to market rate, the City will work with
         property owners, interest groups, and the State and federal governments to conserve the
         affordable housing stock.
     Timeframe:                    Implementation throughout the planning period
     Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
     Funding Sources:              General Fund
November 2013                                        5-29                                         Housing Plan

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
5.3.5 Promote Equal Housing Opportunity
Goal 5:            Promote equal housing opportunity for all residents.
Policy 5.1         Continue to enforce fair housing laws prohibiting discrimination in the building, financing,
                   selling, or renting of housing on the basis of race, ethnicity, ancestry, national origin,
                   religion, sex, disability, age, marital status, familial status, source of income, sexual
                   orientation, or any other arbitrary factor.
Policy 5.2         Encourage and facilitate the development of residential units that are accessible to
                   handicapped persons or are adaptable for conversion to housing for handicapped
                   persons.
Program 5.11: Fair Housing
The City of Loma Linda takes affirmative steps to promote fair housing practices by contracting the
services of a non-profit organization to provide fair housing services in the City. The City works with the
Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board to provide fair housing services for residents and housing
professionals.
     Actions:
      Continue to refer cases and questions to the Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board for
          enforcement of prohibitions on discrimination in lending practices and in the sale or rental of
          housing.
      Continue to provide information to help increase awareness of fair housing protections through
          fair housing workshops.
      Advertise the availability of fair housing services through flyers at public counters and City
          mailers. Post available fair housing services on the City’s website and other community
          locations.
     Timeframe:                      Implementation throughout the planning period. Website and public
                                     counter posting of fair housing resources to occur within one year of
                                     Housing Element adoption. Fair housing workshops to occur at least
                                     twice per year.
     Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
     Funding Sources:                General Fund
Program 5.12: Reasonable Accommodation
The federal Fair Housing Act, as amended in 1988, requires that cities and counties provide reasonable
accommodation to rules, policies, practices, and procedures where such accommodation may be
necessary to afford individuals with disabilities equal housing opportunities. While fair housing laws intend
for all people have equal access to housing, the law also recognizes that people with disabilities may
need extra tools to achieve equality. Reasonable accommodation is one of the tools intended to further
housing opportunities for people with disabilities. Reasonable accommodation provides a means of
requesting from the local government flexibility in the application of land use and zoning regulations or, in
some instances, even a waiver of certain restrictions or requirements because it is necessary to achieve
equal access to housing. Cities and counties are required to consider requests for accommodations
related to housing for people with disabilities and provide the accommodation when it is determined to be
“reasonable” based on fair housing laws and case law interpreting the statutes.
     Actions:
      Create a process for making requests for reasonable accommodation to land use and zoning
          decisions and procedures regulating the siting, funding, development, and use of housing for
          people with disabilities.
Housing Plan                                            5-30                                    November 2013

                                                                                          City of Loma Linda
                                                                                             Housing Element
       Provide information to residents on reasonable accommodation procedures via public counters
        and the City website.
    Timeframe:                      2014
    Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
    Funding Sources:                General Fund
5.3.6 Quantified Objectives
Table 5.H summarizes the City’s quantified objectives for the 2014-2021 planning period by income
group.
       The Construction Objective represents the City’s unaccommodated 2008 RHNA and the 2014
        RHNA for a total of 1,796 units.
       No quantified objectives are provided for rehabilitation since no funds for rehabilitation programs
        or funding are currently available at the City or County level. However, policies are in place to
        encourage maintenance and rehabilitation of housing in the City in the event funding sources
        become available during the planning period.
       The Conservation objective refers to maintenance of existing affordable housing through rental
        subsidies (Housing Choice Voucher)
       Table 5.H: 2014-2021 Quantified Objectives
                                                          Income Levels
                                            Extremely/                        Above
                   Objectives                Very Low     Low    Moderate    Moderate         Total
       Construction Objectives (a)             671        461       202         462          1,796
       Rehabilitation Objectives (b)             --        --        --          --             --
       Conservation/Preservation
                                                    137              --          --            137
       Objectives (c)
November 2013                                        5-31                                        Housing Plan

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
APPENDICES
Housing Plan       5-32 November 2013
                   City of Loma Linda
                    Housing Element
November 2013 5-33       Housing Plan
                                                                                          Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                 Housing Element
Appendix 5.A: Housing Needs Assessment
The Housing Needs Assessment presents information that forms the basis for the objectives, policies,
and programs to address housing needs. This assessment addresses population characteristics,
employment patterns, and income levels. The information illustrates how Loma Linda has grown and
changed, and identifies patterns and trends that serve as the basis for defining the City’s housing policies
and programs. Projections are also provided to show how the community is expected to change over the
next two decades.
The data used in this needs assessment have been collected from a variety of sources, including the U.S.
Census Bureau (1990 and 2000 Census, 2010 Census, 2006-2010 American Community Survey
Estimates), California Department of Finance, and Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG). In comparison to the 2000 the Census, the data provided by 2010 the Census are limited and in
most instances, instead of providing 100 percent population data for demographic factors, provide
estimates. Many of these estimates (such as the 2006-2010 American Community Survey and California
Department of Finance data) are shown solely as percentages, as the raw numbers carry a significant
margin of error, especially for smaller geographies such as cities and Census-designated places.
Nonetheless, the percentages give a general indication of population and employment trends. The
information contained in the City’s 2012 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data is
drawn from Census 2010 data. CHAS data are based on special tabulations from sample Census data.
Thus, the number of households in each category often deviates slightly from 100 percent due to
extrapolations to the total household level. Because of this, interpretations of CHAS data should focus on
proportions and percentages, rather than on precise numbers.
5.A.1 Population Trends
Population Growth
Between 1990 and 2000, the population of Loma Linda increased from 17,400 to 18,681, according to the
U.S. Census. Table 5.A.A shows population growth in Loma Linda from 1990 to 2020. SCAG growth
forecasts predict a steady increase in population through 2020, reflective of projections for Southern
California in general. From 2010 to 2020, SCAG estimates that the City’s population will grow by 15
percent, while countywide population is expected to increase by 11 percent.
                   Table 5.A.A: Population Trends and Projections
                                                                             San Bernardino
                              Year                    Loma Linda                  County
                   1990                                  17,400                   895,016
                   2000                                  18,681                  1,418,380
                   2010                                  23,261                  1,709,434
                   2020                                  26,700                  2,035,210
                   % Change 2000-2010                     25%                       19%
                   % Change 2010-2020                     15%                       11%
                   Source: 1990 ,2000, 2010 Census, SCAG 2012 Adopted Growth Forecast
Age
Understanding age distribution in the community is important because it affects the housing market. A
declining number of young children can result in a change in the types of housing units being sought
within a community. Childless adults tend to have a higher combined income and prefer certain
November 2013                                          A-34              Appendix 5.A: Housing Needs Assessment

                                                                                            City of Loma Linda
                                                                                             Housing Element
amenities, increasing the demand for condominiums or units in planned unit developments. An elderly
population creates a demand for units with common recreation facilities and easy access to commercial,
medical, and transportation facilities.
It is typical that small communities, such as Loma Linda, experience a particular demographic cycle. As
the community matures, school age children grow up and begin forming their own households. As can be
seen from Table 5.A.B, Loma Linda currently is in this phase. Almost 68 percent of all residents are over
the age of 25, compared to 60 percent countywide. In 2010, 23 percent of Loma Linda’s population was
under the age of 20, compared to 33 percent countywide. Seniors comprised 14 percent of the City
population compared to 9 percent countywide. Reasons for this include that the City of Loma Linda is a
university- and education-oriented community; therefore, there are more college-age and young adult
students than would typically reside in suburban communities. Also, many seniors reside in the
community to be close to the various medical facilities.
                       Table 5.A.B: Age Distribution
                                                         City of Loma      San Bernardino
                                      Age                    Linda             County
                       Under 5 years                          6.6%               7.8%
                       5-19 years                            16.6%             24.9%
                       20-24 years                            9.0%               7.9%
                       25-44 years                           32.1%              27.3%
                       45-64 years                           21.7%              23.3%
                       65 years and over                     13.9%               8.9%
                       Total                                100.0%             100.0%
                       Source: 2010 Census
Race and Ethnicity
Table 5.A.C shows the racial/ethnic distribution of population in Loma Linda. The City has become more
racially and ethnically diverse since 2000, a trend seen throughout California. In 2010, Whites were the
most prevalent group in the City at 47 percent, followed by Asian/Pacific Islanders at 25 percent and
Hispanics at 22 percent. The City has a significantly lower Hispanic population and higher Asian
population compared to the County as a whole.
     Table 5.A.C: Race and Ethnicity
                                                     City of Loma Linda           San Bernardino County
                Race and/or Ethnicity               2000             2010            2000          2010
     White                                         47.1%           37.0%            44.0%         33.3%
     Hispanic                                      16.3%            22.2%           39.2%         49.2%
     Black (African American)                       7.0%             8.3%            8.8%          8.4%
     American Indian and Alaska Native              0.3%             0.2%            0.6%          0.4%
     Asian, Pacific Islander                       24.5%            28.6%            4.8%          6.4%
     Other (Other Alone, Two or More Races)         4.8%             3.7%            2.6%          2.3%
     Total                                         100.0%          100.0%          100.0%        100.0%
     Source: 2000, 2010 Census
5.A.2 Household Characteristics
Household Type and Size
Household characteristics and types can impact the type of housing needed. For instance, single-person
households often occupy smaller apartment units or condominiums, such as studio and one-bedroom
units. Married couples often prefer larger single-family homes, particularly if they have children. The U.S.
Census Bureau defines a household as all of the people who occupy a housing unit. A household is
different than a housing unit, as a housing units are living quarters (homes, apartments, mobile homes,
etc.). A household refers to the group of persons living in a housing unit.
November 2013                                         A-35                   Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
The 2010 Census reported 8,764 households in the City of Loma Linda, with an average household size
of 2.56. Of these households, the Census reports that 63 percent were family households while 37
percent were non-family households (75 percent of which were individuals living alone). This is
dramatically different from the County as a whole, where 77 percent of households are family households
and 23 percent are nonfamily households (mostly individuals living alone). Over 60 percent of households
live in rental housing. These trends are indicative of Loma Linda’s large student population. It also
indicates that many university students live off campus.
Loma Linda’s population average household size in 2010 was 2.56, smaller than San Bernardino County
(3.26) and the state (2.90). SCAG estimates (through its 2012 Adopted Growth Forecast) that the
average household size will remain stable through 2020.
          Table 5.A.D: Household Characteristics
                                                          2000                    2010
                                                             Percent of               Percent of
                     Household Type             Number          Total     Number        Total
          Total Households                        7,480        100.0%      8,764       100.0%
          Families                                2,103         28.1%      5,483        62.6%
           with children                           867          11.6%      2,392        27.3%
          Non-Families                             768          10.3%      3,281        37.4%
          Average Household Size                   2.42           --        2.56          --
          Average Family Size                      3.09           --        3.18          --
          Living in Renter-Occupied Units         2,871         38.4%      5,332        60.8%
          Living in Owner-Occupied Units          4,609         61.6%      3,432        39.2%
          Source: U.S. Census 2000, 2010
5.A.3 Income and Employment
Income
Household income is the most important, although not the only factor, affecting housing access and
opportunity because it determines a household's ability to purchase or rent housing and balance housing
costs with other necessities. Income levels can vary considerably among households, affecting
preferences for tenure, location, and housing type. While higher-income households have more
discretionary income to spend on housing, low- and moderate-income households have a more limited
choice in the housing they can afford.
The median household income in Loma Linda is $61,116 according to 2011 Census data, higher than the
median household income for San Bernardino County ($55,583). Figure 5.A.1 shows that overall, Loma
Linda has a larger proportion of residents earning over $75,000 than the County, and a smaller proportion
of residents earning between $35,000 and $74,999 per year.
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                     A-36                                 November 2013

                                                                                        City of Loma Linda
                                                                                         Housing Element
Figure 5.A.1: Income Distribution
                                       6%
           $200,000+
                                 3%
                         City of Loma Linda                        20%
  $100,000-$199,999
                          San Bernardino County                    19%
                                                           15%
    $75,000-$99,999
                                                         14%
                                                               17%
    $50,000-$74,999
                                                                   19%
                                                10%
    $35,000-$49,999
                                                        14%
                                                  10%
    $25,000-$34,999
                                                 10%
                                                 10%
    $15,000-$24,999
                                                10%
                                                    11%
          $0-$14,999
                                                   11%
                     0%           5%        10%         15%      20%   25%
Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey, 2011
For housing planning and funding purposes, HCD uses five income categories to evaluate housing need
based on the Area Median Income (AMI) for the metropolitan area:
        Extremely Low-Income Households earn between 0 and 30% of AMI
        Very Low-Income Households earn between 31 and 50% of AMI
        Low-Income Households earn between 51 and 80% of AMI
        Moderate-Income Households earn between 81 and 120% of AMI
        Above Moderate-Income Households earn over 120% of AMI
The CHAS special Census tabulations developed for HUD provide a specific breakdown of household
income adjusted for family size. As shown in Table 5.A.E, moderate- and above moderate-income
households comprise the largest share of all households, and the low-income households comprise the
second largest category. According to the 2005-2009 CHAS, more than 11 percent of the total
households in Loma Linda are classified as extremely low income (0-30% of AMI), 12 percent are
classified as very low income (31-50% of AMI), and approximately 17 percent are classified as low
income (51-80% AMI). Nearly 60 percent of the households had incomes above 80 percent of the median
household income in 2009.
November 2013                                           A-37             Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
        Table 5.A.E: Households by Income Category
                          Extremely        Very Low                             Moderate/ Above
                         Low Income       Income (31-         Low Income        Moderate Income
                           (0-30%)            50%)              (51-80%)              (81% +)            Total
                                                                                                       100.0%
                            11.3%            12.0%                17.3%                59.4%
        Loma Linda                                                                                      (8,370
                          (945 HHS)       (1,005 HHS)         (1,450 HHS)           (4,970 HHS)
                                                                                                         HHS)
        Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2005-2009.
        HHS: Households
Tenure is closely correlated with income, as households with lower incomes usually cannot afford to buy
a home. Consistent with this fact, renters in Loma Linda earned lower incomes overall, with half earning
less than 80 percent of the median income for the County. There was a difference between renter and
owner households, as the proportion of owners earning less than 80 percent of the median income was
only 40 percent. The large University student population in Loma Linda is reflected in these data. Elderly
renters are shown to be in a precarious financial situation, with almost half earning less than half (50
percent) of the median income for the County.
            Table 5.A.F: Tenure By Income Category by Household Type
                                                                                                Moderate/
                                                 Extremely
                                                                   Very Low         Low            Above
                                                     Low
                      Household Type                                Income        Income         Moderate
                                                   Income
                                                                   (31-50%)      (51-80%)         Income
                                                   (0-30%)
                                                                                                  (81% +)
            Renter-Occupied Households
            Elderly (62+ years)                  31%              18%            18%          34%
            Small Families (2-4 persons)         10%              21%            18%          51%
            Large Families (5+ persons)          7%               18%            39%          36%
            Total Renters                        16%              15%            19%          50%
            Owner-Occupied Households
             Elderly (62+ years)                 8%               6%             29%          57%
             Small Families (2-4 persons)        1%               4%             7%           88%
             Large Families (5+ persons)         4%               9%             9%           77%
            Total Owners                         4%               8%             15%          73%
            Total Households                     11%              12%            17%          59%
            Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2005-2009.
Employment
A useful indicator of economic activity in an area is the pattern of existing and projected employment. The
City of Loma Linda’s economy is centered on healthcare and education. Loma Linda Medical Center,
Loma Linda University, and the Loma Linda VA Health Care System are the largest employers in the
community. In addition, Loma Linda University and the VA Loma Linda health care system are included in
the list of top 20 major employers in the San Bernardino County.
In June 2013, San Bernardino County had an unemployment rate of 10.3 percent, higher than the
statewide unemployment rate (8.8 percent)3. High employment has been a result of the recession that
affected the entire world economy, from late 2007 to 2009. In contrast, the unemployment rate in Loma
Linda is only 6.2 percent. In 2013, the State Employment Development Department estimates that Loma
Linda has a labor force of approximately 10,200 persons, or one percent of the County’s total labor force.
In 2011, the civilian employed population (16 years and over) numbered 10,553. Table 5.A.G shows the
distribution of employment among different industries and median earnings. Census data confirm that
Loma Linda’s economy is centered on healthcare and education. Loma Linda residents held twice the
proportion of jobs in the education, health care, and social assistance industry as compared to the County
3
  Labor Force Data for Cities and Census Designated Places, June 2013 – Preliminary, California Employment
Development Department.
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                           A-38                                         November 2013

                                                                                              City of Loma Linda
                                                                                               Housing Element
(44 percent compared to 22 percent). This is an important trend, as this is the second highest paid
industry in the City, and earnings in this industry are significantly higher in Loma Linda than at the County
level.
Table 5.A.G: Industry Employment and Earnings
                                                     City of Loma Linda            San Bernardino County
                                               Percent of          Median        Percent of         Median
                                                  Total           Earnings         Total           Earnings
                  Industry                    Employment            (2011)      Employment           (2011)
Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting,
and mining                                          0%                NA            1%              $27,012
Construction                                        3%            $51,333           8%              $36,827
Manufacturing                                       5%            $31,295           10%             $35,376
Wholesale trade                                     2%            $36,581           4%              $34,831
Retail trade                                       13%             $25,943          13%             $22,288
Transportation and warehousing, and
utilities                                           6%            $49,954           8%             $ 42,585
 Information                                        3%            $63,578           2%              $44,575
Finance and insurance, and real estate
and rental and leasing                              4%            $31,250           6%              $39,299
Professional, scientific, and management,
and administrative and waste
management services                                 7%            $32,472           8%              $31,457
Educational services, and health care and
social assistance                                  44%             $53,951          22%             $36,674
Arts, entertainment, and recreation, and
accommodation and food services                     7%            $16,411           8%              $14,927
Other services, except public
administration                                      3%            $26,971           5%              $22,474
Public administration                               3%            $50,938           6%              $58,321
Total                                             100%                             100%
Source: Source: U.S. Census American Community Survey, 2007-2011
The 2012 SCAG Growth Forecast4 estimates that between 2008 and 2020, there will be a 32 percent
increase in employment opportunities within Loma Linda compared to a 15 percent increase countywide.
By 2020, SCAG estimates a total of 23,300 employment opportunities in the City. In the same time period
(2008-2020), a 21 percent increase in households is also estimated. These figures indicate that the City
will continue to have a more robust employment environment compared to the County, and that
employment growth will outpace household growth.
5.A.4 Special Needs Groups
Certain groups have more difficulty finding decent, affordable housing due to their special circumstances.
Special circumstances may be related to one's income earning potential, family characteristics, the
presence of physical or mental disabilities, or age-related health issues. As a result, certain groups
typically earn lower incomes and have higher rates of overpayment for housing, or overcrowding. A
central goal of the Housing Element is to identify persons with special needs in meeting their housing
needs. Housing Element law specifically requires quantification of the housing need for the elderly, the
disabled, female-headed households, large families, farmworkers and homeless persons and families.
Due to the large student population in the Loma Linda, students are included in the special needs section.
Elderly
Housing costs are particularly critical for the elderly, as many are on fixed incomes. Housing designed
specifically for the elderly is typically made up of apartments, condominiums, and small detached units
4
  SCAG RTP Growth Forecast, 2012
November 2013                                            A-39                  Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints
City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
with one or two and sometimes three bedrooms. Housing projects for the elderly are often constructed at
higher densities than other types of housing, and often include some units designed for handicapped
residents. The primary considerations in evaluating sites for elderly housing are proximity to shopping,
social services, public transportation, and health care; compatibility with adjacent land uses; and cost.
Secondary considerations involve proximity to recreation and churches, special amenities such as trees
and views, and the absence of detrimental conditions such as traffic, noise, and industrial land use.
As of 2010, 13.9 percent of Loma Linda’s residents (or 3,241 persons) were age 65 or older. The
percentage of older residents in Loma Linda is higher than that of San Bernardino County (8.9 percent).
In addition, 1,792, or 20 percent, of the City’s households had a head of household over 65 years old.
Most of these households are living in owner-occupied housing units (53.6 percent), with 46.4 percent are
in renter-occupied housing units.
The 2009 HUD CHAS report revealed that 72 percent of renting seniors in Loma Linda paid more than 30
percent of their income on housing, experiencing a housing cost burden, compared with only 26 percent
of elderly owner-occupied households. In 2010, 43.7 of the elderly population were disabled.
Therefore, there is a need within the City for affordable housing for the elderly which is equipped with
handicapped access and facilities.
Disabled
Both mentally and physically disabled residents face housing access and safety challenges. Disabled
people, generally speaking, have limited incomes, often receiving Social Security income only, with
housing costs taking the majority of their monthly income. Because people with disabilities spend a higher
percentage of income on housing, overcrowding is frequent as housing expenses are shared with others,
oftentimes live-in caretakers. In addition, disabled persons may face difficulty finding accessible housing
(housing that is made accessible to people with disabilities through the positioning of appliances and
fixtures, the heights of installations and cabinets, layout of unit to facilitate wheelchair movement, etc.).
The 2011 Census data indicate that 2,546 (11 percent of total population) civilian, non-institutionalized
residents aged 5 or over with disabilities live in Loma Linda. Approximately halfof disabled residents are
over the age of 65.
               Table 5.A.H: Disability by Age
                                                           Persons with a          % of Total Age
                  Age Group           Total Persons            Disability              Group
               5-17 Years                  4,541                   83                   1.8%
               18-34 Years                 7,056                  288                   4.1%
               35-64 Years                 8,472                  912                  10.8%
               65-74 Years                 1,312                  221                  16.8%
               Over 75 Years               1,574                 1,042                 66.2%
               Total                      22,955                 2,546                 11.1%
               Source U.S. Census American Community Survey, 2009-2011
A subgroup of disabled residents is the developmentally disabled. Housing Elements must include an
analysis of the special housing needs of the disabled, including persons with developmental disabilities.
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, a "developmental disability" means a
disability that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to
continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which includes mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term also includes disabling conditions found to be
closely related to mental retardation or to require treatment similar to that required for individuals with
mental retardation, but does not include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                       A-40                                      November 2013

                                                                                            City of Loma Linda
                                                                                             Housing Element
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional housing
environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where supervision is
provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where medical
attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood,
the first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s
living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The Census does not record developmental disabilities. The California State Council on Developmental
Disabilities estimates that nationwide, 1.8 percent of the population meet the federal definition of a
developmental disability. This equates to 419 persons in the City of Loma Linda with developmental
disabilities, based on the 2010 Census population.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based services to
approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through a statewide
system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based facilities. The
Inland Regional Center (IRC) is one of 21 regional centers in California that provides point of entry to
services for people with developmental disabilities and serves the Riverside and San Bernardino County
community. The largest of the regional centers in the State of California, IRC is a nonprofit, private
community-based agency and provides services to more than 25,000 people with developmental
disabilities and their families.
According the California Department of Development Services, in Loma Linda approximately 197 persons
are reported as consumers of the services provided at the local Regional Center. The largest age groups
of Loma Linda residents being served are the 23-54 year group (83 clients), 0-14 year group (63 clients),
and the 15-22 year group (32 clients). State data also show that 42 percent of Loma Linda clients using
the Regional Center live in private residences.
Female Headed Households
Single-parent households require special consideration and assistance because of the greater need for
day care, health care, and other services. Female-headed households with children in particular tend to
have lower incomes, thus limiting housing availability for this group. In addition, these households have a
greater need for accessible daycare and other supportive services. In 2010, 1,190 female-headed
households lived in Loma Linda, representing close to 14 percent of all households. Among female-
headed households, almost half (47.5 percent or 566 households) had children under 18 years of age.
Large Households
In general, large households (with five or more members) are identified as a group with special housing
needs based on the limited availability of adequately sized, affordable housing units. Large households
are often of lower income, frequently resulting in the overcrowding of smaller dwelling units and in time,
accelerating unit deterioration.
The 2010 Census reported 988 large households with five or more members in Loma Linda, or 11.3
percent of all households. Among large households, 55 percent were renters and 45 percent were
owners. The share of large households is considerably lower in Loma Linda than the San Bernardino
County average of 22.8 percent. These households are usually families with more than two children or
families with extended family members such as in-laws or grandparents living in the same housing unit.
According to CHAS data, 43 percent of large-family owners and 77 percent of large-family renters
experienced one or more housing problems. Housing problems include overcrowding, cost burden, and
substandard conditions.
Homeless Persons
Due to the transient nature of the homeless, the precise number of homeless individuals in Loma Linda is
difficult to determine. The 2013 San Bernardino County Homeless Count and Subpopulation Survey
reported approximately 2,321 adults and children who are homeless on a given day in San Bernardino
County. For the City of Loma Linda, the study identified seven unsheltered homeless persons and 112
homeless persons in transitional housing. Representatives from Inland Temporary Homes (ITH), a
November 2013                                           A-41                Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
homeless service provider, identified the seven unsheltered homeless persons who were reported to be a
family staying at a motel, ITH indicated having available capacity at shelters on the night of the homeless
count, and offered the family a unit in the ITH two-step program (detailed below). The family declined and
indicated they were not residents of the region and were in transition. Based on this information, at the
time of the homeless count, the City’s had no unsheltered homeless need.
Homelessness is a regional problem that is most effectively addressed within a cooperative, inter-
jurisdictional effort. Several different services and programs in the Loma Linda area are designed to
support the homeless.
Located in Loma Linda, Inland Temporary Homes is a two-step non-profit agency that offers a 90-day
shelter program and 21 to 24-month transitional housing program for homeless families with children
under 18 years of age. ITH is assisted with City/County CDBG funds and currently serves 17 families (60
persons) countywide. Within the City of Loma Linda, ITH has 26 units available for families with children.
The Community Services Department of the County of San Bernardino implements a Family
Development Program which addresses the needs of low-income families by providing emergency
assistance, case management and transitional housing. There are also programs in the area specifically
designed to assist homeless veterans. The Frazee Community Center in San Bernardino works closely
with and is supervised by the VA Medical Center in Loma Linda to provide sober living transitional
homes. The VA Medical Center provides assistance to homeless veterans through emergency housing,
physical and mental health, and employment programs.
Farmworkers
According to 2011 Census data, only 16 Loma Linda residents work in the “agriculture, forestry, fishing
and hunting” industry. As such, the City has no need for farmworker housing, and affordable housing
needs of those who held the “Farming, Forestry, and Fishing” occupations would be accommodated
under programs designed for lower-income households.
Students
The need for student housing is a significant factor affecting housing demand in Loma Linda. Although
students may produce only a temporary housing need, the impact upon housing demand is critical in
areas that surround universities and colleges. Typically, students have limited incomes and are, therefore,
competing for the same limited amount of affordable housing in the community, especially within easy
commuting distance from campus. They often seek shared housing situations to decrease expenses, and
can be assisted through roommate referral services offered on and off campus. College graduates
provide a specialized pool of skilled labor that is vital to the economy; however, the lack of affordable
housing often leads to their departure from the region.
2011 Census data indicate that 3,461 Loma Linda residents were enrolled in undergraduate or graduate
studies. The main higher educational institution is Loma Linda University (LLU). LLU is a Seventh-Day
Adventist coeducational health sciences university consisting of eight schools and the Faculty of
Graduate Studies. More than 100 certificate and degree programs are offered by the schools of allied
health professions, dentistry, medicine, nursing, pharmacy, public health, religion, and science and
technology. Curricula offered range from certificates of completion and associate in science degrees to
doctor of philosophy and professional doctoral degrees. LLU also offers distance education. In Fall 2011,
LLU enrolled 4,521 students and had 1,484 full-time faculty. Since 2002, student enrollment has
increased by 32 percent. Students under the age of 21 years who are in undergraduate programs, such
as nursing, dental hygiene, or allied health professional curricula, are required to live on campus, unless
they are married or living with their parents. LLU offers on-campus residential housing for students in two
complexes. Kate Lindsay Hall for Undergraduate and Graduate Women houses 240 students in double,
single, or modified double occupancy rooms. The A.G. Daniells Residence for Men and Women houses
200 students in 87 0- to 4-bedroom units. LLU also provides off-campus housing for students through 12
LLU foundation homes and apartment complexes located within just a few blocks of campus.
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                   A-42                                      November 2013

                                                                                                          City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                            Housing Element
5.A.5 Housing Characteristics
This section addresses characteristics of the housing supply in Loma Linda, including type, age,
condition, costs, and availability.
Housing Inventory, Tenure, and Vacancy
As shown in Table 5.A.I, the California Department of Finance identifies 9,649 housing units within the
City of Loma Linda. This is an increase of 2,191 households (29 percent) over the 7,458 households
reported by the 2000 Census. Close to 47 percent of these dwelling units are detached single-family
homes, and over 26 percent are located in structures of five or more units. The percentage of single-
family units in the County is higher and the percentage of five or more unit structures is lower than the
City.
Census 2010 data indicate that 39 percent of occupied housing units are owner occupied and 61 percent
are renter occupied. As of 2010, the owner vacancy rate in Loma Linda was 2.5 percent and the renter
vacancy rate was 9.9 percent.
    Table 5.A.I: Composition of the Housing Stock, 2010
                                               City of Loma Linda                      San Bernardino County
    Housing Type                      Number of Units          Percentage        Number of Units           Percentage
    Single Family, Detached                 4,497                46.6%                      498,965           71.3%
    Single Family, Attached                  714                  7.4%                        24,640           3.5%
    2 to 4 Unit Structure                   1,235                12.8%                        45,123           6.4%
    5 or More Unit Structure                2,546                26.4%                        87,405          12.5%
    Mobile Home                              657                  6.8%                        43,504           6.2%
    Total                                   9,649                 100%               699,637                  100%
    Source: State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties and the
    State, 2010.
Housing Conditions
The age and condition of housing stock can be an indicator of potential rehabilitation needs. Commonly,
housing over 30 years of age needs some form of major rehabilitation, such as a new roof, foundation
work, plumbing, etc. The age of the housing stock in Loma Linda, as defined by the year the units were
built, is shown in Table 5.A.J. As of 2011, approximately 41 percent of all housing units in the City were
built prior to 1979, making many of these close to or over 30 years old. Only about 17 percent of the units
were built in 2000 or later. It should be noted that older homes are not necessarily indicative of
substantial housing rehabilitation needs in a community. Where household incomes are high,
homeowners generally have the wherewithal to maintain older homes in good condition.
The City uses a code enforcement program to help maintain the quality of residential neighborhoods. City
code enforcement staff estimates that only about 20 units are considered substandard and indicate that
the only about 5 units that are considered to be in need of demolition.
November 2013                                                 A-43                      Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints
City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
                      Table 5.A.J: Age of Housing Stock, 2011
                                                                           % of All Housing
                                   Age                   Year Built              Units
                      7 years or less                  2005 or later             6.5%
                      8-17 years                       2000 to 2004             10.3%
                      18-27 years                      1990 to 1999             11.0%
                      28-47 years                      1980 to 1989             31.0%
                      48-67 years                      1960 to 1979             29.7%
                      68-72 years                      1940 to 1959              9.2%
                      73 years or more                1939 or earlier            2.2%
                      Median Year All Structures
                                                            1983
                      Built                                                        --
                      Source: American Community Survey, 2011
Overcrowding
In response to a mismatch between household income and housing costs in a community, some
households may not be able to buy or rent housing that provides a reasonable level of privacy and space.
According to both California and federal standards, a housing unit is considered overcrowded if it is
occupied by more than one person per room (excluding kitchens, bathrooms, and halls). Occupancy by
more than 1.5 persons per room constitutes “severe” overcrowding. In 2011, just over four percent of
households lived in overcrowded conditions. This rate is significantly less than the San Bernardino
County average of 8.8 percent of households living in overcrowded housing units. Overcrowding is
typically more prevalent among renters than among owners. Close to six percent of renter households
experienced overcrowding in 2011, compared to only 2.5 percent of owner households.
                    Table 5.A.K: Overcrowding by Tenure
                                                                        2010
                                                     Housing Units       Percent of All Units
                                                                         Renter-       Owner-
                                                      No.        %      Occupied      Occupied
                    Overcrowded
                                                      301      3.6%       4.9%          1.7%
                    (1-1.5 persons/room)
                    Severely Overcrowded
                                                       66      0.8%       0.8%          0.8%
                    (>1.5 persons/room)
                    Total Overcrowded
                                                      367      4.4%       5.7%          2.5%
                    (>1 persons/room)
                    Source U.S. Census American Community Survey, 2009-2011
Housing Cost and Rents
The cost of housing in a community is directly correlated to the number of housing problems and
affordability issues. High housing costs can price low-income families out of the market, cause cost
burdens, or force households into overcrowded conditions
Housing costs in Loma Linda are about the same as the San Bernardino and Riverside County average.
According to DQNews, the median price of homes sold in June 2013 was $358,000. While no data are
available for condominium sales in June 2013, DQNews 2012 Home Sales activity Report indicates that
there were seven condominium sales in 2012 with an average price of $95,000. A review of
condominiums for sale in July 2013 indicated that prices range from $80,000 for a one-bedroom
condominium to $200,000 for a two-bedroom condominium. Median home sale prices in Loma Linda
were higher than in neighboring and surrounding jurisdiction, but still substantially lower than prices prior
to the 2007 recession.
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                       A-44                                   November 2013

                                                                                                City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                 Housing Element
                        Table 5.A.L: Loma Linda Area Home Prices, 2012 and
                        2013
                                                              Median Price     % Change
                                Jurisdiction                    June 2013      from 2012
                        Loma Linda                         $358,000           +37.8%
                        Fontana                            $272,045           +30.0%
                        Grand Terrace                      $254,000           +30.3
                        Highland                           $219,000           +15.6%
                        Redlands                           $330,000           +34.0%
                        Riverside                          $265,000           +25.7%
                        San Bernardino County              $195,000           +25.8%
                        Source: DQNews, June 2013
Rental housing is often a lower-cost alternative for lower-income households. Based on a review of
several internet rental sites, a two-bedroom apartment in Loma Linda can be rented for $820 to $1,206
per month. During the search of rental units for rent, many single-family houses were identified. Rents for
homes were in a higher range, and rental costs as of August 7, 2013 ranged from $1,150 to $1,495 for
two-bedroom homes and from $1,650 to $1,780 for three- and four-bedroom homes.
                  Table 5.A.M: Rental Costs
                             Type                   Minimum           Maximum       Average
                  Efficiency                       --              --           --
                  One-Bedroom                      $725            $1,015       $851
                  Two-Bedrooms                     $820            $1,206       $992
                  Three-Bedrooms                   $885            $885         $885
                  Source: Craigslist, Apartmentfinder.com, August 2013.
5.A.6 Housing Affordability and Overpayment
In assessing housing affordability, the California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 establishes
thresholds for affordable housing cost based on the area median income level (AMI) adjusted by family
size and income level. Using these affordability thresholds, current housing affordability, at the County
level, can be estimated for the various income groups (Table 5.A.N).
Given the median home prices presented in Table 5.A.L, single-family home ownership is beyond the
reach of lower-income households. For home ownership, some lower-income households may be able to
afford a condominium, but the unit may not be adequately sized for them. In the rental market, generally
only moderate-income households can afford the market rents in Loma Linda.
November 2013                                              A-45                  Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints
City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
                Table 5.A.N: Housing Affordability
                                                                           Maximum Affordable Price
                    Income Group and Household Type                    Home Purchase            Rental Rate
                Extremely Low (0-30% AMI)
                One Person (Studio)                                          $49,165                $291
                Two Person (1 bedroom)                                       $60,511                $340
                Three Person (2 bedrooms)                                    $57,893                $339
                Four Person (3 bedrooms)                                     $62,257                $363
                Five Person (4 bedrooms)                                     $58,533                $352
                Very Low (30-50% AMI)
                One Person (Studio)                                          $93,967                $519
                Two Person (1 bedroom)                                      $112,876                $600
                Three Person (2 bedrooms)                                   $116,658                $631
                Four Person (3 bedrooms)                                    $127,422                $688
                Five Person (4 bedrooms)                                    $129,750                $703
                Lower (50-80% AMI)
                One Person (Studio)                                         $139,350                $635
                Two Person (1 bedroom)                                      $153,605                $695
                Three Person (2 bedrooms)                                   $164,951                $753
                Four Person (3 bedrooms)                                    $175,133                $800
                Five Person (4 bedrooms)                                    $188,166                $853
                Moderate Income (81-120% AMI)
                One Person (Studio)                                         $214,067               $1,116
                Two Person (1 bedroom)                                      $262,602               $1,295
                Three Person (2 bedrooms)                                   $289,726               $1,452
                Four Person (3 bedrooms)                                    $303,350               $1,577
                Five Person (4 bedrooms)                                    $322,628               $1,693
                Source: MIG | Hogle-Ireland, 2013
                Notations:
                1. Small Family = 3 persons; Large Families = 5 persons
                4. Property taxes and insurance based on averages for the region
                5. Calculation of affordable home sales prices based on a down payment of 10%, annual
                   interest rate of 4%, 30-yr mortgage, and monthly payment 30% of gross household income
                6. Based on San Bernardino County AMI $65,000 and 2013 HCD State Income Limits
                3. Monthly affordable rent based on payments of no more than 30% of household income
                Definition of affordable housing cost per Health and Safety Code Sections 50052.5 and 50053
                Calculation of Affordable Housing Cost               Owner                  Rental
                    Extremely Low (0-30% AMI)                        30% of 30% AMI         30% of 30% AMI
                    Very Low (0-50% AMI)                             30% of 50% AMI         30% of 50% AMI
                    Lower (51-80% AMI)                               30% of 70% AMI         30% of 60% AMI
                    Moderate Income (81-120% AMI)                    35% of 110% AMI        30% of 110% AMI
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                              A-46                                         November 2013
                                                                                                    City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                       Housing Element
State and federal standards specify that households spending more than 30 percent of gross annual
income on housing experience a housing cost burden. Housing cost burdens occur when housing costs
increase faster than household income. When a household spends more than 30 percent of its income on
housing costs, it has less disposable income for other necessities such as food and health care. In the
event of unexpected circumstances such as loss of employment and health problems, lower-income
households with a burdensome housing cost are more likely to become homeless or double up with other
households. Homeowners with a housing cost burden have the option of selling the homes and becoming
renters. Renters, on the other hand, are vulnerable and subject to constant changes in the housing
market.
Table 5.A.O shows the connection between income, household type, and cost burden. The proportion of
households experiencing cost burden declined significantly as income increased. Overall, cost burden
was more prevalent among renter households in all income categories. In particular, extremely low-
income elderly renters (100 percent), very low-income elderly renters and owners (100 percent), and very
low-income large renter households (100 percent) had the highest proportion of cost burden compared
with the proportion experiencing cost burden citywide (40 percent).
         Table 5.A.O: Households Experiencing Cost Burden
                                                                                    Moderate/
                                         Extremely          Very-                     Above
                                           Low-             Low-         Low-       Moderate-
                                        Income (0-         Income      Income        Income       All Income
               Household Type              30%)           (31-50%)    (51-80%)       (81% +)     Categories
         Renter-Occupied Households
         Elderly (62+ years)                86%             100%          85%          39%            72%
         Large Families (5+ persons)       100%             100%          71%          19%            59%
         Total Renters                      69%              95%          72%          15%            47%
         Owner-Occupied Households
         Elderly (62+ years)                47%             100%          35%          10%            26%
         Large Families (5+ persons)         0%              40%          16%          22%            22%
         Total Owners                       48%              66%          49%          22%            30%
         Total Households                   66%              88%          64%          18%            40%
         Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2005-2009
5.A.7 Affordable Housing
The Housing Authority of the County of San Bernardino Housing Choice Voucher Program (formerly
known as Section 8) serves Loma Linda. The Housing Choice Voucher Program provides rental subsidies
to very low-income families that spend more than 30 percent of their gross income on housing costs. As
of September 2013, the Housing Authority provided Housing Choice Voucher rental assistance to 137
households in Loma Linda, with 31 applicants on the waiting list residing in Loma Linda.
Assisted Housing
In the past, the City has used various funding sources, including Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside
Funds and tax credits, to increase the supply of affordable housing in Loma Linda. Table 5.A.P presents
the inventory of affordable housing developments in Loma Linda. In 2013, 379 affordable units were
located in Loma Linda. In addition, in 2013, the City approved the 152-unit Loma Linda Terrace
development.
November 2013                                             A-47                       Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints
City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
  Table 5.A.P: Assisted Housing Developments
                                                                Unit     Affordable     Total    Covenant
         Development           Year      Funding Source       Types         Units      Units    Expiration
                                        RDA Housing Fund,
  Poplar Street Apartments    2009-      Tax Credits-MHP                                           2064
  10777 Poplar St.            2010            Loan           MF               44          44
                                        RDA Housing Fund,
  Loma Linda Commons          2010-      HOME Funds, Tax                                           2074
  10799 Poplar St.            2011           Credits            MF           120         120
  Loma Sierra Apartments
                                                                                                   2063
  25421 Cole St.              2008      RDA Housing Fund        MF            24          24
  Inland Temporary Homes
                                                                                                   2064
  10875 Poplar St.            2009      RDA Housing Fund        MF             4           4
                              2001-
                                                                                                2031-2056
  Parkside Homes              2002      RDA Housing Fund         SF           35          58
  University Community        2001-
                                                                                                2031-2054
  Townhomes                   2002      RDA Housing Fund         SF            7          42
  Loma Linda Springs
                                                                                                   2046
  11171 Oakwood Dr.           1991            Bond              SR            89         444
  25256 Van Leuven St.        2001      RDA Housing Fund         SF            1           1       2038
  10599 Lind Ave.             2006      RDA Housing Fund         SF            1           1       2052
  24966 Court St.             2006      RDA Housing Fund         SF            1           1       2057
  10605 Lind Ave.             2006      RDA Housing Fund         SF            1           1       2052
  10655 Lind Ave.             2008      RDA Housing Fund         SF            1           1       2053
  25564 Van Leuven St.        2008      RDA Housing Fund         SF            1           1       2053
  Loma Linda Terrace
  Senior Housing                        HOME Funds, State
  10846 Poplar Street          2013           Bonds           Senior          50          50       2068
  Total                                                                      379         788
At-Risk Units
Housing Element law requires jurisdictions to provide an analysis and program for preserving affordability
of assisted housing developments for the next 10 years. As many of the City’s affordable units were built
in the early 2000s, the affordability covenants do not expire within the next 10 years. Based on City
records and information from the California Housing Partnership Corporation, in the next 10 years (2014-
2024) no assisted housing developments in Loma Linda are at risk of losing their affordability status.
5.A.8 Estimates of Housing Need
Several factors influence the degree of demand, or "need," for housing in Loma Linda. The four major
needs categories considered in this element include:
         Housing needs resulting from population growth, both in the City and the surrounding region
         Housing needs resulting from the overcrowding of units
         Housing needs that result when households pay more than they can afford for housing
         Housing needs of "special needs groups" such as elderly, large families, female-headed
          households, households with a disabled person, farmworkers, and the homeless
Table 5.A.Q: Summary of Existing Housing Need
                                                                                 Percent of Total City
       Summary of Households/Persons with Identified Housing Need              Population/ Households
Households Overpaying for Housing:
   % of Renter Households Overpaying                                          47%
   % of Owner Households Overpaying                                           30%
   % of Extremely Low Income Households (0-30% AMI) Overpaying                66%
   % of Very Low Income Households (31-50% AMI) Overpaying                    88%
   % of Low Income Households (51-80% AMI) Overpaying                         64%
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                   A-48                                      November 2013

                                                                                                           City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                            Housing Element
Table 5.A.Q: Summary of Existing Housing Need
                                                                                              Percent of Total City
       Summary of Households/Persons with Identified Housing Need                           Population/ Households
Overcrowded Households:
   % of Overcrowded Renter Households                                                      6%
   % of Overcrowded Owner Households                                                       3%
   % of All Overcrowded Households                                                         4%
Special Needs Groups:
                                                                                           14% of Population 20% of
   Elderly Households                                                                      Households
   Disabled Persons                                                                        11% of Population
   Developmentally Disabled Persons                                                        1.8% of Population
   Large Households                                                                        11% of Households
   Female Headed Households                                                                14% of Households
   Farmworkers                                                                             0.2% of Labor Force
                                                                                           7 persons unsheltered/ 112
   Homeless                                                                                persons sheltered
   Students                                                                                3,461 student residents
Affordable Housing Units At-Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Costs                        0
Source: 2011 Census ACS Estimates, HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2009
Projected Housing Need
California General Plan law requires each city and county to have land zoned to accommodate its fair
share of the regional housing need or the RHNA, as described previously. HCD determined that the
projected housing need for the Southern California region (including the counties of Los Angeles, Orange,
Riverside, San Bernardino, Ventura, and Imperial) is 412,716 new housing units for the 2013-2021
planning period. SCAG allocated this projected growth to the various cities and unincorporated county
areas within the SCAG region, creating the RHNA. The RHNA is divided into four income categories: very
low, low, moderate, and above moderate. As determined by SCAG, the City of Loma Linda’s fair share
allocation is 1,095 units during this planning cycle, with the units distributed among the four income
categories as shown in Table 5.A.R.
                   Table 5.A.R: City of Loma Linda RHNA 2014 to 2021
                                                     % of
                                                  County            Total Housing         Percentage of
                       Income Group                  AMI           Units Allocated             Units
                   Extremely/Very Low           0-50%            254                     23.2%
                   Low                          51-80%           177                     16.2%
                   Moderate                     81-120%          202                     18.4%
                   Above Moderate               120% +           462                     42.2%
                   Total                                         1,095                   100.0%
                   Note: Pursuant to AB 2634, local jurisdictions are also required to project the housing
                   needs of extremely low-income households (0-30% AMI). In estimating the number of
                   extremely low-income households, a jurisdiction can use 50% of the very low-income
                   allocation or apportion the very low-income figure based on Census data. There are 1,950
                   extremely low- and very low-income households, with extremely low-income households
                   comprising 48.5% of the total. Therefore, the City’s very low-income RHNA of 254 units
                   can be split into 123 extremely low-income and 131 very low-income units.
November 2013                                                A-49                        Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints
Governmental, infrastructure, environmental, and market factors may constrain the provision of adequate
and affordable housing in a city. State law requires that Housing Elements analyze potential and actual
governmental and non-governmental constraints to the production, maintenance and improvement of
housing for all persons of all income levels and disabilities. Should constraints preclude the achievement
of housing goals, Housing Element law requires jurisdictions to address and, where appropriate and
legally possible, remove governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of
housing. This section addresses these potential constraints that affect the supply of housing in Loma
Linda.
5.B.1 Government Constraints
Local government housing regulations are necessary to assure: 1) that housing is constructed and
maintained in a safe manner, 2) that the density and design of housing are consistent with community
standards, and 3) that adequate infrastructure to support new housing is provided. Local policies and
regulations can also impact the price and availability of housing and, in particular, the provision of
affordable housing. Land use controls, site improvement requirements, fees and exactions, permit
processing procedures, and other factors may constrain the maintenance, development and improvement
of housing.
5.B.1.1 Land Use Controls
The City of Loma Linda exercises a number of land use controls that directly affect the development of
housing. Some of these programs place restrictions on housing development, while others encourage
housing production. This section evaluates the extent to which these regulations may facilitate or hinder
the development of housing for all economic segments of the community.
General Plan Designations
The Land Use Element sets forth the policies that guide development, and the zoning regulations
implement these policies. Residential land use designations in Loma Linda are divided into 12 categories,
with allowable densities ranging from one unit per 10 acres to 25 units per acre, as described below. In
addition, Special Planning Areas (SPA) address unique conditions. While the General Plan, by vote of the
people, established minimum densities of zero for residential land use categories, the Zoning Code is
more specific and establishes minimum densities for multifamily areas.
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                   A-50                                     November 2013
                                                                                                City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                 Housing Element
 Table 5.B.A: Residential Land Use Designations and Zoning Districts
                                     Zoning         Permitted
  General Plan Designation           District       Densities                Typical Residential Types
                                                                    Very low density single-family residential
                                                                    homes in the Hillside Conservation Area.
                                              0 to 1 dwelling unit
 Hillside Conservation                 A-1                          Designation allows bonus of up to one
                                              per 10 acres
                                                                    dwelling unit per 5 acres when specific
                                                                    criteria are met
                                                                    Low density single-family residential
 Low Density Hillside                         0 to 1 dwelling unit  homes in the Hillside Preservation Area
                                       A-1
 Preservation                                 per 10 acres          (only in use in the City’s sphere of
                                                                    influence)
                                                                    Low density single-family residential
 Medium Density Hillside                      0 to 1 dwelling unit  homes in the Hillside Preservation Area
                                       A-1
 Preservation                                 per 5 acres           (only in use in the City’s sphere of
                                                                    influence)
                                              0 to 1 dwelling unit
                                              per 10 acres (non-
                                              clustered
                                                                    Low density single-family residential
 South Hills                           A-1    development)/ 1
                                                                    homes in the southwestern hillside area
                                              dwelling unit per 2
                                              acres (clustered
                                              development)
                                              0 to 1 dwelling unit
 Rural Estates                         A-1                          Single-family homes in a rural setting
                                              per acre
                                              0 to 2 dwelling units Single-family residential homes in a large
 Very Low Density                      R-1
                                              per acre              lot, suburban setting
 Low Density Residential                      0 to 4 dwelling units
                                       R-1                          traditional single-family subdivisions
                                              per acre
                                                                    Single-family residential, duplexes,
                                              0 to 9 dwelling units
 Medium Density Residential            R-2                          townhouses, and condominium types of
                                              per acre
                                                                    development
                                                                    Multifamily uses consisting of townhouse,
 Medium High Density                          0 to 13 dwelling
                                       R-3                          condominium, and low-rise apartment
 Residential                                  units per acre
                                                                    style development
                                                                    Multifamily uses consisting of low-rise
                                              0 to 13 dwelling
 High Density Residential              R-3                          (one to three stories) condominium and
                                              units per acre
                                                                    apartment style development
                                                                    Multifamily uses consisting of low-rise
 Very High Density                            0 to 20 dwelling
                                       R-3                          (one to three stories) condominium and
 Residential                                  units per acre
                                                                    apartment style development
                                                                    Multifamily uses consisting of
                                              0 to 25 dwelling      condominium and apartment style
 Senior Citizen Housing               R-SH
                                              units per acre        development within age-restricted
                                                                    developments
                                              0 to 2 dwelling units
 San Timoteo Creek Area                PC                           Single family residential
                                              per acre
 Special Planning Areas              Various  Various               Varies by Planning Area
 Source: Loma Linda General Plan, 2009
Special Planning Areas
Seven areas within the City have the designation of “Special Planning Area,” or SPA. Each SPA is
intended to provide a different variety of uses at varied densities according to each area’s location,
access, size, and adjacent land use designations. The intent is to create areas for mixed use
development to meet the commercial, employment, institutional, and residential needs of the
neighborhood and community at large through efficient patterns of land use. Implementation of
development within SPAs is intended to occur through specific plans, planned developments, or similar
procedures, providing potential developers with the ability to customize development regulations. The
General Plan anticipates a housing buildout of 3,485 units within the 553 acres designated SPA.
November 2013                                        A-51                     Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Development Standards
The City of Loma Linda regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development to
protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents, as well as implement General
Plan policies. The Zoning Ordinance establishes restrictions on lot size and area, setbacks, lot coverage,
building height, parking, and minimum unit size. The development standards summarized in Table 5.B.B
include the most pertinent development standards in Loma Linda.
There are six basic residential zoning districts in Loma Linda:
          A-1    Agricultural Estates Zone
          R-1    Single Family Residence Zone
          R-2    Two-Family Residence Zone
          R-3    Multiple Family Residence Zone
          R, M-H Mobile Home Subdivision Zone
          R-SH   Senior Housing Residence Zone
Residential uses are also allowed as part of mixed-use developments within the Planned Community (PC)
District. The PC district provides flexibility in development for the creative and imaginative design of parcels of
land as coordinated projects involving a mixture of residential densities and housing types, community
facilities, and commercial areas. This zoning designation allows for Specific Plans and Master Plans that set
zoning densities pursuant to General Plan guidelines. All areas within the PC district are subject to specific
development standards such as lot size, setbacks, yards, and parking requirements that are contained within
the Specific Plans or Master Plans and approved by the City Council.
Loma Linda’s development standards are typical of California communities, and are not considered to be
unusually restrictive as a constraint on the development of housing.
Table 5.B.B: Zoning District Development Standards
      Land Use Activity           A-1            R-1         R-2                R-3           R, M-H        R-SH
Maximum Units Net/Acre              1              6          12                 20              -            -
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)       1.0 ac         7,200       7,200              7,200           3,500       3.0 ac
Lot Area per Dwelling Unit       1.0 ac         7,200       3,600              2,200             -            -
Lot Width (feet)                  150             65          65                65              44
Front Setback, Main                25             25          25                 20             10           35
Structure (feet)
Front Setback, Street               -              -           -                  -         10 for side      25
Facing Garage (feet)                                                                       entry, 20 for
                                                                                            front entry
Rear Setback (feet)                15             15          15              15 with           10           25
                                                                         additional 5 for
                                                                            each story
                                                                          above a one-
                                                                          story structure
Side Setback (each)                15              5           5         10% of lot width        5           35
Side Setback (street side)         15             15          15                10              10           25
Structural Parcel Coverage          -            40%         50%               60%             50%          35%
(maximum)
Distance Between Main               -              -           -              10 with            -           20
Structures (feet)                                                        additional 5 for
                                                                            each story
                                                                          above a one-
                                                                          story structure
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                        A-52                                        November 2013

                                                                                                             City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                              Housing Element
Table 5.B.B: Zoning District Development Standards
     Land Use Activity               A-1               R-1             R-2               R-3            R, M-H           R-SH
Distance Between                      20                  -               -                -                -
Accessory Structures (feet)
Common Useable Open                     -                 -       0-1bedroom:        0-1bedroom:            -            1,000
Space (sq. ft.)                                                     600 sq ft          600 sq ft                        sq. ft. /
                                                                   2bedroom:       2bedroom: 700                          unit
Private Outdoor Living                  -             1,200         700 sq ft            sq ft              -              -
Space (sq. ft.)                                                   3+ bedroom:        3+ bedroom:
                                                                    800 sq ft          800 sq ft
Main Bldg./Structure Height                                       35 feet                               20 feet            -
(maximum)
Accessory Bldg./Structure                                           35 feet or 2 stories                                   -
Height (maximum)
Within the R-3 zoning district, Table 5.B.B shows that one dwelling unit is permitted for each 2,200 square
feet of lot area. This identification of lot area per dwelling unit is simply showing how many units per acre the
lot area standards allow. For example, zones R-1, R-2, and R-3 all require a minimum lot area of
7,200 square feet. Within the R-3 zone, this would allow a maximum of 20 dwelling units per acre. The
development standards for parking, the minimum unit size, and the standard of 7,200 square feet for the
minimum lot size for the R-3 zone are designed to facilitate the development of larger multifamily housing
complexes. Within these complexes, the parking requirement and the minimum unit size requirement would
accommodate maximum allowable densities. The R-3 zone smaller lots, such as lots that are 7,200 square
feet, can still be used for multifamily residential units; however, the maximum allowable density would not be
achieved due to the development standards. The same development standards that apply to the R-1, R-2,
and R-3 zones will remain in effect if these zones are within the SPA General Plan Land Use Designation.
The Zoning Code specifies minimum size requirements for multifamily dwelling units. The minimum size is
measured on the outside of walls, and excludes basements, garages, carports, exterior courtyards, and
porches. These are modest requirements and are substantially smaller than what is currently being produced
in market rate housing. Minimum dwelling unit sizes are as follows.
          Studio and 1 Bedroom ....................... 675 sq. ft.
          2 Bedrooms ........................................ 850 sq. ft.
          3 Bedrooms ..................................... 1,025 sq. ft.
          Per each additional bedroom ............. 175 sq. ft.
Overall, development standards do not unreasonably add to the cost of housing since they are comparable to
regional regulations.
         Lot Width – The lot width standards for residential development is consistent with other
          jurisdictions in the surrounding area and are not considered to be unusually restrictive as a
          constraint, and will not impede the ability to achieve maximum densities. The lot width standards
          will not potentially impact the cost and supply of housing.
         Front Setbacks – The front setback in the multifamily zones is 20 feet. The setback is reduced
          five feet from other residential zones, allowing the development of multifamily housing to increase
          the building footprint to achieve maximum densities. Ultimately, this can increase the supply of
          multifamily housing in the City.
         Rear Setback – The rear setback for the R-3 zone is 15 feet, with an additional five feet for each
          additional story above ground. Development that builds up to the maximum height limit of 35 feet
          will usually achieve maximum density. If the building is developed to the maximum height limit of
          35 feet, the rear setback is 30 feet. This space may be provided for common open space and
          parking purposes.
November 2013                                                     A-53                       Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
         Side Setbacks – The side setbacks for R-3 zoned properties are consistent with other
          jurisdictions in the area and are not viewed as a constraint to achieving maximum densities or
          having a potential impact on the cost and supply of housing.
         Lot Coverage – The lot coverage for R-3 zoned properties is 60 percent. This allows for orderly
          and efficient development and should not impede the ability to achieve maximum densities.
         Distance between Main Structures – The distance between main structures is to provide for safe
          access and walkability throughout the development. With lot coverage at 60 percent, the required
          distance between buildings should have no effect on the ability to achieve maximum density. This
          development standard will not significantly affect the cost and supply of housing.
         Common Usable Open Space – This refers to the usable open space within the development that
          may contain “common amenities.” Amenities that are provided within multifamily housing (pools,
          barbeque areas, playgrounds, tennis and basketball courts, etc.) may increase the overall costs
          of the units but contribute to a enhanced living environment. The more amenities provided within
          the development, the more costly each of the units. By providing additional common areas in
          excess of the requirement, this may impede upon the ability to achieve maximum densities.
         Private Outdoor Living Space – Private patio or balcony areas may be utilized to fulfill not more
          than 50 percent of the open space requirement, provided such areas have direct access from the
          unit they are designed to serve, have a minimum dimension of seven feet, and have a minimum
          area of 70 square feet. Although multifamily units are not required to have private outdoor living
          space, units that do have private balconies or patios typically rent or sell for a higher price.
          Providing private outdoor living space should not impede the ability to achieve maximum
          densities if good site planning principles are applied.
         Main Building Structure Height – The height limit for residential properties is consistent among
          different zoning designations. The cost of units in dense, multifamily housing is relatively lower than
          large-lot single-family homes. The height limit of 35 feet would accommodate approximately three
          story structures and would not impede the ability to achieve maximum densities, given the
          appropriate lot size.
Although Measure V (discussed later in this chapter) may have resulted in a reduction of the potential
buildout of Low Density Residential lands, an increased opportunity has risen for the development of
multifamily housing more suitable and affordable to moderate-, low- and very low-income households,
such as duplexes, condominiums, and other forms of attached multiple-unit housing.
To facilitate and encourage development of housing for very low- or low-income households, the City, as
part of a comprehensive zoning ordinance update, will modify development standards for affordable
housing as follows:
         In the R-2 zone, setbacks will be modified as follows: front 15, rear 5, side 5; and parcel coverage
          shall be increased to a maximum of 60 percent.
         In the R-3 zone, setbacks will be modified as follows: front 15, rear 5, side 5; and parcel coverage
          shall be increased to a maximum of 70 percent; the maximum building height will be increased to
          50 feet.
Second Dwelling Units
In the Single Family Residence Zone (R-1), the City permits an additional dwelling unit for senior citizens to
be sited on a parcel subject to site plan review and the following standards:
         Lot coverage shall not exceed 40 percent.
         The minimum square footage for a detached second unit shall be 500 square feet and the
          maximum shall be 640 square feet. The maximum attached unit shall be 640 square feet.
         Detached second units shall be placed on lots that have a minimum lot area of 10,000 square
          feet. Attached second units shall be placed on lots that have a minimum lot area of 7,200 square
          feet.
         One additional open parking space shall be required for a second unit.
         A covenant shall be required on all second units that prohibits property owners from renting the
          units.
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                      A-54                                       November 2013

                                                                                              City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                Housing Element
        Adequate water and waste disposal shall be available for the second unit at the time of the
         application.
        Sprinklers shall be required for all units (detached and attached).
        The second unit shall not encroach into any front, side or rear yard setbacks, and shall be subject
         to architectural and site review.
        The second unit permit shall be considered by the planning commission as a conditional use
         permit.
While the second unit provisions in the zoning code are outdated, it is the City’s policy to permit second
units consistent with State law. As part of a comprehensive update of the zoning code, the City will modify
the requirements for second units to comply with state law. First, the City will eliminate requirements for a
conditional use permit. The City will also lift the restricting covenant only allowing second units for senior
citizens.
Density Bonus Provisions
The City adopted density bonus provisions, but the regulations need to be modified to reflect existing
provisions of state law. Section 17.30.380 of the Loma Linda zoning ordinance states that the City will
enter into an agreement with a developer to provide a density bonus or “other alternative incentives” for
the development of projects that provide a specified percentage of affordable housing. To qualify for a
density bonus, the zoning ordinance requires that a project provide one of the following.
        25 percent of the proposed units be for low- or moderate-income housing, as defined in Section
         50093 of the California Health and Safety Code (up to 120 percent of the area median income,
         adjusted for household size), or
        10 percent of the units are for lower income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the
         California Health and Safety Code (up to 80 percent of the area median income, adjusted for
         household size)
The existing density bonus provisions are inconsistent with current law. Government Code Section 65915
requires that cities and counties provide development incentives, such as a density bonus, for projects
providing the following affordable housing.
                                                                               Additional % Target
                                                                               Bonus for      Units
                                                                                Each 1%     Required
                                                            Minimum           Increase in      For
                                                              % of   Bonus       Target     Maximum
                               Group                          Units Granted      Units     35% Bonus
          Very Low Income                                      5%     20%         2.5%        11%
          Low Income                                          10%     20%         1.5%        20%
          Moderate Income (Condo or PUD Only)                 10%      5%          1%         40%
          Senior Citizen Housing Development                  100%    20%           --          --
Developers may seek a waiver or modification of development standards. The developer must show that
the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. State density
bonus regulations also include requirements for incentives and concessions. To better facilitate the
application of the state’s density bonus regulations, the City will amend its density bonus requirements to
meet the requirements of current law (Program 5.5).
November 2013                                          A-55                    Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Parking
City parking standards for residential developments are tailored to vehicle ownership patterns associated
with different residential uses. While these standards may affect development costs, they are considered
necessary to assure certain quality standards for multifamily housing. As part of a comprehensive
development code update, the City will evaluate, and modify if necessary, parking standards to ensure
that they do not constrain the development of housing, specifically senior housing and multi-family
housing.
Table 5.B.C: Residential Off-Street Parking Standards
           Residential Type                                    Off-Street Parking Standard
Single family detached                 2 spaces within a garage
Single family attached and multifamily All units must have a minimum of one garage parking space and a minimum
residential:                           of 0.25 spaces per bedroom for guest parking.
          Studio                       One parking space per unit
          One-bedroom                  1.5 parking spaces per unit
          Each additional bedroom      0.5 additional parking spaces per bedroom
Mobile homes                           2 spaces for each unit
Senior Housing Projects                1 parking space per unit with a minimum of 0.5 spaces per unit being
                                       covered and 20 percent of the covered spaces being enclosed garages
Second Dwelling Units                  1 open parking space for the additional unit
Congregate Care Facility               0.5 parking spaces per unit
5.B.1.2 Planning for a Variety of Housing Types
The Land Use Element and zoning code contain the basic standards that allow for the development of a
variety of housing types.
Multifamily Housing
Multifamily developments are permitted in the R-3 zone. If a development consists of more than one
dwelling unit (single-family, duplex, or multifamily), a Precise Plan of Design (PPD) or a Conditional Use
Permit (CUP) must be submitted to the Planning Department, reviewed by the Architectural Review
Committee, and approved by the Planning Commission, and City Council on appeal. As part of the update to
the zoning code, the permit procedures for multifamily development within multifamily zones will be
amended to permit multifamily developments ministerially rather than administratively in the R-3 zone
although a design review process will be included.
Manufactured and Mobile Homes
Manufactured homes may be placed on individual lots that allow residential uses, provided that the
mobile homes are attached to a foundation system in compliance with all applicable building regulations
and Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code, and occupied only as a residential use. Manufactured
homes are subject to all zoning ordinance provisions applicable to residential structures. Mobile home
parks are conditionally permitted in the R-4 zone.
Housing for Agricultural Employees
As stated previously, the 2011 Census data identified only 16 Loma Linda residents working in the
“agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting” industry. Since agricultural employment continues to be a very
small economic activity, there is no farm worker housing in Loma Linda, and it is anticipated that the
housing needs of farm workers will be accommodated as part of meeting the needs of lower income
households. The City complies with the State Employee Housing Act (Section 17000 of the Health and
Safety Code) and will allow employee/farmworker housing in zones allowing agricultural uses. In
accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5 and 17021.6 employee housing occupied by
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                      A-56                                       November 2013

                                                                                             City of Loma Linda
                                                                                               Housing Element
six (6) or fewer employees in a single family structure, are treated the same as any other single family
dwelling in the same zone.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
Single-room occupancy (SRO) buildings house people in single rooms with tenants often sharing
bathrooms and kitchens. SROs are permitted in the R-3 zone. However, the zoning ordinance does not
specifically define SROs.
Emergency Shelters and Transitional and Supportive Housing
In Loma Linda, homeless shelters can be treated as a boarding house, a use that is conditionally
permitted in the R-3 zone. The zoning code does not currently reference transitional or supportive
housing directly. Siting for transitional and supportive housing is based on the character of development
(residential, commercial, etc.), not the population these developments serve. Consistent with state law,
small transitional housing serving six or fewer people is considered a regular residential use and
permitted in all zones where residential uses are permitted. Transitional housing that functions as a
regular residential use (such as a single family home or an apartment complex) is permitted in the same
manner those uses are permitted.
Currently, the zoning ordinance does not address transitional and supportive housing, SROs, and
emergency shelters. To address this constraint, the City will amend the zoning ordinance to facilitate
housing opportunities for extremely low-income persons by addressing provisions for transitional housing,
supportive housing, SRO housing, and emergency shelters (Program 5.5). The City will permit homeless
shelters by right in the Commercial Manufacturing (CM) zone. If the City determines (based on the most
recent publically available homeless census and in consultation with local homeless service providers)
that the number and type of emergency shelter beds available within the City of Loma Linda exceeds the
City’s unsheltered homeless need, a conditional use permit will be required.. The adopted ordinance
related to emergency shelters will not include a sunset clause. The CM zone encompasses 27.9 acres
and applies to properties in the northern part of the City, in close proximity to San Timoteo Creek and the
Union Pacific Railroad alignment. Over 14 acres of land in the CM zone are vacant, and adjacent uses
are lighter industrial and commercial industrial in nature. No heavy manufacturing uses are close to the
CM zoned parcels.
5.B.1.3 Housing for Persons with Disabilities
The current zoning ordinance does not contain specific provisions related to housing for persons with
disabilities, including provisions facilitating or constraining the production of housing that is designed for
persons with disabilities. While the City allows for reasonable accommodations for persons with
disabilities, it does not have a formal procedure for making reasonable accommodation exceptions in the
development review process.
In addition, the zoning ordinance does not formally address residential care facilities or facilities for
persons with disabilities. Consistent with state law, residential care facilities serving six or fewer people
are considered a regular residential use and permitted in all zones where residential uses are permitted.
There are no spacing requirements for residential care facilities.
The zoning ordinance contains a definition of “family,” which is defined as:
        “an individual living alone, or two or more persons living together, related by blood or
        marriage, and shall include stepchildren and children by adoption, or a group of not more
        than three persons who are not related by blood or marriage, or as stepparents or
        stepchildren, or as adopted parents and adopted children, and excluding there from
        domestic help, provided the group of persons are living together as a single housekeeping
        unit in a dwelling unit with one kitchen.”
The City requires that all development comply with the Uniform Building Code, and does not maintain
additional building requirements that would hinder the development of housing for disabled residents. The
November 2013                                          A-57                   Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
City facilitates the development of housing for persons with disabilities by being able to waive
development standards for ADA retrofit projects.
As part of a comprehensive zoning ordinance update, the City will revise or remove the definition of
family, directly address residential care facilities, and enact provisions to make reasonable
accommodation exceptions for persons with disabilities in the land use and zoning application, review,
and approval process (Program 5.5).
5.B.1.4 Residential Growth Management
On November 7, 2006, the voters of the City of Loma Linda passed Ballot Measure V. The purpose and
intent of Measure V was to establish principles of managed growth, including the protection of hillside
areas. Voter approval of Measure V added Chapter 2A, Growth Management, to the General Plan. As
noted in Measure V, “…all of the elements of the General Plan are intricately woven together and a
significant change in one could affect them all.” Thus, maintaining the internal consistency of the General
Plan, as required by state law, requires each of the elements of the General Plan to be consistent with the
provisions of Measure V, as approved by the voters of Loma Linda. Any changes to provisions set forth in
Measure V require a citywide vote.
Provisions
Measure V set forth policies specifically to preserve the hillside and open space areas of the City. Some
provisions of Measure V also established policies affecting all residential development, such as
establishing allowable density for residential land use designations as set forth in Table 5.B.A
(Residential Land Use Designations and Zoning Districts). Measure V also modified all land use
designations to have a minimum density of zero units per acre and established a 7,200 square foot
minimum lot size for single-family development citywide. Measure V also defines “Gross Land Area” in
residential projects as developable land remaining after deducting the area of any floodway easement,
utility easement, and the area of the right-of-way of any bordering street.
Measure V established traffic mitigation standards to ensure that traffic levels of service (LOS) at the time
of a development application are maintained. Exempted from this requirement are infill construction of
individual single-family homes on existing lots smaller than five acres and bounded on three sides by
developed property (at the effective date of Measure V). Rehabilitation, remodeling or additions to
existing single-family residential structures are also exempt. Developments associated with the Loma
Linda University Adventist Health Sciences Center are exempt if projects provide student and/or staff
housing for Loma Linda University Adventist Health Sciences Center or associated entities.
Measure V Constraints
While Measure V reduced the development potential in many areas of the City, it did not remove all
opportunities for development of housing to meet the City’s identified need (as established by the RHNA.
While Measure V reduced the development densities allowed in some residential land use designations, it
does not preclude the ability of the City Council to change land use designations outside of those areas
designated by Measure V as the San Timoteo Creek Area, Hillside Preservation Areas (including Low
Density Hillside Preservation, Medium Density Hillside Preservation, and Rural Estates), Hillside
Conservation Area and Expanded Hillside Area (collectively referred to as “Hillside areas”). The land use
designations for all other areas were not changed by Measure V, and may be amended without voter
approval.
Measure V does not affect density limitations on mixed-use projects (residential and commercial, or
residential and other) allowed in SPAs or within other non-residential land use designations, or maximum
residential densities permitted in the Institutional land use designations. Buildout potential in these areas
is regulated by FAR specifications that are not affected by Measure V.
By modifying the maximum allowable density within the Low Density Residential land use designation,
Measure V reduced the maximum allowable density of lands designated Low Density Residential from
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                      A-58                                    November 2013

                                                                                             City of Loma Linda
                                                                                               Housing Element
five units per acres to four units per acre. By itself, this revision did not affect housing production since
traditional single-family neighborhoods within the Low Density Residential designation and R-1 zone were
being built out at 3.5 to 4.0 units per acre. Further, both the Very High and High Density Residential land
use designations clearly state that the intent of these categories is to provide for multifamily development;
single-family development is not identified as an appropriate housing type within these categories. While
Measure V, by the vote of the people establishes minimum density of zero units per acre in residential
designations, the zoning ordinance is more specific and does establish minimum densities in the R-3
zone. Varying by locations, allowed densities in the R-3 zone range from 5.1 to 9 units per acre to 20
units per acre.
The City has determined that the 7,200-square-foot minimum lot size requirements of Measure V apply
only to detached single-family homes. The minimum lot size requirement does not apply to development
of attached housing units that may prove more affordable to moderate-, low- and very low-income
households such as duplexes, condominiums and other forms of attached multiple-unit housing.
Reducing the intensity of potential development within Loma Linda’s hillside areas was one of Measure
V’s major objectives. Because of the environmental constraints that any hillside development would have
to address, the overall density of potential development within the South Hills area would have been low
even prior to Measure V. The reduction in the allowable density of hillside development in Measure V is
intended to recognize the substantial environmental constraints present within the hillside areas.
5.B.1.5 Building Codes and Enforcement
The City adopted the 2010 California Building Code with minor administrative amendments. The code
establishes minimum construction standards for residential construction while not unduly constraining the
development of housing. No local amendment to the code has either been initiated or approved that
directly impacts the production of housing.
Code enforcement is conducted by the City and is based upon systematic enforcement in areas of
concern and on a complaint basis. The Code Enforcement division of the Public Safety Department
works with property owners and renters to assist in meeting state health and safety codes.
5.B.1.6 On- and Off-Site Improvements
Site improvements and property dedications are important components of new development and
contribute to the creation of decent housing. Off-site improvements within and adjacent to housing tracts
include standard street widths, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, and are in compliance with standards as
defined in the General Plan Circulation update and the Municipal Code. Water and sewer lines from the
development are required to be connected to the nearest water and sewer main lines. In Loma Linda, site
improvements vary depending on the existing condition of each project. Typically, site improvements are
requested during the plan check process or as conditions of approval during the public hearing process.
New subdivisions typically require a certain level of public improvements and circulation improvement for
the orderly and efficient development of the community. Loma Linda’s requirements for off-site
improvements are standard for small communities within San Bernardino County.
As stated in the Municipal Code (Section 16.04.120), site improvements for residential subdivisions
include:
         Grading, drainage, and drainage structures necessary to proper use and to the public safety
         Portland cement concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks and drive approaches
         Storm drains, conduits and channels
         Asphalt concrete street paving
         Aggregate base
         Adequate domestic water supply, including the relocation or replacement of all water mains,
          irrigation lines, and appurtenances as required by the City Engineer
November 2013                                        A-59                     Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
         Sanitary sewer facilities and connections for each lot
         Underground utilities providing services to each lot
         Services from public utilities, where provided, and from sanitary sewers shall be made available
          for each lot in such manner as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street pavement,
          gutter, curb and sidewalk when service connections are made
         Street trees
         Fire hydrants
         Street name signs, and traffic regulatory devices
         Street lights, including ornamental light standards
         The relocation or replacement of all utility lines and poles as required by the City Engineer
         Permanent subdivision survey monuments
         Connecting to the City’s fiber optic network
5.B.1.7 Development Fees
The City charges fees to process plans submitted for residential projects and to finance the provision of
important services needed to accommodate housing and population growth. Fees and exactions are
used to finance public facilities, roadways, water and sewer infrastructure, schools, and other community
services. Nearly all of these fees are assessed through a pro rata share system, based on the magnitude
of the project’s impact or the extent of the benefit that will be derived. The fees have not been found to
act as a constraint to the development of housing in Loma Linda.
Two types of fees are charged and discussed below: planning processing fees and development impact
fees. A summary of the City’s permit processing and development impact fee schedules is included in
Tables 5.B.D and 5.B.E, as updated in 2011.
Planning and permitting fees are charged on an at-cost basis to cover staff services and administrative
expenses for processing development applications. A comparison of Loma Linda’s typical residential
planning fees in relation to nearby communities is shown in Table 5.B.D. Loma Linda, the City of
Redlands, and the County of San Bernardino permit residential development. It can be seen from Table
5.B.D that Loma Linda’s planning fees are generally comparable to other cities in its vicinity.
Table 5.B.D Comparison of Planning Fees
   Fee Type             Loma Linda (12/12/11)               City of Redlands        County of San Bernardino
Annexation          $15,000 deposit against actual  $6,366 (includes Service Plan) N/A
                    cost + LAFCO fee                Service Plan- $1,236
                                                    Pre-Annexation Agreement-
                                                    Hourly Charge with $2,309
                                                    deposit
Application Fee     SF Residence - $1,360           N/A                            N/A
                    Small Project- $1,360
Conditional Use     Up to a residential 4-plex -    New Construction $6,044        0 - .99 acres $6,705
Permit              $4,220                          No New Construction $2,011     1 - 4.99 acres $7,450
                    Project< 20,000 sq. ft. -$4,220 Time Extension $243            5 or more acres $8,940
                    Project> 20,000 sq. ft. -
                    $5,560
                    Existing unit - $4,120
Environmental       $355 for projects exempt from   Negative Declaration-$5,133    Environmental Review (Non
Fees                CEQA                            Environmental Assessment       Land Use Application) - actual
                    $3,475 for projects requiring   $727                           cost with Initial Deposit.
                    an initial Study and $170 per   EIR/IS – Hourly Rate           $2,980.
                    technical study.                                               Mitigation Monitoring - actual
                    $15,080 deposit for an EIR                                     cost with Initial Deposit $2,980
General Plan        Text - $4,835                   $5,464                         Actual Cost with Initial Deposit
Amendment           Map - $4,575                                                   $8,046
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                        A-60                                       November 2013

                                                                                                 City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                   Housing Element
Table 5.B.D Comparison of Planning Fees
    Fee Type           Loma Linda (12/12/11)               City of Redlands            County of San Bernardino
Specific Plan      $15,000 deposit against actual   Specific Plan $8,757             Actual cost., with Initial
                   cost - hourly                    Amendment $3,986                 Deposit $20,000.00
Tentative Parcel   $4,585 per application and       $4,543                           <5 Parcels - $3,725
Map                $10 per lot for every lot over 9                                  >5 Parcels - $8,940, $45 per
                   lots.                                                             lot
Tentative Tract    $4,965 per application plus      $11,249                          Actual cost., with Initial
Map                $20 per lot                                                       Deposit $8,920, $45 per lot
Variance           $2,015 per application           Fence $569                       Actual Cost with Initial Deposit
                   $200 for owner occupied SFR      Single-Family Res. $2,024        Major $3,576
                                                    Multi-Family or Commercial       Minor $1,515
                                                    $2,790
                                                    Parking $1,681
Zone Change        $2,625                           Zone Change $3, 420              Actual Cost with Initial Deposit
                                                    Text amt. $2,658                 $3,725
                                                    Commission Determination
                                                    $2,111
Development impact fees are required to provide essential services and infrastructure to serve new
residents. Impact fees are governed by state law and must demonstrate a nexus between development
and potential impacts. State law also requires the proportionality test to ensure the pro rata share of
costs to provide services and infrastructure by individual developments is reasonable.
Table 5.B.E: Residential Development Impact Fees
1.       General Government Facilities:
         a. Detached dwelling unit                                      $2,150/du
         b. Attached dwelling unit                                      $2,150/du
2.       Parkland Acquisition and Development
         a. Detached dwelling unit                                      $5,354/du
         b. Attached dwelling unit                                      $3,955/du
3.       Public Meeting Facilities
         a. Detached dwelling unit                                      $343/du
         b. Attached dwelling unit                                      $253/du
4.       Art in Public Places
         Residential Valuation                                          $0.0025 percent of value
6.       Public Library Facilities
         a. Detached dwelling unit                                      $260/du
         b. Attached dwelling unit                                      $192/du
7.       Fire Suppression Facilities, et. al.
         a. Detached dwelling unit                                      $570/du
         b. Attached dwelling unit                                      $377/du
8.       Local Circulation Systems
         a. Detached dwelling unit                                      $1,467.04/du
         b. Attached dwelling unit                                      $979.44/du
9.       Regional Circulation Systems
         a. Detached dwelling unit                                      $5,147.44/du
         b. Attached dwelling unit                                      $3,435.59/du
10.      Storm Drainage Facilities
         a. Detached dwelling unit                                      $702/du
         b. Attached dwelling unit                                      $141/du
11.      Water Generation, Storage, and Distribution
November 2013                                          A-61                     Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints
City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
Table 5.B.E: Residential Development Impact Fees
          a. Detached dwelling unit                                   $3,500/du
          b. Attached dwelling unit                                   $2,586/du
12.       Wastewater Collection System
          a. Detached dwelling unit                                   $539/du
          b. Attached dwelling unit                                   $398/du
13. School Impact Fees (Redlands Unified School District)
          a. Single family dwelling unit                              $5,523/du
          b. Attached dwelling unit                                   $2,893/du
14. Sewer Capacity Fee (Collected by the City of San Bernardino)
         a. Single family dwelling unit (0-3 units)                   $3,500/du
          b. Attached dwelling unit (4+ units)                        $2,625/du
In addition, a Sewer Capacity Fee, paid to and collected by the City of San Bernardino, is $3,500 per
dwelling unit for each single family unit and each unit in a duplex or triplex. For multifamily uses in excess
of three units, the City of San Bernardino charges three-quarters of the single unit equivalent ($2,625) per
unit.
School fees collected by the Redlands Unified School District (RUSD) are $5,523 for a single family unit
and $2,893 for each multi-family unit5.
Altogether, developer fees for a prototypical single-family subdivision are approximately$39,023 ($30,000
per unit in addition to the $5,523 fee charged by the school district and the $3,500 fee charged by the City
of San Bernardino). Fees for a prototypical multifamily project are lower on a per-unit basis at $21,448
($16,000 per unit in addition to the $2,893 fee charged by the school district and the $2,625 fee charged
by the City of San Bernardino). (Single-family prototype is a single family unit within a 20-lot subdivision,
approximately 2,500 square foot units. Multifamily prototype is a 12-unit apartment complex with
approximately 1,000-square-foot units).
5.B.1.8 Development Review Process
The City reviews all applications for development to ensure that construction of projects contribute in a
positive manner to the community and improve quality of life. In the City of Loma Linda, an application for a
residential project containing about 20 units typically requires a processing time (from filing of the initial
application to final map approval) of approximately four months. However, actual processing time varies
according to the size and scope of the project, as well as the time taken by the developer to prepare the final
map, improvement plans, and other project-related documents. While the City attempts to process
development applications in a timely and efficient manner, some delays are outside the control of the City.
Delays in processing can occur if environmental review, pursuant to California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA), requires an EIR to be prepared. At times, approval from state or other agencies may also be
required for certain types of projects.
Typically, processing and permitting procedures for residential dwelling units in the City of Loma Linda are as
follows.
If a development consists of one single-family residence and has obtained the correct development permits,
the Planning Department Staff can approve the project and send it to review before the Administrative
Review Committee (ARC). After approval by the ARC, the project will go to an Administrative Public Hearing
for final approval. In the majority of instances, applications for single-family residences are exempt from
CEQA. Timeline as follows:
5 Comparative Survey of Development Impact Fees: Cities in San Bernardino County and Unincorporated Riverside
County. County of San Bernardino, September 2012
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                      A-62                                      November 2013
                                                                                              City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                Housing Element
          Approval by ARC – approximately 2 weeks
          Administrative Public Hearing – approximately 2 weeks
 If a development consists of more than one dwelling unit (single-family, duplex, or multifamily) a Precise Plan
 of Design (PPD) must be submitted to the Planning Department, reviewed by the ARC, and approved by the
 Planning Commission and City Council. Developments that exceed development standards such as the
 maximum building height, are required to submit a Conditional Use Permit (CUP). The CEQA process runs
 concurrently with the application process. Requirements and timeline are as follows:
          A Precise Plan of Design is the entitlements required for multifamily housing.
          Approval by ARC – approximately 2 weeks
          Approval by Planning Commission – public hearing – 4 to 8 weeks
As part of a comprehensive development code update, the City will Modify permit procedures for all
multifamily development within multifamily zones to permit these developments ministerially rather than
administratively.
 If the development consists of a subdivision, a Tentative Tract Map must be approved by the Planning
 Commission and the City Council at public hearings. However, a housing project may accompany the
 tract map through the process as long as the subdivision approval occurs first. Once the final tract map is
 prepared, the project can be approved by the City Council. The CEQA process runs concurrently with the
 application process. Timelines are as follows:
          Tentative Tract Map
           Approval by Planning Commission – public hearing – approximately 4 to 8 weeks
           Approval by City Council – public hearing – approximately 4 weeks
          Final Tract Map
           Approved by City Council by consent – approximately 4 weeks
 It is the intent of the permit process to provide for all multifamily residential developments that are
 compatible and harmonious with the immediate neighborhood and in conformance with the General Plan.
 These decision-making standards ensure that adequate light, air, ventilation, open space, parking
 facilities, and other amenities are provided and maintained for residents of multifamily residential
 developments.
 5.B.2 Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints
 5.B.2.1 Environmental
 Flooding
 Portions of Loma Linda have historically been vulnerable to flooding associated with Mission Channel and
 the Santa Ana River, as well as small-scale floods originating on hillsides in the southern portion of the
 City. Major roadways that cross over water courses/channels include Anderson Street and Barton Road
 (San Timoteo Creek), Redlands Boulevard (Mission Channel), and Beaumont Avenue (San Timoteo
 Creek). In addition, the northern portion of the City is within the inundation area of the Seven Oaks Dam,
 the failure of which would impact the City. Improvements to San Timoteo Creek have removed most
 areas of the City from flooding hazards. The areas adjacent to the Mission Channel are mostly business
 park areas and a medium high-density residential area that is already built out. Additionally, the areas in
 the southern portion of the City are designated at a very low density, which will allow development to
 avoid hazards such as flooding. Therefore, flooding hazards will not hinder the development of new
 residential units.
 Steep Slopes
 The southern portion of the City (commonly known as the South Hills) has steep natural slopes which are
 susceptible to instability in certain areas. The type of instability anticipated in this area includes deep-
 November 2013                                        A-63                     Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
seated landslides, surficial soil slips, wet debris flows, and surficial creep. Most of the mapped landslides
appear to be relatively recent (less than 11,000 years). Other deep-seated landslides smaller in size and
not as geomorphically pronounced are suspected to exist in the steep terrain of the southern portion of
the City. These areas in the southern portion of the City are designated for very low density to avoid
hazards related to steep slopes and unstable ground, and to protect natural resources within the hillside
area. The need to avoid hazards and protect resources is the basis for allowable densities within this
area.
Fault Zones
Four faults traverse Loma Linda. The San Jacinto Fault zone crosses the southwest portion and has been
the most historically active fault zone in Southern California. There are numerous offset gullies, linear
ridges, and other fault-related features that indicate active faulting along the Claremont branch of the San
Jacinto Fault. The Loma Linda Fault has been mapped as crossing the northern portion of the City. This
fault was originally identified from groundwater data and lacks topographic evidence. No evidence of
active faulting has been identified. The Banning Fault is a trace of the San Andreas Fault, extending
westward from the San Gorgonio Pass. The fault has been mapped crossing the northeast corner of
Loma Linda. This fault is not generally thought to be active. The Live Oak Canyon Fault, with many
branches nearby, has been mapped in eastern portion of the south hills. This fault is not generally thought
to be active.
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (Alquist-Priolo) was passed in 1972 to mitigate the hazard
of surface faulting to structures built for human occupancy. The Act’s main purpose is to prevent the
construction of buildings used for human occupancy on the surface trace of active faults. The San Jacinto
Fault, considered to be active, has been mapped in the southern portion of Loma Linda. An earthquake
hazard zone has been established along the trace of this fault. Investigations of the San Jacinto Fault
have recommended building setbacks varying from 50 to 100 feet. The southern portion of the City is
designated at a very low density, which will allow development to avoid hazards related to this fault. Also,
the units that will be developed within this area will be required to meet safety standards related to
earthquake hazards.
5.B.2.2 Infrastructure
The provision of public services (especially water, sewers, and flood control) does not constrain the
production of new housing. Currently, state laws governing municipal funding limit the ability of cities to
provide infrastructure from ongoing revenues. As a result, new development is generally required to “pay its
own way” with regard to public facilities such as water, sewer, drainage, parks, and roadway facilities. In
accordance with AB 1600, the City has enacted a development impact fee program to ensure new
development pays only for its impacts and not for existing deficiencies caused by prior development. The
Loma Linda Municipal Services Review (2004) states that potable water is available to serve the
development of all vacant parcels in the City to their maximum potential. It also states that the capacity of
the sewer system and wastewater treatment plant is such that all vacant parcels in the City could be
developed to their maximum potential without causing a strain on the system.
Water service is provided by the City of Loma Linda. Potable water is extracted from the Bunker Hill
groundwater basin. The estimated safe yield of this basin is many times greater than current water extraction.
Thus, groundwater from Bunker Hill Basin, due to its abundance and good quality, is expected to be the long-
term water source. As development occurs, it will be necessary to bring new wells online, construct
distribution systems, and provide additional water storage capacity. New distribution lines are generally the
responsibility of new development.
Wastewater (sewer) facilities within the City of Loma Linda are operated and maintained by the City’s
Department of Public Works, Utilities Division. Sewer line maintenance programs are administered by the
City, while the wastewater treatment services are provided under provisions outlined in a Joint Powers
Agreement (JPA) with the City of San Bernardino. Expansion of the sewer system to accommodate new
development is paid for exclusively by development fees levied on new construction. The operation and
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                      A-64                                    November 2013

                                                                                             City of Loma Linda
                                                                                              Housing Element
maintenance of existing sewer facilities is funded through monthly user fees levied on residential,
commercial, and institutional users.
Storm drain systems have been constructed throughout the City to accommodate both the increased runoff
resulting from development and to protect developed areas from potential localized flooding. The City (along
with the City of Redlands) is located within the area addressed in San Bernardino County Comprehensive
Storm Drain Master Plan No. 4. Because County drainage facilities receive upstream drainage from the City’s
drainage system, the City storm drain system must be consistent with the County’s Master Plan. Future
improvements to the City’s storm drain system will follow the improvements outlined in Master Plan No. 4.
Many storm drains and open channels drain into the San Timoteo Creek channel, which is a County facility.
At least one longer storm drain (66 inches) and smaller lines drain to Mission Channel.
5.B.3 Market Constraints
Many factors that relate to housing costs are related to the larger housing market in general. Land costs,
construction costs, and labor costs all contribute to the cost of housing, and can hinder the production of
affordable housing. Additionally, the availability of financing can limit access to homeownership for some
low-income households. Market-related constraints are part of regional trends related to housing and
local jurisdictions seldom have any control over these
5.B.3.1 Land and Construction Costs
The price of land is a significant factor in the total cost of housing. Developed land costs typically account
for about one-quarter of the total cost of a home. Land costs in Southern California and San Bernardino
County have consistently been increasing since World War II as a result of inflation, increased demand
due to population immigration, and decreasing land supply. This increase has an adverse effect on the
ability of households–particularly low- and moderate-income households–to pay for housing.
Raw land costs of residential lots in Loma Linda depend on the size and location of the parcel and the
extent of improvements contained on the lot. In July 2013, there were two lots for sale ranging from
$350,000 for a 1.93-acre lot to $750,000 for a 9.78-acre lot. Both lots are zoned for lower-density
residential development.
Construction costs for housing can vary significantly, depending on the type of housing, such as single-
family, townhomes, and apartments. However, even within a particular building type, construction costs
vary by unit size and amenities. Furthermore, neighborhood resistance to some developments lengthens
development time, driving up the holding costs. The difficulty of developing awkward infill sites can also
add to costs. Another factor related to construction costs is the number of units built at one time. As the
number increase, overall costs generally decrease as builders can benefit from the economies of scale.
Construction costs in Loma Linda are about the same as in other parts of Southern California. For
standard housing construction, costs may average $110 to $129 per square foot for single-family
residences depending on the level of amenities provided, and $100 to $132 per square foot for multi-
family residential structure, depending on construction type and excluding parking6.
5.B.3.2 Financing
The availability of capital to finance new residential development is a significant factor that can impact
both the cost and the supply of housing. There are two types of capital involved in the housing market: 1)
capital used by developers for initial site preparation and construction, and 2) capital for financing the
purchase of units by homeowners and investors. Interest rates substantially impact home construction,
purchase, and improvement costs. A fluctuation in rates of just 2.5 percent can make a dramatic
difference in the annual income needed to qualify for a loan. In general, financing for new residential
development in Loma Linda at the present time (2013) is available at reasonable rates. However, the
6 http://www.iccsafe.org/cs/Documents/BVD/BVD-0813.pdf, accessed December 30, 2013
November 2013                                           A-65                  Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints

City of Loma Linda
Housing Element
recent high foreclosure rates on home loans have caused caution among lenders. Although interest rates
are low, lenders are considering applicants much more closely than in the past, leading to credit
tightening despite affordable interest rates.
The City in the past offered homebuyer programs funded through redevelopment agency funds. With the
demise of redevelopment agencies, City residents must rely on state and federal mortgage programs
such as the Mortgage Credit Certificate Program (MCC), California Homebuyer's Downpayment
Assistance Program (CHDAP), and FHA and VA home loans.
The entire nation, and the Southern California region in particular, experienced a large number of
foreclosures during the 2007-2012 housing crisis. In many cases, financing for these homes was made
through the sub-prime credit market. Sub-prime loans are characterized by higher interest rates and fees
than prime loans, and are more likely to include prepayment penalties. Beginning in 2006, foreclosures
were on a dramatic rise, indicative of the housing and larger economic crisis of the recession. In 2012, the
nation and region began to see a decrease in new Notices of Default throughout California. In San
Bernardino County, distressed home sales as a percent of total home sales dropped from 59 percent in
May 2012 to 32 percent in May 2013. In 2012, there were 65 short sales in Loma Linda, as well as sale of
48 lender-owned homes (Multiple Listing Service, 2013). As of July 2013, there have only been 28 short
sales and sales of nine lender-owned homes.
Appendix 5.B: Housing Constraints                   A-66                                     November 2013
                                                                                              Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                     Housing Element
    Appendix 5.C: Evaluation of Previous
    Accomplishments
    The goals, policies, and programs in the Plan build upon identified housing needs, constraints, and
    resources to address housing needs in the community, and will guide City housing policy through the
    2013-2021 planning period. Prior to presenting the goals, policies, and programs, an evaluation of the
    programs in the previous Housing Element (2008-2014) is presented as a foundation for 2013-2021
    Housing Element Plan.
    State law (California Government Code Section 65588[a]) requires each jurisdiction to review its housing
    element as frequently as appropriate and evaluate:
            The appropriateness of the housing goals, objectives, and policies in contributing to the
             attainment of the state housing goal
            The effectiveness of the Housing Element in attainment of the community’s housing goals and
             objectives
            The progress in implementation of the Housing Element
    The evaluation provides valuable information on the extent to which programs have achieved stated
    objectives and whether these programs continue to be relevant to addressing current and future housing
    needs in Loma Linda. The evaluation provides the basis for recommended modifications to policies and
    programs and the establishment of new housing objectives.
    Table 5.C.A shows the progress the City made toward implementing the 2008-2014 housing programs.
    Based on this information, an analysis of the effectiveness and continued appropriateness of these
    programs is provided, and the goals, policies, and programs of this Housing Element have been updated
    to reflect this evaluation.
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                 Accomplishments and Continued
        Name of Program                      Objective/Timeframe                           Appropriateness
1.1.1 Biennial Evaluation         Conduct a biennial update of the          Continued site availability is important to
                                  inventory of available sites, and ensure  meeting the community’s identified housing
                                  an ongoing supply of sites at appropriate need. The program is included in the 2013-
                                  densities. Timeframe: September 2011,     2021 Housing Element as part of a general
                                  and every two years thereafter            adequate sites program.
1.1.2 Modify Requirements for     Modify requirements for Second Units.     While the second unit provisions in the
Second Unit/Accessory Units       Eliminate requirements for a conditional  zoning code are outdated, it is the City’s
                                  use permit. Reduce lot size and unit size policy to permits second units consistent
                                  requirements. Lift the requirement        with state law. A program is included in the
                                  allowing Second Units for only senior     Housing Plan to bring the City’s second unit
                                  citizens. Timeframe: Mid 2011             ordinance into compliance. As part of a
                                                                            comprehensive update of the zoning code,
                                                                            expected to be completed in 2014, the City
                                                                            will modify its requirements for Second
                                                                            Units. This program will remain in the 2014
                                                                            Housing Plan.
1.1.3 Encourage Development       Actively encourage the development of     Information and assistance to property
of Second Unit/Accessory Units    second units in single-family residential owners interested in constructing second
                                  areas where appropriate. Provide          units is provided as a routine function of the
    November 2013                                           A-67                        Appendix 5.E: Public Outreach

   City of Loma Linda
   Housing Element
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                    Accomplishments and Continued
        Name of Program                      Objective/Timeframe                              Appropriateness
                                  information and forms to facilitate the     City. To expedite second unit development,
                                  approval process. Timeframe: Ongoing        the City offers a fast-track process for all
                                                                              residential projects. This program is no
                                                                              longer necessary and is removed from the
                                                                              2014 Housing Element.
1.1.4 Identify the Intended       Amend the General Plan Land Use             Program was completed and incorporated
Residential Buildout of Lands     Element to identify the intended            into the General Plan (May 2009). This
Designated “Special Planning      residential buildout (including both        program has been implemented and is not
Area”                             densities and acreage) of Special           included in the 2013-2021 Housing
                                  Planning Areas. Timeframe: May 2009         Element.
1.1.5 Permit Residential          Amend the adopted General Plan Land         Provisions were incorporated into the
Development for Students and      Use Element and zoning ordinance to         adopted General Plan (May 2009). The City
Employees within Lands            permit the development of residential       will incorporate provisions into the zoning
Designated Institutional and      dwelling units for student and employee     code as part of a comprehensive zoning
Health Care                       housing within lands designated             code update. This program is folded into a
                                  Institutional and Health Care. Facilitate   program related to a comprehensive update
                                  development of 300 dwelling units for       of the City’s zoning code to achieve
                                  university students and employees of        consistency with the General Plan.
                                  large institutions within Loma Linda by     Completed tasks will be removed.
                                  2014.Timeframe: General Plan (2009),
                                  Development Code (Mid 2011)
1.2.1 Monitor At-Risk Projects    Where assisted housing projects are “at-    Based on City records and information from
                                  risk” of conversion to market rate          the California Housing Partnership
                                  housing, develop strategies to preserve     Corporation, in the next 10 years (2014-
                                  their affordability. Timeframe: June 2013   2024) there are no assisted housing
                                                                              developments in Loma Linda at risk of
                                                                              losing affordability. This program is included
                                                                              the 2014 Housing Element with the intent of
                                                                              continually monitoring the status of
                                                                              affordable housing developments.
1.2.2 Housing Rehabilitation      Assist applicants in accessing home         Effective February 1, 2012, all
Program                           rehabilitation loans for low and moderate-  redevelopment agencies in the State of
                                  income housing, and self-help housing       California were dissolved pursuant to AB 1X
                                  projects. Create brochures that identify    26. This program was active up until the
                                  and provide information on available loan   elimination of the redevelopment agency as
                                  programs Provide technical review of        it relied solely on redevelopment funds. In
                                  applicant forms prior to submission.        addition, the County of San Bernardino has
                                  Timeframe: Ongoing                          also discontinued its rehabilitation and
                                                                              repair programs that were available to Loma
                                                                              Linda residents. This program is included in
                                                                              the 2014 Housing Element with the intent to
                                                                              pursue alternative funding sources that
                                                                              would allow the City to reinstate the
                                                                              program.
1.2.3 Community Education         Provide information to very low- and low-   Effective February 1, 2012, all
Regarding the Availability of     income households and other special         redevelopment agencies in the State of
Rehabilitation Programs           needs groups regarding the availability of  California were dissolved pursuant to AB 1X
                                  rehabilitation programs through             26. This program relied solely on
                                  neighborhood and community                  redevelopment funds. In addition, the
                                  organizations, and through the media.       County of San Bernardino has also
                                  Timeframe: Ongoing                          discontinued its rehabilitation and repair
                                                                              programs that were available to Loma Linda
                                                                              residents. Due to loss of Redevelopment
                                                                              funding and the lack of an alternative
                                                                              funding source, this program is removed
                                                                              from the 2014 Housing Element.
1.2.4 Housing Condition Survey    Maintain a current housing condition        This program was tied to the RDA-funded
                                  survey of all housing units within the City rehabilitation programs. Due to loss of
   Appendix 5.C: Evaluation of Previous Accomplishments A-68                                              November 2013

                                                                                                 City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                   Housing Element
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                              Accomplishments and Continued
       Name of Program                 Objective/Timeframe                              Appropriateness
                            to assist in targeting rehabilitation        redevelopment funding and the lack of an
                            programs. Timeframe: Ongoing                 alternative funding source, this program is
                                                                         removed from the 2014 Housing Element.
1.2.5 Rental Rehabilitation Provide financial assistance to owners of    This program is no longer active. Effective
Program                     existing rental property to rehabilitate     February 1, 2012, all redevelopment
                            substandard units Apply for CDBG funds       agencies in the State of California were
                            and allocate redevelopment funds for         dissolved pursuant to AB 1X 26. This
                            rental rehabilitation. Provide financial     program relied solely on redevelopment
                            assistance to owners of 5 rental             funds. In addition, the County of San
                            properties .Timeframe: Ongoing               Bernardino has also discontinued its
                                                                         rehabilitation and repair programs that were
                                                                         available to Loma Linda residents. A
                                                                         Housing Rehabilitation Program is included
                                                                         in the 2014 Housing Element with the intent
                                                                         to pursue alternative funding sources that
                                                                         would allow the City to reinstate the
                                                                         program.
1.2.6 Code Enforcement      Provide ongoing inspection services to       Code enforcement is an important tool in
                            review code violations on a survey and       maintaining a high quality of life in
                            complaint basis. Timeframe: Ongoing          residential neighborhoods. The City of Loma
                                                                         Linda building officials have been providing
                                                                         ongoing inspection services on a complaint
                                                                         basis. This program will remain in the 2014
                                                                         Housing Element.
1.2.7 Housing Replacement   Replace 15 dwelling units that would         This program is no longer active. Effective
                            have otherwise undergone costly              February 1, 2012, all redevelopment
                            rehabilitation by 2014. Timeframe:           agencies in the State of California were
                            Ongoing                                      dissolved pursuant to AB 1X 26. This
                                                                         program relied solely on redevelopment
                                                                         funds. Due to loss of Redevelopment
                                                                         funding and the lack of an alternative
                                                                         funding source, this program is removed
                                                                         from the 2014 Housing Element.
1.2.8 Universal Design      Encourage the use of Universal Design        New building construction is typically
                            Guidelines to be offered by developers to    regulated by state building codes that
                            prospective purchasers, in all new           include standards for accessibility. These
                            construction of single family and multi-     standards often match the ADA Guidelines.
                            family for sale housing, except for custom   State law (Health and Safety Code Section
                            built homes. Timeframe: Ongoing              17959.6) also requires developers of any
                                                                         new for-sale residential housing
                                                                         development, including, but not limited to, a
                                                                         single family dwelling, duplex, triplex,
                                                                         townhouse, condominium, or other homes,
                                                                         to provide to a buyer a list of universal
                                                                         accessibility features that would make the
                                                                         home entrance, interior routes of travel, the
                                                                         kitchen, and the bathrooms fully accessible
                                                                         to persons with disabilities. While this
                                                                         program is not included in the 2014 Housing
                                                                         Element as a separate housing program.
                                                                         Instead, a policy is included in the Housing
                                                                         Element to encourage the use of accessible
                                                                         design in residential development.
1.3.1 Energy Conservation   Codify the objectives and strategies of      The Loma Linda Energy Action Plan was
Ordinance                   the 2007 Energy Action Program and the       adopted by the City Council on November
                            City’s Climate Action Plan following their   13, 2007. This program has been
                            adoption. Timeframe: One year from           implemented and is not included in the
                            adoption                                     2013-2021 Housing Element. Aspects of
   November 2013                                      A-69 Appendix 5.C: Evaluation of Previous Accomplishments

    City of Loma Linda
    Housing Element
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                    Accomplishments and Continued
        Name of Program                       Objective/Timeframe                            Appropriateness
                                                                               the program are included in a policy related
                                                                               to encouraging sustainable building
                                                                               practices.
1.3.2 Incentives Program           Establish incentives for participation in   This program was discontinued due to lack
                                   energy conservation program.                of funding. This program is not included in
                                   Timeframe: Ongoing                          the 2014 Housing Element as a separate
                                                                               housing program. Instead, a policy is
                                                                               included in the Housing Element to
                                                                               encourage sustainable building practices.
1.3.3 Strengthen the Energy        Provide training, education, and            This program was discontinued due to lack
Action Plan                        strategies that will assist the City and    of funding. This program is not included in
                                   general public to minimize energy and       the 2014 Housing Element as a separate
                                   conserve natural resources. Timeframe:      housing program. Instead, a policy is
                                   Ongoing                                     included in the Housing Element to
                                                                               encourage sustainable building practices.
1.3.4 Streamline the Permit        Expedite the permit process for “green”     Because the City The City has a fast-track
Process                            buildings. Timeframe: Mid 2011              process for all residential development
                                                                               projects, expediting buildings with
                                                                               sustainable design elements is not
                                                                               necessary. This program is removed from
                                                                               the 2014 Housing Element.
2.1.1 Partnership Program          Meet regularly with nonprofit, private and  The City of Loma Linda is currently working
                                   other public entities to examine on-going   with a non-profit developer with
                                   opportunities for cooperative efforts to    development experience in the City
                                   expand the City’s supply of affordable      regarding the potential for affordable
                                   housing. Timeframe: Annual Meeting          housing development on City owned
                                                                               properties. This program will remain in the
                                                                               2014 Housing Element but will be combined
                                                                               into a general program related to
                                                                               encouraging affordable housing
                                                                               development.
2.1.2 Facilitate Development of    Designate publicly owned sites for          In 2011, the Loma Linda Housing Authority
Affordable Housing Projects        affordable housing projects. Distribute     negotiated directly with non-profit regarding
                                   Requests for Proposals to housing           affordable housing on its scattered sites.
                                   developers for construction of the          The City will continue to work with
                                   affordable housing project, or negotiate    affordable housing developer as
                                   directly with individual qualified          opportunities arise for development of
                                   developers. Timeframe: within one year      affordable housing on City-owned land. This
                                   of Housing Element adoption                 program will remain in the 2014 Housing
                                                                               Element but will be combined into a general
                                                                               program related to encouraging affordable
                                                                               housing development.
2.1.3 Subsidize the Purchase of    Survey all owners of large multi-family     This program is no longer active. Effective
Privately Owned Multi-Family       buildings to determine the feasibility of   February 1, 2012, all redevelopment
Buildings                          the current owners selling the buildings to agencies in the State of California were
                                   a non-profit manager. Subsidize the         dissolved pursuant to AB 1X 26. This
                                   purchase of the buildings in exchange for   program relied solely on redevelopment
                                   income restriction covenants. Timeframe:    funds. Due to loss of Redevelopment
                                   Initiate survey months after Housing        funding (and the lack of an alternative
                                   Element adoption                            funding source), this program is removed
                                                                               from the 2014 Housing Element.
2.1.4 Multi-family Housing         Consider issuing a bond to fund the         Due to lack of funding, the City cannot
Bonds                              construction of multi-family housing units. issue/repay bonds to fund the construction
                                   Timeframe: Determine feasibility of using   of multi-family housing units. This program
                                   bonds within six months of Housing          is removed from the 2014 Housing Element.
                                   Element adoption
2.1.5 Enforce Guarantees Made      Work with outside agencies to ensure        The City encourages the development of
By Other Agencies                  that guarantees for affordable units on     affordable housing but does not have
    Appendix 5.C: Evaluation of Previous Accomplishments A-70                                             November 2013

                                                                                                       City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                         Housing Element
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                   Accomplishments and Continued
       Name of Program                     Objective/Timeframe                               Appropriateness
                               specific parcels are made when                 jurisdiction or authority to enforce
                               properties are declared surplus by these       development agreements made by private
                               agencies. Timeframe: Ongoing                   parties. This program is removed from the
                                                                              2014 Housing Element. Policies and
                                                                              programs are included in the Housing
                                                                              Element related to encouraging affordable
                                                                              housing developments.
2.1.6 Actively Seek Assistance Apply for grant money from the County          HOME funds have been used for a 120-unit
from the County HOME           HOME program to implement Housing              affordable housing development and for a
Program                        Element programs. Timeframe: Ongoing           50-unit senior affordable housing
                                                                              development. Developers of these projects
                                                                              have applied for and received County
                                                                              HOME funds. As the City does not develop
                                                                              housing directly, it does not receive these
                                                                              funds directly. This program is removed
                                                                              from the 2014 Housing Element and
                                                                              replaced with a policy directing the City to
                                                                              alert housing developers with known
                                                                              interest in developing within the City when
                                                                              funding opportunities are available.
2.2.1 Undertake a              Undertake a comprehensive update of            Due to lack of funding, this objective was
Comprehensive Development      the City’s zoning and subdivisions             not met. The City expects to complete a
Code Update                    ordinances to achieve consistency with         comprehensive update of the City’s zoning
                               the provisions of the General Plan (May        and subdivisions ordinances by 2014. This
                               2009), Measure V, the provisions of the        program is continued in the 2012 Housing
                               Housing Element, and state law. Allow          Element.
                               for the development of emergency
                               shelters, transitional housing, housing for
                               farm workers, factory-built housing,
                               single-room occupancy units and
                               supportive housing by right.
                               Modify Special Planning Area B zoning
                               standards to provide for establishment of
                               a facility/parcel within or adjacent to the
                               University or Special Planning Area B to
                               serve as an off-site parking facility for
                               nearby residences.
2.2.2 Amend Permit Procedures  Amend the permit procedures for                Due to lack of funding, this objective was
for Multifamily Developments   multifamily development within                 not met. The City expects to complete a
                               multifamily zones to permit these              comprehensive update of the City’s zoning
                               developments ministerially rather than         and subdivisions ordinances by 2014. This
                               administratively. Timeframe: Mid 2011          program is continued in the 2012 Housing
                                                                              Element.
2.2.3 Maintain a Streamlined   Conduct a review of the zoning                 As part of the Housing Element update,
Application and Development    ordinance, including permitting and            review of zoning and development
Process                        review procedures and development              standards and procedures was conducted.
                               standards within the R-3 zone annually.        The standards and procedures will again be
                               Timeframe: Ongoing                             review during the comprehensive update of
                                                                              the zoning ordinance expected to occur in
                                                                              2014.This program is implemented and is
                                                                              removed from the 2014 Housing Element.
2.2.4 Density Bonus Ordinance  Amend density bonus requirements to            Since 2008, two developments have
                               meet the requirements of current state         included density bonus units consistent with
                               law. Timeframe: Mid 2011                       state law. The City’s existing density bonus
                                                                              provisions are inconsistent with state law.
                                                                              Nonetheless the City applies the density
                                                                              bonus provisions consistent with current
    November 2013                                          A-71 Appendix 5.C: Evaluation of Previous Accomplishments

   City of Loma Linda
   Housing Element
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                    Accomplishments and Continued
       Name of Program                        Objective/Timeframe                            Appropriateness
                                                                               state law, Due to lack of funding, this
                                                                               objective of amending the City’s density
                                                                               bonus provisions was not met. The City
                                                                               expects to complete a comprehensive
                                                                               zoning code by 2014. This program is
                                                                               removed from the 2012 Housing Element
                                                                               and folded into a general program related to
                                                                               completing a comprehensive update of the
                                                                               City’s zoning code to achieve consistency
                                                                               with the provisions of the General Plan,
                                                                               Measure V, the provisions of the Housing
                                                                               Element, and state law.
2.2.5 Use of Density Bonuses       Grant density bonuses for the provision     Since 2008, two developments have
                                   of affordable housing units as required by  included density bonus units consistent with
                                   state law. Promote the use of density       state law. Granting density bonuses are
                                   bonuses by providing information and        allowed by state Law and represent a
                                   brochures to developers and residents.      routine function of the City’s planning and
                                   Timeframe: Ongoing                          building departments. This program folded
                                                                               into a general program related to
                                                                               encouraging affordable housing
                                                                               development.
2.2.6 Priority Permit, Entitlement Give priority to low-, very low-income,     This program was implemented when the
Processing and Building            and large rental unit housing projects for  city established a fast track process for all
Inspections for Lower-Income       permitting, entitlement processing and for  residential development projects. This
Housing Projects                   building inspections that are carried out   program was implemented and is removed
                                   during various stages of the construction   from the 2014 Housing Element.
                                   process. Timeframe: Ongoing
2.2.7 Enforce Covenants            Continue buying resale properties that      Since 2008, the City has purchased 19
Restricting Sale Values on         are not being sold at market value due to   resale properties. Purchasing residential
Properties                         restrictive covenants. These will then be   projects with affordability covenants is an
                                   sold at affordable housing prices with      important tool in maintaining the affordable
                                   covenants placed on future resale prices.   housing stock. This Program is continued in
                                   Timeframe: Ongoing                          the 2014 Housing Element.
2.3.1 Meet with Potential          Seek out and conduct meetings with          City staff has had ongoing discussions with
Developers                         potential developers for infill sites as a  non-profit developers regarding the
                                   means of generating development             development of scattered sites for
                                   interest. Timeframe: Annually, Ongoing      affordable housing. This program is an
                                                                               important tool in expanding affordable
                                                                               housing opportunities and will be folded into
                                                                               a program regarding affordable housing
                                                                               development.
2.3.2 Housing for Existing Very    Utilize CDBG/Agency funds for               The City uses CDBG funds for infrastructure
Low- and Low-Income                infrastructure improvements and             improvements. The housing assistance
Residents                          available programs to undertake             aspect of this program is removed due to
                                   development of housing projects for very    loss of Redevelopment funding and the lack
                                   low and low-income households living in     of an alternative funding source. In the 2014
                                   dwellings that are in need of               Housing Element, this program is folded into
                                   replacement. Provide housing assistance     a general program related to affordable
                                   to 150 existing very low- and low-income    housing development.
                                   residents. Timeframe: Ongoing
2.3.3 Modified Development         For very low or low income-restricted       This program was intended to be
Standards for Income-Restricted    developments modify the following           implemented concurrently with a
Housing Developments               development standards:                      comprehensive zoning code update. Due to
                                                                               lack of funding, this objective was not met.
                                   In an R-2 zone, setbacks shall be           The City expects to complete a
                                   modified as follows: front 15, rear 5, side comprehensive zoning code by 2014. This
                                   5; and parcel coverage shall be             program is folded into a general program
                                   increased to a maximum of 60 percent. In    regarding the comprehensive zoning code
   Appendix 5.C: Evaluation of Previous Accomplishments A-72                                              November 2013

                                                                                                     City of Loma Linda
                                                                                                       Housing Element
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                  Accomplishments and Continued
        Name of Program                     Objective/Timeframe                            Appropriateness
                                an R-3 zone, setbacks shall be modified      update.
                                as follows: front 15, rear 5, side 5; and
                                parcel coverage shall be increased to a
                                maximum of 70 percent; and the
                                maximum building height shall be
                                increased to 50 feet.
                                Timeframe: Ongoing
2.3.4 Inclusionary Housing      Create an inclusionary housing program       Effective February 1, 2012, all
Program                         within redevelopment project areas.          redevelopment agencies in the State of
                                Timeframe: Mid 2011                          California were dissolved pursuant to AB 1X
                                                                             26. This program was tied to the
                                                                             redevelopment agency project areas. Due
                                                                             to loss of Redevelopment funding (and the
                                                                             lack of an alternative funding source), this
                                                                             program is removed from the 2014 Housing
                                                                             Element.
2.3.5 Extra Density Bonus       Within redevelopment project areas,          Effective February 1, 2012, all
Program                         prepare an ordinance providing for an        redevelopment agencies in the State of
                                extra density bonus for developments         California were dissolved pursuant to AB 1X
                                within redevelopment project areas that      26. This program was tied to the
                                are required to establish affordability      redevelopment agency project areas. Due
                                covenants in excess of those required        to loss of Redevelopment funding (and the
                                under density bonus law in order to meet     lack of an alternative funding source), this
                                the requirements of state redevelopment      program is removed from the 2014 Housing
                                law. Timeframe: Mid 2011                     Element.
2.3.6 Remove or Modify the      In order to address the constraints on       This program was intended to be
Definition of a “Family”        housing persons with special needs, the      implemented concurrently with a
                                City will remove or modify the definition    comprehensive zoning code update. Due to
                                of a “Family” in the development Code.       lack of funding, this objective was not met.
                                Timeframe: Mid 2011                          The City expects to complete a
                                                                             comprehensive zoning code by 2014. This
                                                                             program is folded into a general program
                                                                             regarding the comprehensive zoning code
                                                                             update.
2.3.7 Modify the Zoning         Explicitly address residential care          This program was intended to be
Ordinance to Incorporate        facilities in the Zoning Ordinance.          implemented concurrently with a
Residential Care Facilities     Timeframe: Mid 2011                          comprehensive zoning code update. Due to
                                                                             lack of funding, this objective was not met.
                                                                             The City expects to complete a
                                                                             comprehensive zoning code by 2014. This
                                                                             program will remain in the 2014 Housing
                                                                             Element.
3.1.1 Fair Housing Program      Continue to refer cases and questions to     The City continues to abide by and enforce
                                the Fair Housing Council of San              fair housing law. Interested persons are also
                                Bernardino County for enforcement of         directed to additional information about fair
                                prohibitions on discrimination in lending    housing and fair housing services through
                                practices and in the sale or rental of       Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board
                                housing. Create and distribute a brochure    (IFHMB). The City also coordinates with
                                in English and Spanish, explaining how       IGHMB to conduct fair housing workshops.
                                complaints can be filed. Timeframe:          This program is continued in the 2014-2021
                                Ongoing                                      Housing Element.
3.2.1 Housing Opportunities for Give priority funding to development         Furthering housing opportunities for persons
Special Needs Groups            projects that include a component for        with special needs is an important goal. As
                                special needs groups in addition to other    opportunities arise, priority will be given to
                                lower-income households. Timeframe:          developments providing special needs
                                Ongoing                                      housing. The program will remain in the
                                                                             2014 Housing Element.
   November 2013                                          A-73 Appendix 5.C: Evaluation of Previous Accomplishments

   City of Loma Linda
   Housing Element
Table 5.C.A: Previous Program Accomplishments (2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                               Accomplishments and Continued
       Name of Program                           Objective/Timeframe                                   Appropriateness
3.2.2 Coordination with                The City shall cooperate with public and          The City uses CDBG funding to assist
Agencies Serving the Homeless          private agencies to develop housing               homeless service providers. This program
and Ensure that Development            (including transitional housing), family          will remain in the 2014 Housing Element but
Standards Facilitate Emergency         counseling, and employment programs               the objective related to emergency shelters
Shelters and Transitional              for the homeless. Modify development              and transitional housing will be folded into
Housing                                policies and processing requirements to           separate program related to the City’s
                                       remove the constraints and provide                forthcoming zoning code update.
                                       reasonable means of facilitating
                                       accommodations intended for emergency
                                       shelters and transitional housing.
                                       Timeframe: Ongoing
3.2.3 Remove Constraints on            As part of a comprehensive update of the          Due to lack of funding, this objective was
the Production of Housing for          Development Code, enact provisions to             not met. The City expects to complete a
Disabled Residents                     make reasonable accommodation                     zoning code update by 2014. This program
                                       exceptions for persons with disabilities.         is continued in the 2012 Housing Element
                                       Timeframe: Mid 2011                               and renamed Reasonable Accommodation.
   Table 5.C.B summarizes the quantified objectives contained in the City’s 2008-2014 Housing Element,
   and compares the City’s progress in fulfilling these objectives.
                 Table 5.C.B: Summary of 2008-2014 Quantified Objectives and Progress
                                                            Income Levels
                                                                                          Above
                   Objectives          Very Low           Low          Moderate        Moderate             Total
                 Construction Objectives
                 Goal(a)              610            432              501             1,103            2,646
                 Progress             193 (32%)      148 (34%)        6 (1%)          170 (15%)        517 (20%)
                 Rehabilitation Objectives
                 Goal(b)              20              20              10              --               50
                 Progress             106 (530%) 106(530%)            51 (510%)       --               263
                 Conservation/Preservation Objectives
                 Goal(c)              83                              --              --               83
                 Progress             137 (165%)                      --              --               137 (165%)
                 Notes:
                 a. Represents the City’s RHNA for the 2008-2014 planning period.
                 b. Represents objectives for Housing Rehabilitation and Rental Rehabilitation programs: 87
                 rehabilitation loans and 176 households assisted with clean up assistance with garbage dumpsters
                 c. Refers to maintenance of existing affordable housing through rental subsidies (Housing Choice
                 Voucher)
   Appendix 5.C: Evaluation of Previous Accomplishments A-74                                                       November 2013

                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                              Housing Element
Appendix 5.D SITES INVENTORY TABLE
November 2013          A-75       Appendix 5.E: Public Outreach
Table 5.D.A: Sites Inventory Table
                                                                                                Maximum Allowable                                              Infrastructure Environmental
    APN        Site Type                    General Plan                   Zoning Size (acres)       Density                 Current Use Realistic Capacity     Constraints    Constraints
028422117  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                Hillside         169.892                   0.1 Vacant                                17       No             No
028422116  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                Hillside           6.532                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028422115  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                Hillside          31.291                   0.1 Vacant                                 3       No             No
028422113  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                Hillside          33.645                   0.1 Vacant                                 3       No             No
028435122  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.722                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435176  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.905                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435131  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.961                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435111  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 1.651                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435130  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 1.002                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435131  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.037                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435129  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 1.411                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435102  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 2.125                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435127  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 1.312                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435126  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 1.008                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435134  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.973                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435112  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.170                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435174  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.912                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435175  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.619                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435128  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 1.975                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435135  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 1.726                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435173  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 3.150                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435132  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 3.158                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435110  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 0.464                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435152  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 6.248                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435170  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 5.208                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028435101  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                R1                 2.107                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028418125  Vacant Sites   South Hills (0 to 1 du/10 ac)                Hillside          53.783                   0.1 Vacant                                 5       No             No
028419263  Vacant Sites   Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac) R1                61.952                   0.1 Vacant                                 6       No             No
028420238  Vacant Sites   Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac) R1                 9.054                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028420243  Vacant Sites   Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac) R1                 9.723                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028464127  Vacant Sites   Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac) R1                 1.186                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028420242  Vacant Sites   Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac) R1                 5.537                   0.1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028419264  Vacant Sites   Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac) Hillside          85.073                   0.1 Vacant                                 9       No             No
028418125  Vacant Sites   Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac) Hillside         117.450                   0.1 Vacant                                12       No             No
029305216  Vacant Sites   Rural Estate (0 to 1 du/ac)                  R1                 1.052                     1 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029305215  Vacant Sites   Rural Estate (0 to 1 du/ac)                  R1                17.961                     1 Vacant                                18       No             No
029305223  Vacant Sites   Rural Estate (0 to 1 du/ac)                  R1                15.182                     1 Vacant                                15       No             No
028426107  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.489                     4 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028426110  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.528                     4 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028318135  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.580                     4 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028416130  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                33.121                     4 Vacant                               106       No             No
028316201  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.174                     4 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028416131  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                17.129                     4 Vacant                                55       No             No
028417123  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 2.174                     4 Vacant                                 7       No             No
029304107  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 3.167                     4 Vacant                                10       No             No
028417129  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.742                     4 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028417131  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.663                     4 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028416109  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.628                     4 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028418122  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 1.170                     4 Vacant                                 4       No             No
028425101  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 1.748                     4 Vacant                                 6       No             No
029307101  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 2.009                     4 Vacant                                 6       No             No
029307115  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 1.173                     4 Vacant                                 4       No             No
028418121  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 8.600                     4 Vacant                                28       No             No
028449510  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.752                     4 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028439110  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 1.380                     4 Vacant                                 4       No             No
028464120  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.487                     4 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028417303  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.244                     4 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028464101  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 0.342                     4 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028420242  Vacant Sites   Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)       R1                 4.697                     4 Vacant                                15       No             No
028313402  Vacant Sites   Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)    R3 5-10            0.368                     9 Vacant                                 3       No             No
Table 5.D.A: Sites Inventory Table
                                                                                                      Maximum Allowable                                             Infrastructure Environmental
    APN        Site Type                       General Plan                     Zoning  Size (acres)       Density                Current Use Realistic Capacity     Constraints    Constraints
028311434  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10            0.171                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028311456  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10            0.190                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028309249  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10            0.290                    9 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028313406  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10            0.533                    9 Vacant                                 4       No             No
029213173  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.362                    9 Vacant                                 3       No             No
029213119  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.146                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029213209  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.138                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029213149  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.138                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029214129  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.139                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029213143  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.077                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029214124  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.138                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029213144  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.103                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029303209  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.146                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028309213  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10            0.153                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029214127  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.140                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028311426  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10            0.454                    9 Vacant                                 3       No             No
029214115  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.138                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029213210  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.138                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029213211  Vacant Sites        Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                 0.138                    9 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028311473  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.177                   13 Vacant                                 2       No             No
029303129  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.301                   13 Vacant                                 3       No             No
029304108  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)                         0.121                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028316105  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.218                   13 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028315159  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.396                   13 Vacant                                 4       No             No
028309237  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.243                   13 Vacant                                 3       No             No
029213142  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.090                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029302129  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.069                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029303129  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.064                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029303111  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.159                   13 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028315157  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.338                   13 Vacant                                 4       No             No
028315158  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.338                   13 Vacant                                 4       No             No
028309246  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.257                   13 Vacant                                 3       No             No
028309218  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.857                   13 Vacant                                 9       No             No
028309209  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.085                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
028309208  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10            0.047                   13 Vacant                                 0       No             No
029213171  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.412                   13 Vacant                                 4       No             No
029213122  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.138                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029213169  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.263                   13 Vacant                                 3       No             No
029214126  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.135                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029214114  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.138                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029214113  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.138                   13 Vacant                                 1       No             No
029302124  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.151                   13 Vacant                                 2       No             No
029302125  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.170                   13 Vacant                                 2       No             No
029302127  Vacant Sites        High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R1                 0.172                   13 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028310310  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10         0.205                   20 Vacant                                 3       No             No
028312153  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20           0.179                   20 Vacant                                 3       No             No
028312164  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20           0.727                   20 Vacant                                12       No             No
028312162  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20           0.727                   20 Vacant                                12       No             No
028312123  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20           0.216                   20 Vacant                                 3       No             No
028312102  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20           1.454                   20 Vacant                                23       No             No
028311410  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20           1.347                   20 Vacant                                22       No             No
028310306  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10         0.160                   20 Vacant                                 3       No             No
028310305  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10         0.152                   20 Vacant                                 2       No             No
028310304  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10         0.160                   20 Vacant                                 3       No             No
028310303  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10         0.281                   20 Vacant                                 4       No             No
028310308  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10         0.252                   20 Vacant                                 4       No             No
028310309  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10         0.560                   20 Vacant                                 9       No             No
028312165  Vacant Sites        Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20           0.750                   20 Vacant                                12       No             No
028316220  Underutilized Sites Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)        R1                 2.783                    4 1 unit                                 9       No             No
028416136  Underutilized Sites Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)        R1                 5.274                    4 1 unit                                17       No             No
Table 5.D.A: Sites Inventory Table
                                                                                                             Maximum Allowable                                                        Infrastructure Environmental
    APN       Site Type                         General Plan                     Zoning        Size (acres)       Density                    Current Use        Realistic Capacity     Constraints    Constraints
028316226  Underutilized Sites Low Density Residential (0 to 4 du/ac)        R1                        1.542                    4 1 unit                                            5       No             No
028309233  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R-3 5-10                  0.482                    9 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028309234  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R-3 5-10                  0.380                    9 2 units                                           3       No             No
028311436  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.553                    9 1 unit                                            4       No             No
028309214  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.172                    9 1 unit                                            1       No             No
028309210  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.172                    9 1 unit                                            1       No             No
028309207  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.159                    9 1 unit                                            1       No             No
028311428  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.469                    9 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028311425  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.578                    9 1 unit                                            4       No             No
028311477  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R-3 5-10                  0.554                    9 2 units                                           4       No             No
028313311  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   2.395                    9 3 units                                          17       No             No
028313307  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.402                    9 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028401211  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                        1.094                    9 1 unit                                            8       No             No
028401206  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                        0.930                    9 1 unit                                            7       No             No
028401213  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                        3.200                    9 1 unit                                           23       No             No
28401212   Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                        0.833                    9 1 unit                                            6       No             No
029302139  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                        0.257                    9 1 unit                                            2       No             No
028309250  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.360                    9 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028309232  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   1.327                    9 2 units                                          10       No             No
029302136  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                        0.235                    9 1 unit                                            2       No             No
029302126  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                        0.172                    9 1 unit                                            1       No             No
029302128  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R1                        0.055                    9 1unit                                             0       No             No
028309227  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.355                    9 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028309226  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.344                    9 1 unit                                            2       No             No
028309224  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   0.636                    9 2 units                                           5       No             No
028315152  Underutilized Sites Medium Density Residential (0 to 9 du/ac)     R3 5-10                   1.034                    9 1 unit                                            7       No             No
028414118  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.590                   13 2 units                                           6       No             No
028414101  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.245                   13 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028309225  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10                   0.026                   13 section of very large yard                        0       No             No
028309228  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 5-10                   0.017                   13 section of very large yard                        0       No             No
028414113  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.557                   13 1 unit                                            6       No             No
028414112  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.257                   13 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028414111  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.633                   13 2 units                                           7       No             No
028414110  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.849                   13 3 units                                           9       No             No
028414217  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.309                   13 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028414219  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.285                   13 1 unit                                            3       No             No
029216209  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3                        2.627                   13 orange groves/vacant                             27       No             No
028414224  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.711                   13 1 unit                                            7       No             No
028414208  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.950                   13 5 units                                          10       No             No
028414122  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.277                   13 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028414117  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.569                   13 2 units                                           6       No             No
028414123  Underutilized Sites High Density Residential (0 to 13 du/ac)      R3 20                     0.224                   13 1 unit                                            2       No             No
028312205  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10                0.363                   20 1 unit                                            6       No             No
028312204  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10                0.177                   20 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028312106  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.970                   20 1 unit                                           16       No             No
028314112  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.622                   20 1 unit                                           10       No             No
028413303  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.458                   20 1 unit                                            7       No             No
028413304  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.509                   20 1 unit                                            8       No             No
028413333  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.320                   20 1 unit                                            5       No             No
028314113  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.972                   20 2 units                                          16       No             No
028312203  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10                0.159                   20 1 unit                                            3       No             No
028312202  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 PD 5-10                0.153                   20 1 unit                                            2       No             No
028413302  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.325                   20 1 unit                                            5       No             No
28321545   Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.715                   20 3 units                                          11       No             No
028321544  Underutilized Sites Very High Density Residential (0 to 20 du/ac) R3 11-20                  0.659                   20 3 units                                          11       No             No
028310212  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B                       Institutional (I)         0.389                      2 units                                                   No             No
028310205  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B                       Institutional (I)         0.270                      1 unit                                                    No             No
028310106  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B                       Institutional (I)         3.043                      Some agriculture, some vacant                             No             No
028310202  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B                       Institutional (I)         0.195                      1 unit                                                    No             No
028310211  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B                       Institutional (I)         0.196                      1 unit                                                    No             No
Table 5.D.A: Sites Inventory Table
                                                                                               Maximum Allowable                                                                   Infrastructure Environmental
    APN        Site Type                        General Plan     Zoning        Size (acres)           Density                      Current Use            Realistic Capacity        Constraints    Constraints
028310206  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.197                            1 unit                                                           No             No
028310207  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.423                            1 unit/part vacant              499 units total. See Table       No             No
                                                                                               See Table 5.E: Special
028310217  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.866                            4 units                        5.E: Special Planning Area        No             No
                                                                                             Planning Area B: Estimated
028309201  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.926                            Some utilities, some vacant    B: Estimated Development          No             No
                                                                                               Development Scenario
                                                                                                                                                         Scenario for breakdown
028310201  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.426                            2 units                                                          No             No
028310110  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.906                            phone company utility building                                   No             No
028310109  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)        31.575                            Some agriculture, some vacant                                    No             No
028310101  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         1.803                            9 SF units                                                       No             No
028310203  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.861                            3 units                                                          No             No
028310204  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.233                            Vacant                                                           No             No
028310213  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area B       Institutional (I)         0.235                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029246102  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                    9.760                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029246101  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                    9.751                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211136  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                   14.754                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211105  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                    8.514                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211104  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                    4.841                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029212214  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                       20.568                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029212243  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        2.051                            1 unit                                                           No             No
029212245  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        1.933                            1 unit                                                           No             No
029212241  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        1.905                            1 unit                                                           No             No
029247105  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        0.536                            1 unit                                                           No             No
029211146  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                    6.505                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211117  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        7.488                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211122  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                       20.439                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029246103  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        6.697                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211140  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       R1                        4.586                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029246106  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                       20.122                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029246108  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        7.660                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211149  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        0.970                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029212215  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        3.776                            orange groves                   956 units total. See Table       No             No
                                                                                               See Table 5.G: Special
                                                                                                                                                       5.G: Special Planning Area
029212216  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        3.783 Planning Area D: Estimated orange groves                                                    No             No
                                                                                                                                                       D: Estimated Development
029247108  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        0.367   Development Scenario     2 units                                                          No             No
                                                                                                                                                         Scenario for breakdown
029247104  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        0.062                            part of yard                                                     No             No
029247109  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        0.473                            1 unit                                                           No             No
029212232  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        5.070                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211114  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                    9.389                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029247106  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                       14.833                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029212217  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        8.721                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029246107  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        9.649                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029211150  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                       13.964                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029212220  Underutilized Sites Special Planning Area D       PC                        6.332                            orange groves                                                    No             No
029212203  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       R1                        2.369                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029212202  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       R1                        1.084                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029212201  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       R1                        0.056                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029211112  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                    4.616                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029246104  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                    7.425                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029211128  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       R1                        7.663                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029211141  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       R1                        5.919                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029211142  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       R1                        3.329                            Vacant                                                           No             No
029246105  Vacant Sites        Special Planning Area D       EVC SD                   10.769                            Vacant                                                           No             No
                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                         Housing Element
Appendix 5.E PUBLIC OUTREACH
November 2013          A-76  Appendix 5.E: Public Outreach
Table 5.E.A: City Council and Planning Commission Joint Study Session Invite List September 10, 2013
                        Organization                              Name                             Title                               Street                          City             State Zip           Phone                      Email
Inland Temporary Homes                                Andria Innerbichler       Program Director                       P.O. Box 239                       Loma Linda                   CA     92354 (909)796-6381        andria@ithomes.org
Obershaw Transitional Housing Program                 Sharon Pollard                                                   696 S. Tippecanoe Ave              San Bernardino               CA     92408 (909) 723-1568
San Bernardino County Homeless Partnership            Sharon Green              Chair                                  1949 Sunwest Ln Ste 200            San Bernardino               CA     92407 909-252-4001
S.B. County Office of Homeless Services               Tom Hernandez             Homless Services Manager               1950 Sunwest Ln Ste 200            San Bernardino               CA     92408 909-252-4051          thernandez@dbh.sbcounty.gov
Adventist Community Team Services                                                                                      24914 Barton Rd                    Loma Linda                   CA     92354 (909) 796-8357
Department of Aging and Adult Services                                                                                 686 E. Mill St. 2nd Floor          San Bernardino               CA     92415 909-891-3900
Loma Linda Senior Center                              Lynette Arreola                                                  25571 Barton Road                  Loma Linda                   CA     92355 909-799-4402         larreola@lomalinda-ca.gov
Senior and Disabled Fund of San Bernardino County                                                                      P.O. Box 85                        San Bernardino               CA     92402 1 888 303-7776       info@senioranddisabledfund.org
Inland Regional Center                                Carol Fitzgibbons         Executive Director                     1365 S. Waterman Ave.              San Bernardino               CA     92408 (909) 890-3000       rkuruppu@inlandrc.org
Mary Erickson Community Housing                       Susan McDevitt            Executive Director                     P.O. Box 775                       San Clemente                 CA     92674 (949) 369-5419
Habitat for Humanity - San Bernardino                 Dennis Baxter             Executive Director                     25948 Business Center Dr.          Redlands                     CA     92374 (909) 478-1176
KB Home                                                                                                                10990 Wilshire Blvd                Los Angeles                  CA     90024 (310) 231-4000
Granite Homes                                                                                                          17891 Cartwright Road              Irvine                       CA     92614 949-250-9229
Richmond American Homes                                                                                                5171 California Avenue, Suite #120 Irvine                       CA     92617 949-467-2600
Ryland Homes                                                                                                           49 Discovery Ste. 250              Irvine                       CA     92618 (949) 236-5000
The Spanos Corporation                                                                                                 10100 Trinity Parkway # 5          Stockton                     CA     95219 (209) 955-2550
American Pacific Homes                                                                                                 8213 White Oak Avenue              Rancho Cucamonga             CA     91730 (909) 988-9000
Loma Linda University                                 Richard H. Hart, MD, DrPH President                                                                 Loma Linda, California 92350 CA     92350 (909) 558-4540
Loma Linda University Student Affairs                                                                                  11139 Anderson St.                 Loma Linda, California 92351 CA     92351
Loma Linda University Foundation - Housing                                                                             24873 Taylor Street                Loma Linda, California 92352 CA     92354 (909) 558-4374
VA Loma Linda Health Care System                      Melissa Conrad, L.C.S.W   Chief, Social Work Service             11201 Benton Street                Loma Linda                   CA     92357 909-825-7084
Frazee Community Center                               Candice Martin            Interim Director                       PO Box 330                         San Bernardino               CA     92402 909-889-4424
Community Action Partnership of San Bernardino County Patricia L. Nickols       CEO                                    696 S. Tippecanoe Ave              San Bernardino, CA 92408     CA     92408 909-723-1500
Option House                                          Melissa Brooks            Program Manager                        P.O. Box 970                       San Bernardino               CA     92402 909-383-1602
Inland Empire United Way                              Lorraine Ousley           Director Community Programs            9644 Hermosa Avenue                Rancho Cucamonga             CA     91730 (909) 980-2857
Catholic Charities San Bernardino/Riverside           Beverly Earl              Director                               1800 Western Ave., Ste 107         San Bernardino               CA     92411 909-388-1239
Housing Authority County of San Bernardino            Ana Gamiz                 Director of Policy & Community Affairs 715 East Brier Drive               San Bernardino, CA 92408     CA     92408 909-890-0644
Housing Authority County of San Bernardino            Rebecca Murillo           Housing Services Manager               715 East Brier Drive               San Bernardino, CA 92408     CA     92408 909-890-0644
Mary's Mercy Center                                   Mike Hein                 Vice President                         P.O. Box 7563                      San Bernardino               CA     92411 (909) 889-2558        mmcinc@msn.com
Neighborhood Housing Services of the Inland Empire    Dawn Lee                  Executive Director                     1390 N. D Street                   San Bernardino               CA     92405 1 909 884 6891
Salvation Army Redlands Corps Community Center        Patrick & Ke'olani Lyons  Captains                               838 Alta Street                    Redlands                     CA     92374 (909) 792-8818
Corporation for Better Housing                        Justin Hardt                                                     15303 Ventura Blvd., Ste 1100      Sherman Oaks                 CA     91403 (818) 905-2430 x 109
Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board                                                                                560 N. Arrowhead Ave., Ste. 7A     San Bernardino, CA 92408     CA     92401 (909) 888-3763
                                        CITY OF LOMA LINDA
                     NOTICE OF CITY COUNCIL AND PLANNING COMMISION
                                       JOINT STUDY SESSION
                         TO DISCUSS THE 2014-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the City Council and Planning Commission of the City of Loma Linda
will hold a study session on September 10, 2013, at 6:00 P.M. in the City Council Chambers, 25541
Barton Road, Loma Linda, CA 92354 to consider the following:
Project Title: 2014-2021 General Plan Housing Element
Description:
The City is in the process of updating the General Plan Housing Element. The Housing Element is one of
the seven State-mandated elements of the General Plan. The General Plan is a long-range planning
document that sets forth policy for the growth and improvement of the City. The Housing Element
provides an assessment of the existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the
community and those with special needs, such as the elderly, homeless, and the disabled. The Element
identifies sites that have the capacity to accommodate new development of various housing types.
Also, the Element presents goals, policies, and implementation programs for the preservation,
improvement, and development of housing.
Objective:
The study session is a forum for City staff to receive input from the City Council and Planning
Commission, residents, and other stakeholders regarding the content of the updated Housing Element.
These comments will be considered for integration into the Housing Element.
For those persons unable to attend the study session, written comments can be submitted to the City by
5:00 P.M. September 19, 2013 (attn: Guillermo Arreola) at 25541 Barton Road, Loma Linda, CA 92354,
by fax at (909) 799-2891, or by e-mail at garreola@lomalinda-ca.gov.
Please direct any questions to Guillermo Arreola, Associate Planner at (909) 799-2830 or at
garreola@lomalinda-ca.gov.
                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                    Transportation and Circulation Element
   6.0      TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION ELEMENT
   Circulation is one of the most pervasive issues of the General Plan, and is related to land use,
   community design, economic development, air quality, energy consumption, and the City’s
   infrastructure. The Circulation and Transportation element define the City’s overall planned
   transportation system. This element identifies and establishes the City’s policies governing streets
   and highways, public transit network, bicycle routes, pedestrian ways, and other components of the
   circulation system. The identified goals and policies are intended to provide guidance and specific
   actions to ensure the continued safe and efficient movement of people and goods within and through
   the City.
   State law recognizes that circulation and land use are closely related, and requires that these two
   components of a City’s General Plan be correlated. Through a comprehensive program of
   transportation and land use planning, the City will ensure that there is sufficient roadway capacity to
   accommodate traffic generated by planned future development. Loma Linda’s transportation issues
   affect more than just the City, and are of a regional nature, involving adjacent communities as well as
   State and Federal agencies. Thus, the City’s circulation plan has been coordinated with those of
   surrounding jurisdiction, as well as with the plans and programs of regional, State, and Federal
   transportation agencies.
   6.1      EXISTING ROADWAY NETWORK
   The circulation network provides the linkage between land uses and facilitates access to home,
   shopping, jobs, and recreation. While this network is planned to provide sufficient capacity to
   accommodate the growth envisioned in the General Plan, the City must plan not only for roadway
   capacity improvements, but also for alternatives to roadway widening such as bus, bicycle, and
   pedestrian circulation systems.
   Figure 6.1 shows the existing roadway network. Major east-west highways (arterials) include the
   following:
Chapter 6.0                      Transportation and Circulation Element                                   6-1

                                                                   TIPPECANOE AVE
                                     10                                                                REDLANDS BLVD
                                    §
                                    ¦
                                    ¨
                                                                     ST
                                                      ACADEMY ST                               POPLAR ST
                                                                 ON                 ORANGE
                                                                                                                                                                         MI
                                                                                    GROVE ST                                                                               SS
                                                                                                           VAN LEUVEN ST                                                      IO
                                                             A ND
                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                     RD
                                                                 ERS
                                             STEWART ST
          WATERMAN AVENUE
                                                                                                                                            MOUNTAIN VIEW AVE                                                       CALIFORNIA ST                       ALABAMA ST
                                    UNIVERSITY AVE
                                                                                                            BENTON ST
                                                                                    PROSPECT AVE                                   PROSPECT AVE
                                                                                     BARTON RD
                                                 CAMPUS ST
                                                                                     LAWTON AVE
                                                                                                                        LOMA LINDA DR
                                                                                                                                                                BEAUMO
                                                                                                                                                                                     BRYN MAWR AVE   WHITTIER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                      NT A VE
     N
     !
 0       1,200              2,400
     S
 Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FIGURE 6.1
      CITY OF LOMA LINDA
      CITY OF LOMA LINDA PLANNING AREA
      GENERAL PLAN ROADS
      LOCAL ROADS                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of Loma Linda General Plan
SOURCE: City of Loma Linda, 2006                                                                                                                                                                                                            MAJOR ROADWAYS
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig6-1_MajRoadways.mxd (12/30/08)

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Transportation and Circulation Element
   x    Redlands Boulevard – A four-lane roadway with a continuous two-way center turn lane. Speed
        limit is generally 45 mph.
   x    Van Leuven Street – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 35 mph.
   x    Stewart Street – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 30 mph.
   x    University Avenue – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 35 mph.
   x    Prospect Avenue – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 30 mph.
   x    Barton Road – A four-lane roadway with bike lanes and a wide, lushly landscaped median with
        left turn pockets at major intersections. Speed limit is 45 mph west of Mountain View Avenue and
        55 mph east of Mountain View Avenue. Landscaped median exists west of Newport Avenue. Bike
        lanes exist west of the bridge over Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR).
   x    Lawton Avenue – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 35 mph.
   x    Beaumont Avenue – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 45 mph.
   Major north-south highways (arterials) include the following:
   x    Campus Street – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 30 mph.
   x    Anderson Street – A four-lane roadway with a two-way center turn lane or left turn pockets from
        the I-10 freeway to Barton Road. A two-lane undivided roadway south of Barton Road. Bike lanes
        exist from Court Street to University Avenue. Speed limit is 35 mph north of University Avenue,
        25 mph between University Avenue and Barton Road, and 30 mph south of Barton Road.
   x    Poplar Street – A narrow two-lane undivided roadway. No posted speed limit.
   x    Benton Street – A two-lane undivided roadway. No posted speed limit.
   x    Loma Linda Drive – A two-lane undivided roadway. No posted speed limit.
   x    Mountain View Avenue – Generally, a four-lane roadway with a continuous center turn lane;
        speed limit is 40 mph. Narrows to three lanes (two southbound, one northbound) with no center
        turn lane between Van Leuven Street and Barton Road as it crosses the San Timoteo Creek and
        the UPRR; speed limit on this section is 35 mph.
   x    Bryn Mawr Avenue – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 35 mph.
   x    Whittier Avenue – Generally, a two-lane undivided roadway. No posted speed limit other than 25
        mph school zone. A two-way center turn lane exists between George Street and Picton Street.
   x    California Street – A two-lane undivided roadway. Speed limit is generally 45 mph.
   In addition, Mission Road is an arterial that runs northwest to southeast from Mountain View Avenue
   to California Avenue. It is a two-lane undivided roadway. The speed limit is generally 45 mph, except
   for the residential area along the several hundred feet immediately east of Mountain View Avenue,
   where the speed limit is 35 mph.
   Roadway operations and the relationship between capacity and traffic volumes are generally
   expressed in terms of levels of service (LOS), which are defined using the letter grades A through F,
   with LOS A being best and LOS F being worst. LOS A, B, and C indicate conditions where traffic can
   move relatively free. LOS D describes conditions where delay is more noticeable, and average travel
   speeds during peak hours are as low as 40 percent of the free flow speed. LOS E indicates significant
   delays and average travel speeds as low as one-third of free flow speed or lower where traffic
   volumes are at or close to capacity. Finally, LOS F characterizes flow at very slow speeds (stop and
   go) and intersection delays over one minute as traffic exceeds the roadway’s capacity. These levels
Chapter 6.0                        Transportation and Circulation Element                                  6-3

                                                                                             Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                            Transportation and Circulation Element
   recognize that, while an absolute limit exists as to the amount of traffic traveling through a given
   intersection (the absolute capacity), the conditions that motorists experience rapidly deteriorate as
   traffic approaches the absolute capacity. Under such conditions, congestion is experienced. Brief
   descriptions of the six levels of service are as follows:
   Table 6.A: Level of Service Definitions and Volume-to-Capacity Ratios
                                 Level of Service Definitions                                        Roadway and
                                                                                               Intersection Volume-to-
   LOS                                        Description                                           Capacity Ratio
   A        No approach phase is fully utilized by traffic and no vehicle waits longer           0.00 to    0.00 to 0.60
            than one red indication. Typically, the approach appears quite open, turns            0.30
            are made easily and nearly all drivers find freedom of operation. Conditions
            of free flow; speed is controlled by driver’s desires, speed limits, or physical
            roadway conditions.
   B        This service level represents stable operation, where an occasional                  0.31 to    0.61 to 0.70
            approach phase is fully utilized and a substantial number are approaching             0.49
            full use. Many drivers begin to feel restricted within platoons of vehicles.
            Conditions of stable flow; operating speeds begin to be restricted; little or no
            restrictions on maneuverability from other vehicles.
   C        This level still represents stable operating conditions. Occasionally drivers        0.50 to    0.71 to 0.80
            may have to wait through more than one red signal indication, and backups             0.71
            may develop behind turning vehicles. Most drivers feel somewhat restricted,
            but not objectionably so. Conditions of stable flow; speeds and
            maneuverability are more restricted; occasional backups behind left-turning
            vehicles at intersections.
   D        This level encompasses a zone of increasing restriction approaching                  0.72 to    0.81 to 0.90
            instability at the intersection. Delays to approaching vehicles may be                0.88
            substantial during short peaks within the peak period; however, enough
            cycles with lower demand occur to permit periodic clearance of developing
            queues, thus preventing excessive backups. Conditions approach unstable
            flow; tolerable speeds little freedom to maneuver; comfort and convenience
            low; at intersection, some motorists, especially those making left turns, may
            wait through one or more signal changes.
   E        Capacity occurs at the upper end of this service level. It represents the most       0.89 to    0.91 to 1.00
            vehicles that any particular intersection approach can accommodate. Full              1.00
            utilization of every signal cycle is seldom attained no matter how great the
            demand. Conditions approach capacity; unstable flow with stoppages of
            momentary duration; maneuverability severely limited.
   F        This level describes forced flow operations at low speeds, where volumes             >1.00         >1.00
            exceed capacity. These conditions usually result from queues of vehicles
            backing up from a restriction downstream. Speeds reduce substantially and
            stoppages may occur for short or long periods of time due to the congestion.
            In the extreme case, both speed and volume can drop to zero.
   Sources: Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual, 1994. DKS Associates.
   All of the intersections in the City currently operate at LOS C or better except for the Anderson
   Street/1-10 Westbound Ramps and Richardson Street/Redlands Boulevard during the p.m. peak hour
   when both intersections operate at LOS F. The average daily traffic volumes are shown in Figure 6.2.
Chapter 6.0                           Transportation and Circulation Element                                             6-4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                TIPPECANOE AVE
                                                                                                                                     RICHARDSON
                                                                                                                                                                                         24.0
                                                                                                                                        STREET
           10                                                                                       31.1                                          REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15.1
                                                                                                           21.0                                      16.3
                                                 15.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7.9
                                                (16.0)                                            24.4    (19.6)
                                                                                                 (23.3)                                                                                   23.2
                                                                                   ST                                                                                         AVE
                                                     ACADEMY ST
                                                                                                     ORANGE              POPLAR ST                                            VIEW
                                                                              N                                                                                                          23.3
                                                                          RSO                        GROVE ST                              VAN LEUVEN ST                                                         MI
                                                                                    22.5                                                                                                                           SS                                                                                                    ALABAMA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IO
                                                                                   (24.4)
                                                                                                                2.7                                   2.9                                                               N                                                 CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                   5.8                                                                                                                                                  RD
                                                                        AND
                                                                            E
                                         STEWART ST                                (6.3)                                                                                                                                                       2.4
                                                 7.4             9.0             15.3
                                                (8.2)                                                                                                                                     22.8
                                                                (9.9)           (15.4)
                              UNIVERSITY AVE                              Y                                                                                                                                                                                                6.4
                                                                       SIT
                                                                                                                                                                              MOUNTAIN
                                                                     ER
                                                                                                                                     BENTON ST
                                                                   IV      1
                                                                UN
                                         5.7                     CT                                                                                         PROSPECT AVE
                                                                                                     PROSPECT AVE
                                                                         (144.3
                  27.3                  (5.9)                                .1)                                                                                                                                                                             18.6
                                                                 6.1
                                                                (6.5)       15.6                                   2.5                                                                            18.3                                                                                          21.9        BARTON RD
                                                    CAMPUS ST              (14.7)                                                    7.3           22.6                24.0
                                                                                                          BARTON RD
                                                                  24.2                                           22.5                                 LOMA
                                           22.8                                                                 (24.0)               1.4                         2.2                       9.2
                                          (21.5)                 (24.5)
                                                                                      2.9                                                             LINDA DR                                            3.7                                 2.0
                                                                                                           LAWTON AVE
                                                                                                                   4.0                              3.3                 3.7
                                                                                                                                                                                            2.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.7                         0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BRYN MAWR AVE                WHITTIER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  BEAUMON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                T AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.9                                         2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.2
          N
      0          1200      2400
       FEET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 6.2
                                                                                            1.0      SUMMER (FALL) AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUMES IN THOUSANDS
      CITY OF LOMA LINDA                                                                   (1.0)
      CITY OF LOMA LINDA PLANNING AREA
      GENERAL PLAN ROADS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City of Loma Linda General Plan
      LOCAL ROADS                                                                                                                                                                                                       EXISTING AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUMES
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig6-2_ex adtv.cdr (10/16/08)
                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                       Transportation and Circulation Element
   6.2      BICYCLE FACILITIES
   According to the Caltrans Highway Design Manual, bicycle facilities are categorized by the degree of
   separation from motorized vehicles that they provide for bicycles:
   x    Class I facilities provide a completely separated right-of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles and
        pedestrians with crossflow minimized.
   x    Class II facilities provide a striped lane for one-way bike travel on a street or highway.
   x    Class III facilities provide for shared use of a lane with pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic.
   Figure 6.3 illustrates existing bicycle facilities in the City.
   6.3      PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
   Omnitrans is the primary provider of public transportation within the western portion of San
   Bernardino County, including the City of Loma Linda. Omnitrans operates five routes that traverse
   Loma Linda. The Riverside Transit Authority also operates one route that connects Loma Linda to
   downtown Riverside. There are about 60 bus stops in the City, with approximately 1,400 average
   weekday boardings on all Omnitrans routes in Loma Linda. According to the Riverside Transit
   Authority, approximately 29,000 passengers ride its Route 25 monthly; however, data are not
   available identifying the number of passengers boarding or leaving buses in Loma Linda. LLUMC and
   the VA Medical Center dial-a-ride also provide limited bus services.
   6.4      PARKING
   Parking requirements and standards for development within the City of Loma Linda are incorporated
   in the City’s Zoning Ordinance. Parking facilities currently appear to be adequate throughout the
   community, except for areas around Loma Linda University and the Loma Linda University Medical
   Center. Because of the high parking demand generated by the University and Medical Center,
   parking is at a premium in this portion of the City. The proximity of residential areas to the University
   and Medical center highlights the need to expand off-street parking availability in the area. In
   response to residents’ concerns about the availability of parking on local streets, the City has
   instituted a residential preferential parking permit program. Under this program, parking on residential
   streets in the vicinity of the University and the Medical Center is restricted to residents and their
   guests from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. Residents are issued one permit per registered
   vehicle plus one guest pass.
   6.5      TRUCK ROUTES
   The City has designated Redlands Boulevard, Anderson Street, Mountain View Avenue north of
   Barton Road, and Barton Road as truck routes. No other roads in the City are designated as truck
   routes.
   6.6      PEDESTRIAN ROUTES/TRAILS
   The City facilitates pedestrian travel through the design of pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods with
   well-connected streets and sidewalks. The City also provides convenient and safe sidewalk routes to
   shopping, schools and recreation areas. One such route connects Hulda Crooks Park to Beaumont
   Avenue thus encouraging pedestrian travel. In addition, the City provides an off-road trail system
   designed for walking and hiking activities. The Conservation and Open Space Element includes the
   Trails Plan which covers the City and sphere of influence. One of these proposed pedestrian trails is
Chapter 6.0                         Transportation and Circulation Element                                   6-6

                                                                                                                                                                                                      $
                                                                                                                                                                                                      `
                                                                                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                       REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                        ACADEMY ST
                                                                                                POPLAR ST
                                                                                                                                   MOUNTAIN VIEW AVE
                                                                                            VAN LEUVEN ST                                                                 MI
                                                                                                                                                                             S   SI
                                                                                                                                                                                   ON
                                                    STEWART ST                                                                                         SA                                        RD
                                                                                                                                                            NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                 IMO
                                                                                                                                                                       TE
                                                                                                                                                                         OC
                                      UNIVERSITY AVE                                                                                                                          RE
                                                                                  ITY                                                                                           EK
                                                                                RS C T
                                                                          IVE            PROSPECT AVE
                                                                        UN                                  BENTON ST
                                                            CAMPUS ST
                                                                                         BARTON RD
                                                                                                                        LOMA
                                                                                                                        LINDA DR
                                                                                          LAWTON AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                 BRYN MAWR AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      WHITTIER AVE
                                                                                                                                                            BEAUMON
                                                                                                                                                                          T AV
                                                                                                                                                                                   E
     N
     !
 0        1,200       2,400
     S
  Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 6.3
      City Boundary                 Class II Bicycle Facility
      City Sphere of Influence      Class III Bicycle Facility
      FUTURE ROADS
      GENERAL PLAN ROADS
      LOCAL ROADS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EXISTING BICYCLE FACILITIES MAP
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig6-3_ExistingBikewys.mxd (10/17/08)
                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                         Transportation and Circulation Element
   the Edison Easement Trail, which is partially complete, and parallels Mountain Avenue between
   Redlands Boulevard and Beaumont Avenue. This trail, as shown on the Figure 9.1 (Conservation and
   Open Space Element), continues throughout the Badlands on the several utility easements in the
   area with the consent of the landowners, Southern California Edison Company. Another proposed
   trail, the San Timoteo Creek Trail, follows the creek from Anderson Street to the City limits, providing
   the flood control district grants approval. For further discussion of the Trail System see the
   Conservation and Open Space Element.
   6.7        RAILROAD LINES
   A Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) line runs from northwest to southeast through the City. Grade
   separations exist at Anderson Street, Mountain View Avenue, and Barton Road. In addition, a
   Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad (BNSF) line runs along part of the City’s northern border.
   However, the Mission Channel physically separates this railroad line from the rest of Loma Linda.
   Neither railroad has any spur lines that serve properties in Loma Linda.
   6.8        REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT PLANS
   Several planned transportation improvements have been programmed for completion in the seven-
   year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) contained in the San Bernardino Congestion Management
   Program (CMP). The County CMP provides the overall direction and approach for the regional
   transportation system, and includes specific projects that may affect the future regional transportation
   system. The projects included in the CIP are those that:
   x     Maintain or enhance the performance of the multi-modal transportation system, and minimize
         travel delay;
   x     Assist in focusing available transportation funding on cost-effective responses to subregional and
         regional transportation needs;
   x     Provide for technical consistency in multi-modal transportation system analysis;
   x     Help to coordinate development and implementation of subregional transportation strategies
         across jurisdictional boundaries;
   x     Anticipate the impacts of proposed new development on the multi-modal transportation system,
         provide consistent procedures to identify and evaluate the effectiveness of mitigation measures,
         and provided for adequate funding of mitigation measures;
   x     Promote air quality and improve mobility through implementation of land use and transportation
         alternatives or incentives that reduce both vehicle trips and miles travels, and vehicle emission; and
   x     Participate in tier I and II traffic signal coordination with SANBAG.
   The following regional roadway improvements within the City of Loma Linda are identified in the CMP
   Capital Improvement Program and the Final 2002 Regional Transportation Improvement Program
   (RTIP):
   x     Anderson Street/Tippecanoe Avenue from University Court to Hospitality Lane – Provide traffic
         signal coordination and timing interconnect at seven traffic signals and install emergency
         preemption of traffic signal operation;
   x     Mountain View Avenue from Van Leuven to Prospect – Widen existing bridge from three lanes to
         four lanes – Add pedestrian walkway to outside of bridge;
   x     Redlands Boulevard at California Street – Widen intersection and install traffic signals and drainage;
Chapter 6.0                           Transportation and Circulation Element                                    6-8

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Transportation and Circulation Element
   x    Redlands Boulevard from east City limits to west City limits – Widen from four lanes to six lanes;
        and
   x    California Street from Barton Road to Redlands Boulevard – Widen from two to four lanes.
   6.9       CIRCULATION ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
   Evans Street/West Road Extension. To assist in relieving the congestion on Anderson Street, a
   new north-south roadway is being planned to connect Redlands Boulevard and Barton Road. This will
   also relieve congestion at the Anderson Street/Tippecanoe Avenue interchange, and will provide an
   alternative route to access the University and Medical Center, as well as other facilities within Loma
   Linda.
   Anderson Street/Tippecanoe Avenue Interchange–Redlands Boulevard/Anderson Street. As
   noted in the existing conditions, this intersection operates at LOS F during p.m. peak hours. In
   addition, the existing geometrics of the intersection make southbound right turns difficult for trucks
   servicing existing commercial uses along Redlands Boulevard. Modification of the curb line at the
   northwest quadrant of the intersection is needed to improve the truck turning radius. The interchange
   will be reconstructed with a westbound loop on-ramp and wider eastbound ramps. Construction of
   this interchange will include an eastbound auxiliary lane on the freeway up to the Anderson
   Street/Tippecanoe Avenue interchange. While the General Plan Master Plan of Roadways includes
   this proposal, it is the General Plan’s intent that the Master Plan of Roadways reflects the ultimate
   recommendation of the working group once it is finalized.
   Mountain View Avenue Interchange. As part of a regional truck traffic study, improvements to this
   interchange are being reviewed. It is anticipated that improvements to this interchange will be
   constructed in the future.
   Redlands Boulevard/California Avenue Intersection. Improvements to this intersection are
   necessary to realign the two streets and eliminate the current offset configuration.
   California Street/Mission Road and California Street/Barton Road Intersections. These
   intersections are in close proximity. Realignment of Mission road to move its intersection with
   California Street to the north is proposed in the General Plan.
   Access to South Hills. In order to protect the sensitive environment of the South Hills and retain its
   natural character, limitations on access into this area are set forth in Chapter 2A, Growth
   Management, and Implementing Policy 6.10.1c of this Element.
   6.9.1 Future Traffic Demands
   New development within the City of Loma Linda along with regional growth will result in an increase in
   traffic volumes with in the City. Loma Linda recognizes that even by constantly expanding the local
   roadway network and providing an ongoing sequence of programmed street improvements, problems
   of traffic congestion will continue. Providing a real solution to traffic congestion requires a balanced
   approach to future transportation improvements.
   In order to estimate the effect of future traffic on the City’s arterial roadway system, the East Valley
   Traffic Model was used. The model included the land uses proposed in the General Plan Update as
   well as the most recent data for long-range regional transportation patterns (Figure 6.4). To
   accommodate this anticipated increase in traffic volumes, a master circulation plan was developed.
   Figure 6.5 illustrates Loma Linda’s Circulation Plan, which has been developed to provide acceptable
   access to and within the City with General Plan build out.
Chapter 6.0                        Transportation and Circulation Element                                  6-9

                                                                                                                                                                                       LAURELWOOD DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
 HOSPITALITY LN                                                                                                                                                       TIPPECANOE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2,869/
                                                                             HARRIMAN PL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BRYN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1,802
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1,494/                                      1,718/2,987                                                 MAWR AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1,777/1,097
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RICHARDSON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1,524/                                                                                                  1,778/1,269
                                   10                                                                                                                                        1,375/                                     1,204     REDLANDS BLVD 1,363                                                                                                                                               518/2,207
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1,603/1,376
                                                      1,281/2,360                                              1,331/1,602                                                                                                                   999/2,072                                                                            609/2,241
                                                                                                                                                                                                   805/2,162              805/1,963
                                                      1,644/1,665                                                  713/1,724                                     2,286/1,386 2,424                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   962/1,014
                                                                                                                                                                 1,174/1,767 1,375/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  897/1,024
                                                                                                                                                                             2,424
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1,786/1,035
                                                                                                              834/1,704                                                                                             POPLAR ST 173/485
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2,259/
                                                                                                                           ACADEMY ST
                                                                                                                                                                                               ORANGE
                                                                                                                                                            2 ,23
                                                                                                                                                                                1,055/
                                                                                                                                                                  2            1,867
                                                                                                                                                                        ,096/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              221/410
                                                                                                                                                                                               GROVE ST                                                                                                                                                             MI
                                                                                                                                           46                                                                                    VAN LEUVEN ST 472/337                                                                                                                SS
                                                                                         EVANS ST 1,763/961                                                 AND
                                                                                                                                      5/9 1 4                                                             597/128                                                                                                                                                        IO                                                                                                                            ALABAMA ST
                                                                                         939/                                       48 9 2 / 7                         1,100/                             247/448                                                                       425/379                                                                            N
                                                                                         696                                          8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1,235 MOUNTAIN VIEW AVE 2,386/1,751
                                                                                                                                                        2,197
                                                                                                                                                             /
                                                                                                                                                                 ERSO 1,257
                                                                                                                                                                      1,887
                                                                                         560/                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RD
                                                                                         1,034
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                  82/                          539/
                                                                                                                                                                     N ST
                                                                                                                  390                          651                                 9.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                            STEWART ST
                                                                                                                 432/                           648/459    1,037/
               WATERMAN AVENUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   227 /341
                                                                                                                 148                                       905
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1,246/1,892
                                                                                         S565/532                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /46
                                                                                                                                                               671/                                                                                          409/143                                                                                                                                     4                                                                          ORANGE AVE
                                                                      UNIVERSITY                                 184/                                          820               693/                                                   150/365                                                                 989/1,623
                                                                                         N622/713                362                                                            84
                                                                       AVE 551/1,278                                                                               Y   3                       MOUND ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1,165/2,077
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1,165/2,077
                                        1,455/2,969                                                              472/
                                                                                                                                            356/484
                                                                                                                                                                SIT
           N                                                                 1,533/694                                                                        ER CT904/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BENTON ST
                                        3,255/1,841                                                              235                                       NIV
                                                                                                                            CAMPUS ST
      INGTO                                                                                                                                            U                 865                                                                                                   PROSPECT AVE
WASH                                                                            8                                                                                                              PROSPECT AVE 283/301                                                                                                           914/                                                                                                          1,287/879   793/1,267
    E ET                                                                                           194/85                                                                          730/1,020                       4                     337/                                                      1,553/                                                                                                               2,615
STR                                                                          ,76 4                                                           475/333                                                        225/444
                                                                                                                                                                                                            225/44                       822
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         929/                                                                                 1,462                                                                                            /1,131
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BARTON RD
                                                                          2/1 ,35                  51/180                                                                                                                                478                                                       1,159                                                                                                               734/2                                        2,291/1,347
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2,115/1,581                                          1,966/1,229                                                                       ,659
                                                                                                                                                                                     869/806                                                                       1,928/1,574
                                                         OAKWOOD DR
                                                                        97 8/0 1
                                                                                                                   979/
                                                                                                                          N735/687 S582/706
                                                                                                                                                                                         1,404/1,358        BARTON RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               969/2,592
                                                                         1,7                                                                       1,154/1,733                                                                                                                          746/2,435                                          787/2,374
                                                                                                                   1,522                                                                                                                                          905/2,087                                                                                  NEWPORT AVE
                                                                                                                   1,777/                          1,772/1,592                            1,361/1,733
                                                                                                                   1,410                                                                                                                  229/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          353                           374/      217/
                                                                                                                                                                                 511/366                                                  260/                             LOMA 265
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          227                                     554                          854/714          760/755
                                                                                                                                                                                 375/521
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LINDA DR       591/192                                               617/192                                            357/120              29/17
                                                                                                                                                                                         LAWTON AVE 731/204                                                      590/195
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          212/442                                               311/404                                            242/180              19/32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        182/684                                      188/476
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               146/217 BRYN MAWR AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                192/613            715/222                                                                    345/191 WHITTIER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               249/173
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BEAUMONT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AVE                                                                450/132
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               71
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    85/6 3/107                                                            890/126
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        00                        745/111
           N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       95/601                                   82/771
       0                         1200       2400
       FEET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FIGURE 6.4
217/
554    PEAK HOUR TRAFFIC VOLUME AM/PM*
       FUTURE ROADWAY (ALIGNMENT UNDETERMINED)                                                                                                                                                            *Northbound values are on the east side of road
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Southbound values are on the west side of road                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Eastbound values are on the south side of road
       CITY OF LOMA LINDA                                                                                                                                                                                  Westbound values are on the north side of road                                                                                                              BUILD OUT PEAK HOUR TRAFFIC VOLUMES
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig6-4_buildout volumes.cdr (10/17/08)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LEGEND
                                                                                                 Tippecanoe Ave Interchange
                                                                                                       Improvements                                                                                                                                                                                          FUTURE ROADWAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BNSF RR
                                                                                                                                                                         $
                                                                                                                                                                         `
                                                                                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                         3            3                                                                                                                      2-LANE UNDIVIDED LOCAL STREET
                                                                                                                             1                   1                       3             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                            2                                           2-LANE UNDIVIDED ROADWAY
                                                                                                             2                                                           2                       2
                                                                                                                                 RICHARDSON ST
                                                                          3                 3                                                    REDLANDS BLVD
                                          2
                                          2                               3                 3                2                                                           2                       2                                  2                            2                                           2-LANE DIVIDED ROADWAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2                  2
                                                                                                                 POPLAR ST                                                                                                                                                                                   4-LANE UNDIVIDED ROADWAY
                                              2                   2
                                                                                                                                                                         2 MOUNTAIN VIEW AVE 3
                                                                              ANDERSON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4-LANE DIVIDED ROADWAY
                                              PROPOSED EVANS ST
                                                                                            ACADAM
                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                   YS                                                                                                                                                                                                        MODIFIED 4-LANE UNDIVIDED ROADWAY
                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                 ALIGNMENT
                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                         VAN LEUVEN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SS                                                                                                 6-LANE UNDIVIDED ROADWAY
                                              2          2                                                                                                                                                     IO
                                                                                                             UP RR                                                       2             2                            NR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6-LANE DIVIDED ROADWAY
                                                        STEWART ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2               2               JURISDICTIONAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                    3          UNIVERSITY AVE 2                                2                                                                                                                                                                           PROPOSED ORANGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ALIGNMENT                                     SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
                                 2            2                           2
                                                                                                                                 BENTON ST
                    3      2                  1             1                                                                                                                                                                                                          2             2
                                                                  ST
                                                                                            PROSPECT AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                     CITY LIMIT
                                                       1 CAMPUS                2            2                                                                             2             2
                                                                      1
                                                                                                                    2                                2                       2              2                       2                                             2                  2                       FREEWAY
                                                  2       2           2        2            2 BARTON RD                                                                                                                                                                                  BARTON RD
                                                                                            2                       2                                2                       2              2                       2                                             2                  2
                                                  2       2           2         2
                                                                                                                                                                          2             2                                                                                                                    RAILROAD
                                                                                                LAWTON AVE                                                                                           LAWTON AVE
                                                                                                                                                         LOMA LINDA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BRYN MAWR AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WHITTIER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BEAUMONT AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0        1,000     2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SOURCE: Parcel Base - City of Loma Linda,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Thomas Bros. 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE 6.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MASTER PLANS OF ROADWAYS
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\Gen_Reports_2008\MasterRoadwayPlan.mxd (10/29/08)
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Transportation and Circulation Element
   This plan includes existing and proposed major thoroughfares. Loma Linda’s roadway classifications
   consist of the following categories:
   x   Freeway. Freeways are divided highways with full control of access and grade separations for all
       intersecting traffic flows. There are no intersection at-grade, traffic signals, pedestrians, or parking
       on freeways to interfere with the continuity of high-capacity, high-speed traffic flow. Freeways are
       designed to provide regional rather than local traffic movement.
   x   Six-lane Divided Highway. A major arterial roadway with six lanes of through traffic (three in each
       direction) with a landscaped, raised median. This roadway serves large volumes of through traffic
       between different sections of the City and may provide access to freeways. The primary function
       of this arterial is to provide for through traffic movement. The six-lane divided highways have
       been proposed to provide sufficient carrying capacity so as to prevent the undesirable diversion
       of through traffic into residential neighborhoods. Additional turning lanes are typically provided at
       intersections.
   x   Six-lane Undivided Highway. A major arterial roadway with six lanes of through traffic (three in
       each direction) and no median: This roadway serves large volumes of through traffic between
       different sections of the City and may provide access to freeways. The primary function of this
       arterial is to provide for through traffic movement. The six-lane undivided highways have been
       proposed to provide sufficient carrying capacity so as to prevent the undesirable diversion of
       through traffic into residential neighborhoods. Additional turning lanes are typically provided at
       intersections.
   x   Four-lane Divided Highway. A four-lane (two in each direction) primary arterial highway with a
       landscaped, raised median. Direct access for individual uses along four lane divided highways is
       limited to intersecting streets and major driveways serving larger uses. Four-lane divided
       highways have been proposed to provide sufficient carrying capacity so as to prevent the
       undesirable diversion of through traffic into residential neighborhoods. Additional turning lanes
       are typically provided at intersections.
   x   Four-lane Undivided Highway. A secondary arterial highway with four lanes of roadway (two in
       each direction) and no median. Arterials need to have sufficient carrying capacity so as to prevent
       the undesirable diversion of through traffic into residential neighborhoods. Four-lane undivided
       highways have been proposed to provide sufficient carrying capacity so as to prevent the
       undesirable diversion of through traffic into residential neighborhoods. Left-turn lanes are typically
       provided at intersections.
   x   Modified Four-lane Undivided Highway. A secondary arterial highway with four lanes of roadway
       (two in each direction) with a continuous two-way center turn lane: Arterials need to have
       sufficient carrying capacity so as to prevent the undesirable diversion of through traffic into
       residential neighborhoods. Modified four-lane undivided highways have been proposed to provide
       sufficient carrying capacity so as to prevent the undesirable diversion of through traffic into
       residential neighborhoods. Left-turn lanes are typically provided at intersections.
   x   Two-lane Divided Highway. A collector street with relatively moderate-speed, moderate-volume,
       with two through lanes (one in each direction), designed for circulation within and between
       neighborhoods with a landscaped, raised median: These roads serve relatively short trips, and
       are meant to collect and distribute traffic from local streets to the arterial network. Left-turn lanes
       are typically provided at major intersections.
   x   Two-lane Undivided Highway. A collector street with relatively moderate-speed, moderate-
       volume, with two through lanes (one in each direction), designed for circulation within and
       between neighborhoods. These roads serve relatively short trips, and are meant to collect and
Chapter 6.0                        Transportation and Circulation Element                                     6-12

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Transportation and Circulation Element
       distribute traffic from local streets to the arterial network. Left-turn lanes are typically provided at
       major intersections.
   The recommended General Plan build out roadway classifications are as follows:
   x   Redlands Boulevard: A divided six-lane highway between Evans Street and approximately 400
       feet east of Anderson Street. A four-lane divided highway at all other segments with additional
       through lanes at the intersection with Mountain View Avenue.
   x   Van Leuven Street: A four-lane undivided highway between Evans Street and Anderson Street.
       A two-lane undivided highway between Academy Street and Mountain View Avenue.
   x   Stewart Street: A two-lane local street west of Evans Street. A two-lane undivided highway
       between Evans Street and Anderson Street.
   x   University Avenue: A two-lane undivided highway.
   x   Prospect Avenue: A two-lane undivided highway.
   x   Barton Road: A four-lane divided highway with bike lanes and a wide, lushly landscaped median
       with left-turn pockets at major intersections. A special circumstances roadway between western
       City limits and University Avenue and between Loma Linda Drive and eastern City limits.
   x   Lawton Avenue: A two-lane undivided highway.
   x   Beaumont Avenue: A two-lane undivided highway.
   x   Evans Street: A four-lane undivided highway between Redlands Boulevard and University
       Avenue. A two-lane undivided highway between University Avenue and Barton Road.
   x   Campus Street: A two-lane local street.
   x   Anderson Street: A six-lane undivided highway between the I-10 Ramps and Redlands
       Boulevard. A modified four-lane undivided highway with a two-way center turn lane or left-turn
       pockets from I-10 to Barton Road. A two-lane undivided highway south of Barton Road. Bike
       lanes from Court Street to University Avenue.
   x   Academy Street: A two-lane undivided highway between Anderson Street and Van Leuven
       Street.
   x   Poplar Street: A two-lane undivided highway.
   x   Benton Street: A two-lane undivided highway.
   x   Loma Linda Drive: A two-lane undivided highway.
   x   Mountain View Avenue: An undivided six-lane highway between I-10 Ramps and Mission Road.
       A modified four-lane undivided highway with a continuous center turn lane between Mission Road
       and Van Leuven Street. An undivided four-lane highway between Van Leuven Street and
       Beaumont Avenue.
   x   Bryn Mawr Avenue: A two-lane undivided highway.
   x   Whittier Avenue: Generally, a two-lane local street. A two-way center turn lane exists between
       George Street and Picton Street.
   x   Mission Road: A two-lane divided highway running northwest to southeast from Mountain View
       Avenue to California Street.
   x   California Street: A four-lane undivided highway.
Chapter 6.0                        Transportation and Circulation Element                                    6-13
                                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                    Transportation and Circulation Element
   x    Local Streets. These streets are primarily used for access to individual abutting land uses. These
        streets are more pedestrian-oriented than collector or arterial roadways, and will also carry higher
        volumes of bicycle traffic. Through vehicular traffic is discouraged.
   x    Special Circumstances. Traffic volumes along certain roadways require special treatment, and
        are identified on the Circulation Plan as having “Special Circumstances.” These include the
        southern end of proposed Evans Street between University Avenue and Barton Road, which is to
        be designed as a two-lane street, with a continuous two-way left turn lane in the median.
        Redlands Boulevard is to be provided with additional through lanes at its intersection with
        Anderson Street. Similarly, Benton Street is to be with additional through lanes at its intersection
        with Barton Road. To preserve the historic district, a two-lane divided highway is to be provided
        on a major portion of Mission Road even though the volume on the roadway meets the guidelines
        for a four-lane roadway.
   6.10 GUIDING POLICY
   Provide a balanced, convenient, energy-efficient, and safe transportation system that incorporates all
   feasible modes of transportation.
   6.10.1 Vehicular Circulation
   Transportation conditions on Loma Linda roadways are generally acceptable, with congestion
   developing at the intersections of major roadways at freeway interchanges during peak hours. As
   traffic volumes increase throughout the City due to future development within Loma Linda and
   surrounding communities, it will be critical to improve the local roadway system to provide additional
   capacity, including extending or expanding existing roadways, and providing connections between
   existing roadways.
   Implementing Policies - Vehicular Circulation
   a. Maintain long-term traffic levels of service at LOS C.
        (1) In those locations where maintaining LOS C is not feasible and Measure V permits a lower
             level of service, implement all feasible mitigation measures.
   b. Require all development projects to provide their fair share (in the form of physical improvements
        and/or fee payment) for all feasible improvements needed to implement Policy “a,” above.
        (1) Where it is determined that it is not feasible to impose the mitigation measures necessary to
             meet City LOS standards on a project that is not exempt from the traffic level of service
             standards set forth in Measure V, development shall not be permitted to proceed unless and
             until the project is able to meet applicable level of service standards in Measure V.
   c.   Where the payment of fees is accepted as mitigation in lieu of actual construction of physical
        improvements, such fee payment shall be considered to be adequate mitigation if, at the time of
        project approval, a public agency has programmed construction of the improvements needed to
        meet City LOS standards to commence at or prior to the time that the proposed project is
        anticipated to cause or contribute to the deterioration of traffic levels of service below City
        standards.1 Notwithstanding the above, developments impacting the California/Redlands,
        Benton/Barton, and Anderson/Redlands intersections or requiring the realignment of Orange
   1
        Generally, this would be considered to be opening day of the project (first occupancy), unless a traffic study approved by
        the City identifies a later date.
   2
        “Existing” levels of service and the level of service standard to be applied to the project is to be determined at the time an
        application is deemed complete and an initial study pursuant to the requirements of CEQA is prepared, and not at the time
        of project approval.
Chapter 6.0                               Transportation and Circulation Element                                                     6-14

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                       Transportation and Circulation Element
       Street shall be conditioned to require the provision of needed physical improvements rather than
       payment of fair share fees.
   d. Alternatively, if the physical improvements are to be constructed by a private entity, construction
       of the needed improvements shall have begun prior to the time that the proposed project causes
       or contributes to the deterioration of traffic levels of service below City standards.
   e. Facilitate roadway capacity by implementing the Loma Linda Circulation Plan.
       -    Pursue the Evans Street interchange and roadway extension.
       -    Although included in regional funding for additional lanes, maintain a four-lane divided
            highway on Redlands Boulevard except at intersection of Anderson Street where additional
            through lanes will be necessary.
       -    Widen roadways as feasible consistent with the General Plan Circulation map, consistent
            with City level of service objectives.
   f.  Promote the design of arterial and collector roadways to optimize safe traffic flow within
       established roadway configurations by minimizing driveways and intersections, uncontrolled
       access to adjacent parcels, on-street parking, and frequent stops to the extent consistent with the
       character of adjacent land uses.
   g. As development occurs, provide adequate capacity at intersections to accommodate future traffic
       volumes by installing intersection traffic improvements and traffic control devices, as needed.
   h. Facilitate the synchronization of traffic signals along Redlands Boulevard, Barton Road, Anderson
       Street, and Mountain View Avenue.
   i.  Require the provision of reciprocal access and parking agreements between adjacent land uses
       where appropriate to facilitate off-street vehicular movement between adjacent commercial and
       other non-residential uses, and to reduce the number of driveways along major roadways.
   j.  Encourage regional goods movement to remain on area freeways and other appropriate routes.
   k.  Require the design of new developments to focus through traffic onto arterial streets, and away
       from local neighborhoods.
Chapter 6.0                        Transportation and Circulation Element                                  6-15
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Transportation and Circulation Element
   l.  Require that existing driveways that are unnecessary or substandard be removed or upgraded,
       wherever feasible, in conjunction with any on-site development or any adjacent street
       construction.
   m. Where single-family residences have no feasible alternative but to front on collector or arterial
       roadways, require, wherever possible, that circular driveways or on-site turnarounds be provided
       to eliminate the need for residents to back onto the street.
   n. Locate driveways on corner parcels as far away from the intersection as is possible.
   o. Avoid locating driveways within passenger waiting areas of bus stops or within bus bays. Locate
       driveways so that drivers will be able to see around bus stop improvements.
   p. Where a series of traffic signals is provided along a route, facilitate the coordination of traffic
       signals to optimize traffic progression on a given route. Traffic signalization should emphasize
       facilitating access from neighborhood areas onto the City's primary roadway network, and should
       work to discourage through traffic from using local streets.
       x    Require developments impacting traffic along Redlands Blvd., Barton Road, Anderson Street
            or Mountain View Avenue to provide a fair share contribution for to the synchronization of
            traffic signals along the impact road(s).
       x     If the City has not yet adopted an implementation mechanism for these improvements,
            require the project applicant to install the required synchronization, and the City will enter into
            a reimbursement agreement with the applicant to be reimbursed as future funds are received
            by the City for that improvement.
   q. Expand intersections to include additional turning and through lanes at intersections where
       needed to relieve congestion and improve intersection operation, so long as the intersection can
       continue to accommodate pedestrians and bicyclists. Avoid traffic system improvements that
       facilitate vehicular turning and bus movements, but that also discourage pedestrian or bicycle
       movements.
   r.  Maintain the first priority for public streets of providing safe and efficient travel for the public with
       on-street parking as a second priority.
   s.  Pursue construction of parking structures within the downtown area to serve projected parking
       demand and facilitate mixed-use development without the need to meet off-street parking
       standards on each individual parcel.
   t.  Work with the Loma Linda University/Medical Center to provide a direct connection of Van
       Leuven Street to Anderson Street, preferably at the existing intersection of Academy Street.
   u. Work with the Loma Linda Academy to modify its entry to provide stacking room for parents’
       vehicles waiting to drop off or pick up students.
   v.  As part of the development of the mixed-use area west of California Street, realign Mission Road
       to connect to Orange Street. West of California Street, design the realigned Mission Road to
       maximize access to lands north of Barton Road.
   w. Place ultimate responsibility for mitigating the impacts of future growth and development,
       including construction of a new and widened roadways, as well as intersection improvements,
       with individual development projects. The City’s Capital Improvements Program will be used
       primarily to address the impacts of the existing development, and to facilitate adopted economic
       development programs.
   x.  Ensure that development projects pay applicable traffic mitigation fees and provide appropriate
       participation in relation to improvements for routes of regional significance.
Chapter 6.0                        Transportation and Circulation Element                                      6-16

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Transportation and Circulation Element
   y.   Within hillside areas, develop roads to standards appropriate to the character and topography of
        the area. In addition, provide for dispersion of traffic dispersion so as to prohibit direct alignment
        or new roadways with Whittier Avenue, Bryn Mawr Avenue, or Wellesley Avenue.
   6.10.2 Non-motorized Transportation
   Bicycling and walking are key elements of Loma Linda’s planned circulation system. A trail system
   has been adopted and is shown in Figure 9.1 of the Conservation and Open Space Element. In
   addition, the City currently has an extensive network of sidewalks that enhance neighborhoods’
   accessibility, and help to reduce reliance on the private automobile for mobility within the community.
   Maintaining a system of bicycle facilities in Loma Linda is important, both as recreation and
   transportation. Bikeways are becoming increasingly important because they are a non-polluting
   alternative mode of transport, and provide links to schools, civic and neighborhood shopping centers
   and employment within the region. By providing bicycle routes throughout the City, riders will be able
   to travel with a greater sense of security (Figure 6.6).
   The City’s Master Plan of Bikeways as shown in Figure 6.6 has three bicycle facility classifications.
   Bike trails (Class I) are facilities at least eight feet in width that are physically separated from
   vehicular roadways and are reserved exclusively for bicycle use. Bike lanes (Class II) consist of a
   painted stripe reserving at least five feet nearest the curb for bicycle use. Bike routes (Class III) are
   designated only with signs and are mainly used to bridge short distances between bike lanes or trails.
   Implementing Policies – Non-motorized Transportation
   a. Design new residential neighborhoods to provide safe pedestrian and bicycle access to schools,
        parks and neighborhood commercial facilities through explicit development requirements for such
        amenities.
   b. Provide lighting that is attractive, functional, and appropriate to the character and scale of the
        neighborhood or area, and which contributes to pedestrian, and bicycle safety.
   c.   Maintain roadway designs that maintain mobility and accessibility for bicyclists and pedestrians
        through incorporation of sidewalks and bicycle lanes, where appropriate.
   d. Integrate multi-use paths into creek corridors, railroad rights-of-way, utility corridors, and park
        facilities through proactive coordination with property owners and developers.
   e. Where shopping facilities are located adjacent to residential areas, provide direct access between
        residential and commercial uses without requiring pedestrians and bicyclists to travel completely
        around the commercial development through stipulations in the design review process.
   f.   Require the construction of attractive walkways in new residential, commercial, office, and
        industrial developments, through the use of landscaping which includes shading for pedestrian
        paths.
   g. Orient site design in non-residential areas to allow for safe and convenient pedestrian access
        from sidewalks, transit and bus stops, and other pedestrian facilities, in addition to access
        through required parking facilities.
   6.10.3 Transit
   Although rail transit service is not currently available in Loma Linda, there has been discussion
   regarding the potential of extending Metrolink service to the Loma Linda area. In addition, the
   Riverside Transit Authority and Omnitrans provide public bus transportation over six separate bus
   routes in the City. These bus routes provide a necessary transportation service by improving access
Chapter 6.0                        Transportation and Circulation Element                                   6-17

                                                                                                                                                                                                       $
                                                                                                                                                                                                       `
                                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                        REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                         ACADEMY ST
                                                                                                 POPLAR ST
                                                                                                                                    MOUNTAIN VIEW AVE
                                                                                             VAN LEUVEN ST                                                                 MI
                                                                                                                                                                              S   SI
                                                                                                                                                                                    ON
                                                    STEWART ST                                                                                          SA                                        RD
                                                                                                                                                             NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                  IMO
                                                                                                                                                                        TE
                                                                                                                                                                          OC
                                      UNIVERSITY AVE                                                                                                                           RE
                                                                                   ITY                                                                                           EK
                                                                                 RS C T
                                                                           IVE            PROSPECT AVE
                                                                         UN                                  BENTON ST
                                                             CAMPUS ST
                                                                                          BARTON RD
                                                                                                                         LOMA
                                                                                                                         LINDA DR
                                                                                           LAWTON AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                  BRYN MAWR AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                       WHITTIER AVE
                                                                                                                                                             BEAUMON
                                                                                                                                                                           T AV
                                                                                                                                                                                    E
     N
     !
 0        1,200       2,400
     S
  Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 6.6
      City Boundary                 Class I Bicycle Trail
      City Sphere of Influence      Class II Bicycle Facility
      FUTURE ROADS                  Class III Bicycle Facility
      GENERAL PLAN ROADS
      LOCAL ROADS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MASTER PLANS OF BIKEWAYS
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig6-6_ExistingBikewys.mxd (10/17/08)
                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Transportation and Circulation Element
   to employment and service centers such as Loma Linda University and the Veterans Hospital.
   Omnitrans and the cities of Loma Linda and San Bernardino are also involved in a major transit
   initiative called the “E Street Locally Preferred Alternative,” which involves establishment of transit-
   oriented development at key locations to serve as the impetus for expanding public transit services to
   the area. The Loma Linda City Council has gone on record as supporting the E Street Locally
   Preferred Alternative
   Implementing Policies for Transit
   a. Ensure that the site design of new developments provides for pedestrian access to existing and
         future transit routes and transit centers through specific review during the development review
         process.
   b. Preserve options for future transit use when designing roadway and highway improvements.
   c.    When applicable, such as adjacent to E Street Locally Preferred Alternative station(s),     include
         Omnitrans in the review of new development projects, and require new development to         provide
         transit improvements in proportion to traffic demands created by the project.                Transit
         improvements may include direct and paved access to transit stops; provision of bus         turnout
         areas and bus shelters; and roadway geometric designs to accommodate bus traffic.
   d. Support transit-oriented development in proximity to E Street Locally Preferred Alternative
         station(s). Such development would include a variety of retail, housing, employment opportunity,
         healthcare, and civic/governmental uses in walking distances of stations to encourage transit
         ridership and address air quality and traffic congestion concerns. In addition, support integration
         of E Street Locally Preferred Alternative transit stations into nearby planned developments and
         attractively landscaped pedestrian linkages interconnecting transit supportive uses to the transit
         stations.
   e. Encourage ridership on public transit through use of City information sources (e.g., City web site,
         and mail-outs) to provide information on transit services.
   f.    Encourage extension of Metrolink service to the Loma Linda area, including assistance in locating
         and developing a Metrolink station within Loma Linda should service be extended to the area.
   g. Require community care facilities and large age-restricted developments (50 units or more, but
         excluding facilities designed for “active” adults) to provide transportation services for the
         convenience of residents as a condition of development.
Chapter 6.0                       Transportation and Circulation Element                                   6-19

                                                                                Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                            Noise Element
   7.0      NOISE ELEMENT
   The Noise Element generally describes the fundamental concepts of noise and summarizes existing
   noise levels and noise sources in the City of Loma Linda. Goals and supporting policies related to the
   control of noise levels and the maintenance of appropriate noise levels are described in this section.
   The purpose of the Noise Element is to limit the exposure of the community to excessive noise levels.
   Projected noise levels for planned land uses as well as transportation corridors are given. The
   projected noise levels are used to guide future land use decisions to limit noise and its effects on the
   community. The Noise Element contains policies for limiting the noise generated from future projects
   as well as means to abate existing noise problems.
   Government Code Section 65302(f) states that a General Plan shall include a Noise Element, which
   identifies and appraises noise problems in the community. The Noise Element also serves as a
   guideline for compliance with the State’s noise insulation standards.
   7.1      NOISE CONCEPTS
   Noise may be defined as sound that is objectionable and disturbing to some individuals. There are
   several noise measurement scales used to describe noise in a particular location. A decibel (dB) is a
   unit of measurement that indicates the relative intensity of a sound. The decibel scale increases as
   the square of the change, representing the sound pressure energy. The zero on the decibel scale is
   based on the lowest sound level that the healthy, unimpaired human ear can detect, but changes of
   3.0 dB or less are perceptible only in laboratory environments. The decibel system of measuring
   sound gives a rough connection between the physical intensity of sound and its perceived loudness
   to the human ear. A sound as soft as human breathing is about 10 times greater than 0 dB. Unlike
   linear units such as inches or pounds, decibels are measured on a logarithmic scale, representing
   points on a sharply rising curve. An increase of 10 dB represents a tenfold increase in acoustic
   energy, while 20 dB is 100 times more intense, 30 dB is 1,000 times more intense. Each 10-dB
   increase in sound level is perceived as approximately a doubling of loudness. Sound intensity is
   normally measured through the “A-weighted sound level, or dBA”. This scale gives greater weight to
   the frequencies of sound to which the human ear is most sensitive. That is, an A-weighted noise level
   de-emphasizes low and very high frequencies of sound similar to the human ear’s de-emphasis of
   these frequencies. Ambient sounds generally range from 30 dBA (very quiet) to 100 dBA (very loud).
Chapter 7.0                                  Noise Element                                                 7-1

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                            Noise Element
   Noise consists of any sound that may produce physiological or psychological damage and/or interfere
   with communication, work, rest, recreation, and sleep. To the human ear, sound has two significant
   characteristics: pitch and loudness. Pitch is generally an annoyance, while loudness can affect our
   ability to hear. Pitch is the number of complete vibrations or cycles per second of a wave that results
   in the tone’s range from high to low. Loudness is the strength of a sound that describes a noisy or
   quiet environment, and the amplitude of the sound wave measures it. Loudness is determined by the
   intensity of the sound waves combined with the reception characteristics of the human ear. Sound
   intensity refers to how hard the sound wave strikes an object, which in turn produces the sound’s
   effect. Sound intensity can be measured precisely with instruments. Sound intensity and its effect on
   adjacent sensitive land uses are evaluated as part of the noise environment of a project area.
   The predominant rating scales for human communities in the State of California are the Equivalent-
   Continuous Sound Level (Leq) and the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) based dBA. Leq is
   the total sound energy of time-varying noise over a sample period. CNEL is the time-varying noise
   over a 24-hour period, with a weighting factor of 5 dBA applied to the hourly Leq for noises occurring
   from 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. (defined as relaxation hours). Events occurring between 10:00 p.m. and
   7:00 a.m. (defined as sleeping hours), 10 dBA is applied. The noise adjustments are added to the
   noise events occurring during the more sensitive evening and nighttime hours. The Day-Night
   Average Level (Ldn) is similar to the CNEL scale, but with no adjustments for the evening hours
   between 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. CNEL and Ldn are typically within 1 dBA of each other and are
   interchangeable.
   7.2       HUMAN HEALTH NOISE CONSIDERATIONS
   The effects of noise on people can be listed in three general categories: subjective effects of
   annoyance, nuisance and dissatisfaction; interference with activities such as speech, sleep, and
   learning; and physiological effects such as startling, and hearing loss. The levels associated with
   environmental noise, in almost every case, produce effects only in the first two categories. Workers in
   facilities such as industrial plants can experience effects in the last category. Unfortunately, there is
   as yet no completely satisfactory way to measure the subjective effects of noise, or to the
   corresponding reactions of annoyance and dissatisfaction. This is because of the wide variation in
   individual thresholds of annoyance and the habituation to noise over differing individual past
   experiences with noise. Table 7.A identifies common sound levels and their sources.
   Physical damage to human hearing occurs with prolonged exposure to noise levels higher than
   85 dBA. Exposure to high noise levels affects our entire systems, with prolonged noise exposure in
   excess of 75 dBA increasing body tensions and thereby affecting blood pressure, functions of the
   heart, and the nervous system. In comparison, extended periods of noise exposure above 90 dBA
   would result in permanent cell damage. When the noise level reaches 120 dBA, a tickling sensation
   occurs in the human ear even with short-term exposure. This level of noise is called the threshold of
   feeling. As the sound reaches 130 dBA, the tickling sensation is replaced by the feeling of pain in the
   ear. This is called the threshold of pain. A sound level of 140 dBA will rupture the eardrum and
   permanently damage the inner ear.
Chapter 7.0                                   Noise Element                                                 7-2

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                              Noise Element
   Table 7.A: Common Sound Levels and Their Noise Sources
                                                       A-Weighted
                                                     Sound Level in      Noise                 Subjective
                     Noise Source                       Decibels      Environment             Evaluations
                                                             0         Very Faint
                                                                                              Threshold of
   Human Breathing                                          10         Very Faint
                                                                                                 Hearing
   Rustling Leaves                                          20         Very Faint
   Soft Whisper                                             30            Faint
   Average Residence Without Stereo Playing                 40            Faint                 as Loud
   Large Transformer                                        45            Quiet
   Light Traffic; Soft Radio Music in Apartment             50            Quiet                ¼ as Loud
   Suburban Street                                          55          Moderate
   Average Office                                          60           Moderate               ½ as Loud
   Normal Conversation                                      65          Moderate
   Near Freeway Auto Traffic                               70        Moderately Loud              Loud
   Busy Restaurant                                         75        Moderately Loud
   Pneumatic Drill; Vacuum Cleaner                         80        Moderately Loud        2 times as Loud
   Freight Cars; Living Room Music                         85        Moderately Loud
   Garbage Disposal                                         90         Very Loud            4 times as Loud
   Ambulance Siren; Food Blender                           95          Very Loud
   Pile Driver; Noisy Urban Street/Heavy City
                                                           100         Very Loud            8 times as Loud
   Traffic
   Accelerating Motorcycle at a few feet away              110         Very Loud           16 times as Loud
                                                                      Threshold of
   Hard Rock Band                                          120                             32 times as Loud
                                                                         Feeling
   Civil Defense Siren                                     130      Threshold of Pain      64 times as Loud
   Jet Engine in close proximity                           140         Deafening          128 times as Loud
   Source: Compiled by LSA Associates, Inc. 2000.
   7.3       NOISE STANDARDS
   Tolerance to noise varies by land use. Commercial and industrial uses are less affected by noise
   intrusion than are hospitals, schools and residences. On a broader level, the amount of ambient noise
   in a community can affect whether the community is perceived as a desirable place to live, work, and
   play, or a stressful place. Because of this, noise and land use compatibility relationships are important
   factors to consider in planning and land use studies.
   Land use and noise compatibility criteria have been developed from various sources, including the
   California Office of Noise Control. These criteria are designed to integrate noise consideration into
   land use planning to prevent noise/land use conflicts. The California Land Use Compatibility Matrix is
   shown in Table 7.B.
Chapter 7.0                                       Noise Element                                             7-3

                                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                  Noise Element
  Table 7.B: California Office of Noise Control Land Use Compatibility Matrix for Community
  Noise Exposure
                                                                  Community Noise Exposure (Ldn or CNEL, dB)
                 Land Use Category
                                                                 55         60         65         70         75           80
     Residential – Low-Density Single-Family,
               Duplex, Mobile Homes
               Residential – Multifamily
        Transient Lodging – Hotels, Motels
     Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals,
                    Nursing Homes
      Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters
     Sports Areas, Outdoor Spectator Sports
         Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks
       Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water
               Recreation, Cemeteries
    Office Buildings – Business, Commercial &
                      Professional
         Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities,
                       Agriculture
            NORMALLY – Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of
            normal conventional construction, without any special noise.
            CONDITIONALLY – New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the
            noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional
            construction, but with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
            NORMALLY – New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or
            development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise
            insulation features included in the design.
            CLEARLY – New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
   Source: California Department of Health, Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan,
   February 1976.
   As shown in Table 7.A, low-density residential uses are most sensitive to community noise with noise
   levels of 60 dBA CNEL/Ldn and below considered “normally acceptable” (65 dBA CNEL/Ldn for
Chapter 7.0                                             Noise Element                                                          7-4

                                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                    Noise Element
   multifamily uses). For schools, churches hospitals, and business and commercial areas, noise levels
   up to 70 dBA CNEL/Ldn are “normally acceptable.” For industrial, manufacturing, and utility uses,
   noise levels up to 75 dBA CNEL/Ldn may be considered “normally acceptable.”
   Table 7.C shows the City’s policies related to land use and acceptable noise levels which are based
   on the California Office of Noise Control Community Compatibility Matrix. These standards are
   determined to be performance guidelines that provide a decibel range for the City to follow and to
   help determine what type of noises are nuisances and are unacceptable to the community.
  Table 7.C: City of Loma Linda Noise Level Standards
                                                                            Energy Average CNEL
           Land Use Categories                     Normally         Conditionally             Normally                 Clearly
                                                Acceptable(1)        Acceptable(2)       Unacceptable(3)          Unacceptable(4)
   Residential                                         55                  70                    75                  76 or more
   Residential (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.)              < 50            55 or more                 ----                    ----
   Transient Lodging, Motels, Hotels                   65                  70                    75                  76 or more
   Schools, Libraries, Churches,
                                                       70                  70                    80                  81 or more
   Hospitals, Nursing Homes
   Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
                                                       ----                80                    ----                90 or more
   Amphitheaters
   Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator
                                                       ----                80                    ----                90 or more
   Sports
   Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                     70                 ----                   75                  76 or more
   Golf Course, Riding stables, Water
                                                       ----               ----                   80                  81 or more
   Recreation, Cemeteries
   Office Buildings, Business
                                                       70                  75                76 or more                  ----
   Commercial and Professional
   Industrial Manufacturing, Utilities,
                                                       70                  80                81 or more                  ----
   Agriculture
   Emergency type land uses, emergency response vehicles, and emergency notification measures shall be considered
   as Normally Acceptable measures and exempt from violations and or penalties.
   Source: Chapter 9.20 Loma Linda Municipal Code
   INTERPRETATION
   (1) Specified land use activities that are satisfactory based upon the assumption that any land use or buildings involved are of
        ordinary performance standards.
   (2) Activities or Actions shall be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction (muffling) requirements is
        made and noise reduction insulation features are included as a preventive measure.
   (3) Noise levels exceeding the following ranges shall generally be discouraged. If new activities or actions proceed, a detailed
        analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and necessary noise insulation features included in the
        design.
   (4) Activities shall not be undertaken or permitted.
   In addition to the performance guidelines, the noise ordinance lists prohibited noises in the
   community. For example, refuse collection trucks are prohibited between the hours of 10 p.m. and
   6 a.m. and construction activity is limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday
   through Friday, with heavy construction not permitted on weekends, or national holidays.
   7.4       NOISE SOURCES
   Typical major noise sources in communities like Loma Linda include:
   x    Cars, trucks and buses;
Chapter 7.0                                              Noise Element                                                             7-5

                                                                                       Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                  Noise Element
   x    Routine community activities of daily life;
   x    Trains along railroad tracks; and
   x    Aircraft near airport
                                                                 The most important difference between
                                                                 transportation and non-transportation noise
                                                                 sources is that municipalities can generally
                                                                 exercise control on the level and duration of
                                                                 noise at the property line of any non-
                                                                 transportation source of noise. Cities can
                                                                 adopt noise exposure standards for noise
                                                                 levels generated from mobile sources, such
                                                                 as trucks, trains or planes, and then make
                                                                 permitting decisions regarding sensitivity of
                                                                 land uses in areas with excessive noise.
                                                                 Cities play a role in enforcing the requirement
                                                                 in the state vehicle code regarding properly
                                                                 operating mufflers and may also set speed
                                                                 limits or weight restrictions on streets. In
                                                                 general terms, a city’s actions are primarily
                                                                 proactive with respect to stationary noise
            Transportation is the dominant noise source
                                                                 sources versus reactive for those mobile
                                                                 sources beyond City control.
   Automobiles, buses, trucks and trains dominate transportation noise in Loma Linda. Bus service is
   provided on major streets, collectors, and local streets within the Loma Linda circulation system.
   Measurements have shown that background noise levels on “quieter” major streets in Loma Linda are
   near 60 dBA while the “noisier” streets are about 65 dBA at the nearest residences. An increase of 3
   dB is generally considered the threshold level at which people complain that their noise quality has
   become noticeably degraded. Major transportation noise sources in the City of Loma Linda include
   traffic on I-10, Redlands Boulevard, Barton Road, Anderson Street, Mountain View Avenue, and
   Mission Road and trains on the UPRR lines.
   The City does not have industrial uses that would generate high noise levels to be considered
   stationary noise sources.
   Rail noise occurs at intervals from the operations on the Union Pacific rail lines, which currently
   transports only freight. Although the City supports the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA)
   light rail transit service through the City, currently the City has no Metrolink service.
   There are no airports in Loma Linda and the nearest Airport is the San Bernardino International
   Airport. This airport serves only small aircraft and does not offer commercial flights. The City is
   outside the 60 dBA CNEL airport noise contours of the Airport. Therefore, aircraft noise is not typically
   a problem in the City. The Jerry L. Pettis Memorial Medical Center and the Loma Linda University
   Medical Center operate helipads on the roof of each hospital. The hospitals and the County of San
   Bernardino Sheriff’s Search and Rescue Division use these helipads. Flights to the hospitals average
   one to two per day primarily between 3:00 p.m. and midnight. The Search and Rescue Division uses
   the helipads only on an as-needed basis, generally averaging one flight a month.
Chapter 7.0                                        Noise Element                                                7-6

                                                                                         Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                     Noise Element
   7.5       EXISTING NOISE MEASUREMENTS
   Twelve representative locations throughout the City were monitored for existing noise exposure.
   Measurements were made using a Larson-Davis Model 720 sound level meter on August 29, 2001.
   Each site was monitored for 20 minutes. Measurement sites were chosen to provide a representative
   spectrum of the community’s existing noise environment, focusing on locations where there might be
   a reasonable expectation of quiet, such as hospitals and residences. Several commercial sites near
   busy streets were included to provide some basis for comparison with some of the less noisy
   locations.
   Results of the community noise monitoring survey are summarized in Table 7.D. The quietest
   locations were homes on low-traffic streets or places where traffic was screened by topography or
   distance.      As     would    be     expected,   the     noisiest        locations      were     along      major
   arterials/expressways/freeways or near commercial areas. Many sites were heavily street-oriented,
   and many readings were taken at corners where traffic noise from two roadways was combined.
   Since most people cannot detect ambient noise differences of less than 3 dBA, and it takes a
   doubling of traffic volumes to increase noise levels by 3 dBA, very few Loma Linda receiver sites are
   likely to have experienced a perceptible change in noise levels in the past few years.
  Table 7.D: Ambient Noise Monitoring August 29, 2001
                                Start Time       Leq
            Location                                        Noise Sources                        Remarks
                                (Duration)     (dBA)
   1.   Court Street off      9:20 a.m.         60.3   Traffic on Anderson          Monitor is approx. 50 feet from
        Anderson Street       (20 minutes)             Street, light traffic on     Anderson Street, facing west.
                                                       Court Street, birds.         Wind is 0-5 mph.
   2.   Corner of Anderson    9:50 a.m.         71.8   Traffic on Anderson,         Monitor is approx. 30 feet from
        Street and Stewart    (20 minutes)             lighter traffic on           Anderson Street and 15 feet
        Street                                         Stewart, birds.              from Stewart Street, facing west.
                                                                                    Wind is 0-5 mph.
   3.   Corner of Campus      10:20 a.m.        64.7   Traffic on Campus and        Monitor is facing southwest
        Street and University (20 minutes)             University streets.          approx. 15 feet from inter-
        Avenue                                         Pedestrians.                 section. Wind is 0-5 mph.
   4.   Corner of Barton      10:55 a.m.        69.3   Traffic on Barton and        Monitor is on southwest corner,
        Road and Anderson     (20 minutes)             Anderson. Pedestrians        facing northeast approx. 20 feet
        Street                                                                      from intersection. Wind is 0-5
                                                                                    mph.
   5.   Barton Road and       11:25 a.m.        67.5   Traffic on both streets      Monitor is on northeast corner
        Benton Street         (20 minutes)             passing through              facing south, approx. 30 feet
                                                       intersection.                from Barton Road and 10 feet
                                                                                    from Benton Street Wind is 0-5
                                                                                    mph.
   6.   Mountain View         12:05 p.m.        74.8   Traffic on both streets      Monitor is approx. 30 feet from
        Avenue and Lawton     (20 minutes)             coming through               Mt. View Avenue facing east.
        Avenue                                         intersection. Birds.         Wind is 0-5 mph.
   7.   Railroad tracks near  1:00 p.m.         77.2   Light traffic on road,       Monitor is on western side of
        Nevada Street         (20 minutes)             birds, winds. Train          tracks facing east approx. 30
                                                       passing through - 3          feet from tracks. Wind is 0-5
                                                       minutes of actual            mph.
                                                       noise, 2 minutes as the
                                                       train passed by.
Chapter 7.0                                    Noise Element                                                         7-7

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                 Noise Element
  Table 7.D: Ambient Noise Monitoring August 29, 2001 (continued)
                                   Start Time    Leq
            Location                                       Noise Sources                    Remarks
                                   (Duration)  (dBA)
   8.   New Jersey Street        1:35 p.m. (20  62.4   Traffic on Barton,       Monitor is approx. 100 yards
        and Barton Road          minutes)              occasional vehicle on    from Barton Road and approx. 8
                                                       New Jersey. High         feet from New Jersey Street
                                                       winds.                   facing south. Wind is 15-20
                                                                                mph.
   9.   Mission Road near        2:10 p.m.      59.1   Traffic on Mission, high Monitor is approx. 20 feet from
        historical landmark      (20 minutes)          winds and birds.         road facing west. Wind velocity
                                                                                is 15-20 mph.
   10. Mobile home park at       2:35 p.m.      63.7   Traffic on Redlands,     Monitor is approx. 15 feet from
        southwest corner of      (20 minutes)          winds.                   Redlands Boulevard facing
        Redlands Boulevard                                                      south. A brick wall separates the
        and Mt. View                                                            monitor from Redlands
        Avenue                                                                  Boulevard. Wind is 5-10 mph.
   11. Richardson Road           3:05 p.m.      65.7   Traffic on Richardson    Monitor is approx. 15 feet from
        near I-10                (20 minutes)          Road and I-10. Winds.    road, facing south. Redlands
                                                                                Boulevard is approx. 400 yards
                                                                                away; I-10 is approx. 200 yards
                                                                                to the north. Wind is 10-15 mph.
   12. Taft Street and           3:35 p.m.      69.4   Traffic on Redlands      Monitor is approx. 25 feet from
        Redlands Boulevard       (20 minutes)          Boulevard, light traffic Redlands Boulevard, facing
                                                       on Taft Street.          south. Wind velocity is 0-10
                                                       Ambulance with sirens    mph.
                                                       on passing by.
   Source: LSA Associates, Inc., August 2001.
   7.6       IDENTIFIED ISSUES
   Although there are no significant citywide noise problems, there are locations in the City that are
   subject to noise impacts. These locations consist primarily of areas adjacent to major streets. It is
   likely that some longtime Loma Linda residents have noticed that noise levels have become
   significantly degraded within the last two decades. Roadways that have maintained a reasonable
   travel speed despite moderate volume increases are probably only slightly noisier. Clearly, traffic
   noise is a pervasive problem in an urbanized environment that will not change much in Loma Linda
   until some quieter mode of transportation replaces the combustion engine vehicle.
   Because of the hour of the flights and the nature of the need, helicopters to the VA Medical Center
   and Loma Linda University Medical Center may cause noise levels sufficient to cause sleep
   interruption during nighttime hours. However, overflights are usually brief, lasting only a few minutes.
   The railroad track that traverses the City serves both passenger and freight trains. The passage of
   these trains through the City creates noise problems not only from the movement of the trains
   themselves but also from the sounding of train whistles. As the number of trains using the track
   increases in the future, the noise pollution created by the trains will increase.
   Should the proposed off-ramp from the I-10 Freeway at Evans be constructed, a new source of noise
   impacts is likely to be created. Not only will new traffic noise be created, but there will also be short-
   term noise during construction. Existing sensitive receptors need to be considered in the design of the
   off-ramp.
Chapter 7.0                                    Noise Element                                                     7-8
                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                              Noise Element
   7.7       NOISE ABATEMENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE NOISE CONTOUR
             TABLE
   Three basic mechanisms are effective at reducing excessive noise exposure: 1) reducing the strength
   of the noise at the source; 2) increasing the distance between the source and the receiver; and 3)
   placing an obstruction between the noise source and the receiver. The potential future noise contour
   map for the City of Loma Linda based upon build out of the proposed land uses and completion of the
   Master Plan of Arterial Highways denotes the areas in the City susceptible to excessive noise in the
   future (Figure 7.1).
   Although State and Federal law establish vehicular noise emissions standards, local agencies can
   play a significant part in reducing traffic noise by controlling traffic volume and congestion. Traffic
   noise is greatest at intersections due to acceleration, deceleration and gear shifting. Measures such
   as signal synchronization can help minimize this problem. Likewise, reduction of congestion aids in
   reduction of noise. This can be accomplished through the application of traffic engineering techniques
   such as channelization of turning movements, parking restrictions, separation of modes (bus, auto,
   bicycle, pedestrian), and restrictions on truck traffic.
   Noise caused by traffic volumes can also be reduced with incentive programs for use of public transit
   facilities and high-occupancy vehicles, staggering of work hours, and land use controls. Vehicle trips
   can be turned into pedestrian trips with integration of housing and employment into the same project
   area and affordable housing in proximity to employment, shopping, and public transit facilities, among
   other techniques.
   Placement of walls, landscaped berms, or a combination of the two between the noise source and the
   receiver can accomplish noise reduction. Garages or other buildings may be used to shield dwelling
   units and outdoor living areas from traffic noise. In addition to site design techniques, noise insulation
   can be accomplished through proper design of buildings. Nearby noise generators should be
   recognized in determining the location of doors, windows, and vent openings. Sound-rated windows
   and wall insulation are also effective.
   7.8       POLICIES
   Following are the City policies pertaining to noise.
   7.8.1 Guiding Policy
   Strive to achieve an acceptable noise environment for existing and future residents of the City of
   Loma Linda.
   7.8.1.1     Implementing Noise Policies for Land Use and New Development
   a. Achieve and maintain exterior noise levels appropriate to planned land uses throughout Loma
        Linda as indicted below:
        x    Residential
                 Single-Family 65 dBA within rear yards.
                 Multifamily: 65 dBA within private yard or enclosed balcony spaces.
                 Single/Multifamily, indoor noise level: 45 dBA with windows closed.
Chapter 7.0                                    Noise Element                                                 7-9
                                                                                                                                                                                   $
                                                                                                                                                                                   `
                                                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                        E REDLANDS BLVD                                                 REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                ANDERSON ST
                                             EVANS ST
                                                                                                                                                MI
                                                                                            VAN LEUVEN ST                                            SS
                                                                                                                                                        ION
                                                                                                                                                            R   D                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                          STEWART ST
                                                                                                                             MOUNTAIN VIEW AV
                    UNIVERSITY AV
                                                                              PROSPECT AV
                                                   CAMPUS ST                                     BENTON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BARTON RD
                                                                               BARTON RD
                                                                                            LAWTON AV        LOMA LINDA DR                      LAWTON AV
                                                                                                                                                                    BRYN MAWR AV       WHITTIER AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BEAUMONT AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 7.1
                                                MODELED ROAD SEGMENT*
    N
                                                CENTER-LINE TO 65 CNEL (FEET)
    !                                   *ASSUMES ALL FUTURE ROADWAYS COMPLETE
0        1,000       2,000 Feet
                                                I-10 CENTER-LINE TO 65 CNEL (FEET)                                                                                                                    City of Loma Linda General Plan
    S
SOURCE: Basemap - Thomas Bros. 2001                                                                                                                                                                  FUTURE NOISE CONTOURS
I:\LLD0701\Reports\Traffic\Orchard_Park\fig7-1_noise_contour.mxd (06/21/04)
                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                             Noise Element
         x    Schools
                 Classrooms: 65 dBA exterior noise environment at the classroom location.
                 Play and sports areas: 70 dBA.
         x    Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes: 60dBA exterior noise environment at the
              building location.
         x    Commercial/Industrial: 70 dBA exterior noise environment at the building location, unless
              additional interior mitigation is provided.
   b. Maintain a pattern of land uses that separates noise-sensitive land uses (e.g., residential,
       churches, schools, hospitals) from major noise sources to the extent possible, and guide noise-
       tolerant land uses into the noisier portions of the Planning Area.
   c.  Require new developments to limit noise impacts on adjacent properties through acoustical site
       planning, which may include, but is not limited to the following actions:
       x    Increased setbacks from noise sources from adjacent buildings;
       x    Screen and control noise sources, such as parking, and loading facilities, outdoor activities
            and mechanical equipment;
       x    Use soundproofing materials and double-glazed windows;
       x    Retain fences, walls, and landscaping that serve as noise buffers;
       x    Orient delivery, loading docks, and outdoor work areas away from noise-sensitive areas;
       x    Cluster office, commercial, or multifamily residential structures to reduce noise levels within
            interior open space areas.
   d. Where new development (including construction and improvement of roadways) is proposed in
       areas exceeding the noise levels identified in the General Plan, or where the development of
       proposed uses could result in an increase of more than 3.0 dBA above existing background
       noise, require a detailed noise attenuation study prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer to
       determine and incorporate appropriate mitigation into project design and implementation to
       reduce potential noise levels to acceptable noise levels as identified in the General Plan.
   e. Utilize site design and architectural design features to the extent feasible to mitigate impacts on
       residential neighborhoods and other noise-sensitive uses. In addition to sound barriers, design
       techniques to mitigate noise impacts may include, but are not limited to:
       x    Increased building setbacks to increase the distance between the noise source and sensitive
            receptors.
       x    Orienting buildings that are noise-compatible with adjacent to noise generators or in a
            manner that shields noise-sensitive uses.
       x    Orienting delivery, loading docks, and outdoor work areas away from noise-sensitive uses.
       x    Placing noise tolerant activity areas, (e.g., parking) between the noise source and sensitive
            receptors.
   f.  Provide double glazed and double paned windows on the side of the structure facing a major
       noise source, and place entries away from the noise source to the extent possible.
   g. Continue enforcement of California Noise Insulation Standards (Title 25, Section 1092, California
       Administrative Code).
Chapter 7.0                                      Noise Element                                            7-11
                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                             Noise Element
   h. Discourage new projects that have potential to create ambient noise levels more than 5 dBA
       above existing background noise within 250 feet of sensitive receptors, (e.g., schools, hospitals,
       churches, residential uses, etc.).
   i.  Require new noise sources to use best available control technology (BACT) to minimize noise
       from all sources.
   j.  Ensure that construction activities are regulated as to the hours of operation in order to avoid or
       mitigate noise impacts on adjacent noise-sensitive land uses.
   k.  Require proposed development adjacent to occupied noise-sensitive uses to implement a
       construction-related noise mitigation plan that identifies the location of construction equipment
       storage and maintenance areas, and documents the methods that will be used to minimize
       impacts on adjacent noise-sensitive land uses, including, where needed, installation of temporary
       noise barriers.
   l.  Require that all construction equipment utilize noise-reduction features (e.g., mufflers and engine
       shrouds) that are no less effective than those originally installed by the manufacturer.
   7.8.1.2     Implementing Noise Policies for Circulation and Transportation Noise
   a. Implement measures – which may include reduced speed limits, improved paving texture, and
       traffic controls – to assist in reducing noise levels to acceptable levels (as defined in Section
       7.8.1.1.a.) in areas where noise standards are presently or will be exceeded.
   b. Work with Caltrans and SANBAG to include noise mitigation measures in the design and
       operation of the proposed new Evans Street off-ramp. Design and operation measures may
       include synchronized traffic controls, landscaping berms, and improved paving textures.
   c.  Work with the administrators of the area hospitals that have, or plan to have, helicopters to
       coordinate non-emergency helicopter service during normal business hours to help reduce
       potential noise impacts to nearby residential neighborhoods.
   d. Work with public transit agencies to ensure that the buses, vans, and other vehicles used rely on
       the best available control technology to minimize noise.
   e. Participate and monitor the plans to continue the conversion of Norton Air Force Base to the San
       Bernardino International Airport to ensure that no additional adverse noise impacts will result in
       the City.
   f.  Work with the passenger and freight train operators to establish “quiet zones” (areas where train
       whistles are not sounded) within the City.
Chapter 7.0                                    Noise Element                                             7-12

                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                        Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.0      PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
   The Public Services and Facilities Element is concerned with the provision of public services,
   community facilities, and utility systems, which promote and enhance the daily activities of all Loma
   Linda citizens. Many of these systems, including wastewater treatment, and the provision of water,
   natural gas, electricity, and telecommunications, act as catalysts for urban growth and development.
   These facilities must be in place for growth to occur in an area. Other facilities are also necessary to
   serve both existing and new development. These facilities include solid waste disposal, parks,
   libraries, educational facilities and service, and the delivery and availability of police, fire, and
   health/medical services. In addition, this element focuses on City’s current service levels of the
   existing facilities and services.
   The purpose of the Public Services and Facilities Element is to identify and plan for the public
   services necessary to serve the functional needs of Loma Linda as it grows in area and population.
   The focus of this Element is on the capital facilities and public services needed to support build out of
   the land uses identified in the Land Use Element while maintaining a full range of high-quality public
   and private services. This Element sets forth standards desired by the community for its fire and
   police services, library services, public schools, private institutions, public utilities, and solid waste
   management.
   In accord with the provisions of California Government Code Sections 66000 et seq., all development
   projects as defined therein shall be required to pay development fees to cover 100 percent of their
   pro rata share of the cost of any public infrastructure, facilities, or services, including without limitation
   roads, sewer, utility, police, and fire services, necessitated as a result of the approval of such
   development. The City Council shall set and determine development fees sufficient to cover 110
   percent of their pro rata share of the estimated cost of such public infrastructure, facilities, and
   services based on appropriate cost-benefit analyses, as required by the provisions of California Law.
   8.1      FIRE PROTECTION
   The Fire and Rescue Division of the Department of Public Safety provide fire protection. Fire
   Station 251, located at 11325 Loma Linda Drive, services the City of Loma Linda. The Fire Station
   houses the equipment listed in Table 8.A.
Chapter 8.0                        Public Services and Facilities Element                                        8-1

                                                                                      Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                        Public Services and Facilities Element
   Table 8.A: Loma Linda Fire and Rescue Division Equipment as of February 2004
                       Equipment                                           Capacity/Function
   Two triple-combination engines                      1,500 gallons per minute; structure fires, etc.
   One aerial multi-purpose ladder truck               2,000 gallons per minute, 102-foot aerial.
   One brush engine                                    750 gallons per minute; wildland fires
   One water tender                                    750 gallons per minute; 1,500-gallon tank.
   One paramedic fire/rescue squad                     Medical aid and rescue
   One portable lighting/rehab trailer                 Lighting and rehab support
   One rescue/backup paramedic squad                   Rescue and Haz Mat equipment
   The Department of Public Safety’s Fire and Rescue Division currently consists of two Chief Officers,
   six Captains, six Engineers, and six Firefighter/Paramedics. Additionally, the Division has 10 part-time
   Firefighters participating in the Paid Call
   Program. The average 24-hour shift consists of
   two      Captains,      two      Engineers,     two
   Firefighter/Paramedic, and two part-time
   Firefighters. This set of personnel normally
   staffs an Engine Company the Paramedic
   Rescue Squad and either an additional engine
   or the truck. The Fire and Rescue Division
   handles structural, wildland, vehicle, and
   refuse fire suppression, fire investigation,
   heavy rescue, technical rescue, confined-
   space rescue, hazardous materials response,
   vehicle     extrication,    emergency      medical
   procedures, building collapse, train derailment,
   CPR/First-aid training, and fire hydrant testing.
                                                                       Paramedic fire rescue truck
   The Department of Public Safety’s Community Safety Division consists of one Fire Prevention
   Inspector, two Code Enforcement Officers, contract animal control services, and one Parking Control
   Officer. This Division handles fire plan checks, fire prevention inspections, weed abatement, public
   fire safety and fire extinguisher training, traffic control, fire public education, disaster preparedness,
   municipal code enforcement, animal control services, and parking enforcement.
   Response time varies within the City and is difficult to measure due to the daily influx of traffic from
   the University and the related medical center. The Fire and Rescue Division is currently experiencing
   an approximately 11 percent increase in call volume (2003 over 2000) at this time. Additionally, the
   Department is experiencing a number of simultaneous calls (approximately 25% of all calls). To
   ensure adequate fire protection services in an emergency, the City of Loma Linda maintains a joint
   response/automatic aid agreement with the fire departments in neighboring cities including Colton,
   Redlands, and San Bernardino. The Department also participates in the California Master Mutual Aid
   Agreement.
   8.1.1 Identified Fire Protection Issues
   The southern portion of the City, including the Hillside Initiative and adjacent hillside areas, has been
   identified by the Public Safety Department as an area that may need a second station for several
   reasons. First, these hills lie within the City’s identified Hazardous Fire Area. Second, there is an
   extended drive time into the southern hill area from the headquarters station. Third, future
   development is likely to occur in this area. The need to expand services is being addressed in the
Chapter 8.0                          Public Services and Facilities Element                                   8-2

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Public Services and Facilities Element
   budgetary process due to a rapidly increasing rate of calls for service. Along with a new station, the
   City will need the equipment and personnel to service the area.
   8.1.2 Guiding Policy
   Provide an adequate number of fire stations, along with fire fighting personnel and equipment to
   protect the residents and businesses of Loma Linda.
   8.1.2.1      Implementing Policies
   a. Assess the short-term and long-term needs of the Department of Public Safety to ascertain how
         the Fire and Rescue Division should grow to serve Loma Linda adequately.
   b. All discretionary development projects shall be reviewed by the Department of Public Safety to
         ensure that a five-minute response time (including three-minute running time) can be maintained
         for 80 percent of emergency fire, medical, and hazardous materials calls on a Citywide response
         area basis.
   c.    Conduct an annual assessment of the adequacy of facilities and services serving Loma Linda,
         personnel and staffing needs, and capital needs, based on anticipated growth and the level of
         service standard set forth in Implementing Policy b, above. This assessment should be
         undertaken as part of the annual review of proposed capital projects required by the California
         Government Code Sections 65103(c) and 65410.
   d. Require implementation of fire protection measures, such as a buffer area of fire-resistant plants
         and non-combustible roofing in areas of high fire hazard as identified on Figure 10.3 and in
         Section 10.4.
   e. Continue to collaborate with other jurisdictions in the provision of back-up fire services in
         emergency situations.
   f.    Continue and expand Fire Education and Safety Programs.
   8.1.3 Fire Protection Facilities
   8.1.3.1      Performance Objective
   Maintain competent and efficient fire
   prevention and emergency fire, medical, and
   hazardous materials response services with
   first responder capability in order to minimize
   risks to life and property.
   8.1.3.2      Performance Standard
   Prior      to   approval     of   discretionary
   development projects, require written
   verification from the Fire Department that a
   five-minute response time (including three-
   minute running time) can be maintained for
   80 percent of emergency fire, medical, and
   hazardous materials calls on a citywide
   response area basis.                                          Loma Linda Public Safety Department
Chapter 8.0                        Public Services and Facilities Element                                  8-3
                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                        Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.2      POLICE PROTECTION SERVICES
   Police protection for the City is provided by and contracted through the San Bernardino Sheriff‘s
   Department, located at 655 East Third Street in San Bernardino, at Sheriff’s Headquarters, Central
   Station. The City has recently provided a workstation at City Hall, which provides deputies and a
   sheriff’s service specialist with an area for completing reports, conducting interviews, and crime
   prevention activities. The City shares the cost of law enforcement personnel and equipment with the
   City of Grand Terrace. Loma Linda University maintains its own security force with the City providing
   services on an as-needed basis.
   The sheriff personnel currently serving the City of Loma Linda includes 12 sworn officers and 5 non-
   sworn (civilian) employees. The present ratio of sheriff officers to population in the City of Loma Linda
   is 1 deputy per 2,478 residents. The volunteer staff includes 11 citizens on patrol and 13 Explorer
   Scouts. Sheriff vehicles include 5.5 marked units, 2 unmarked units, and 1 citizen patrol unit.
   The Sheriff Department divides the City into 16 reporting districts, and has an average emergency
   response time within the City of 3.25 minutes. The present ratio of sheriff deputy to population is 1
   deputy per 2,478 residents. Table 8.B details the City of Loma Linda’s Crime Statistics from 1995
   through 2000.
   Table 8.B: City of Loma Linda Crime Statistics
               Offense                    1995         1996         1997        1998       1999         2000
   Criminal Homicide                            0            0            1           2          0            3
   Forcible Rape                                6            6            7           4          2            8
   Robbery                                     22           26           21          15         14           12
   Assault                                    113           74          100          86         72           83
   Burglary                                   239          203          223        171          93         157
   Larceny – Theft                            407          471          506        407        374          321
   Grand Theft Auto                           325          291          251        160        106          105
   Grand Total                              1,112        1,071        1,109        845        661          689
   8.2.1 Identified Police Protection Issues
   A number of factors are considered in assessing the law enforcement needs for the community in the
   future. First, the level of calls for police services has been steadily increasing during the past several
   years and is now reaching the range of 55 to 60 per day. This trend is expected to continue. Second,
   while the resident City population is listed at 19,418, this number increases to an estimated 50,000
   during the day due to activities related to the LLU and related Medical Centers. The daytime
   population is expected to increase in the future. Third, community arterial roadways, including Barton
   Road, Redlands Boulevard, Anderson Street, and Mountain View Avenue, routinely handle over
   25,000 cars daily, which significantly impacts law enforcement transportation issues. Travel on these
   roadways is expected to increase in the future. Lastly, with several large housing and business
   developments in the final stages of planning, the population of Loma Linda could easily expand by a
   projected 25 percent during the next several years, which would increase the need for law
   enforcement services. These issues could significantly tax the available resources and impact the
   ability of the Sheriff’s Department deputies to respond to calls for service in the appropriate time
   frame.
Chapter 8.0                          Public Services and Facilities Element                                    8-4

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.2.2 Guiding Policy
   Provide for the protection of Loma Linda citizens and businesses from crime through maintenance of
   an adequate force of police officers, appropriate physical planning of new development, and a high
   level of public involvement in crime prevention.
   8.2.2.1    Implementing Policies
   a. Strive to provide an adequate police force to respond to emergency calls within an average of
       3.25 minutes from time of dispatch.
   b. Provide sufficient facilities and staff to ensure that the dispatch staff can collect emergency
       information and immediately forward requests for service to patrol units.
   c.  Annually assess crime prevention and law enforcement programs to evaluate the adequacy of
       Loma Linda’s services, facilities, and personnel needs based on short and long-term growth.
   d. Continue collaboration with other jurisdictions in providing back-up police services and where
       necessary, equipment and personnel.
   e. Continue working with Loma Linda University Security in providing as needed police services to
       the University community.
   f.  Promote the establishment and operation of neighborhood watch programs.
   g. Expand community outreach programs and promote community involvement in crime prevention.
   h. Require design features in new development to reduce potential for crime.
       x    Provide well-lighted and visible streets and street names, building entrances and addresses,
            recreation areas, and parking areas.
       x    Limit access into and between buildings to reduce escape routes and to make undetected
            entry difficult.
       x    Landscape development sites to permit surveillance of open areas and entryways, and avoid
            creating places for concealment.
       x    Within multifamily and non-residential developments, provide emergency vehicle access
            around buildings to the extent feasible.
       x    Within multifamily and non-residential developments, eliminate the potential for access to
            roofs by pallets, flag poles, etc.
   8.2.3 Police Service Facilities
   8.2.3.1    Performance Objective
   Maintain an active police force, while developing programs and police facilities that are designed to
   enhance public safety and protect the citizens of Loma Linda by providing an average response time
   to emergency calls of between seven and eight minutes from the time the call is received to the time
   an officer arrives.
   8.2.3.2    Performance Standard
   Maintain a force level, including sworn and community service officers assigned to community
   policing and prisoner custody details that is capable of responding to emergency calls within an
   average of 3.25 minutes from time of dispatch.
Chapter 8.0                         Public Services and Facilities Element                                  8-5

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.3       EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
   The City of Loma Linda’s roots are tied to education beginning with the “College of Medical
   Evangelists,” which opened in 1909 and later became Loma Linda University (LLU) in 1961. From
   the first nursing school to the seven schools comprising LLU today, the university has been a
   dominant force in the growth and development of the community. LLU is a Seventh-day Adventist
   educational health-sciences institution with 3,000 students. Seven schools and the Faculty of
   Religion comprise the University organization. The schools of Allied Health Professions, Dentistry,
   Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, Public Health, and the Graduate School offer more than 55
   programs. Curricula offered range from certificates of completion and associate in science degrees
   to doctor of philosophy and professional doctoral degrees. Students from more than 80 countries
   and virtually every state in the nation are represented in LLU’s student body. Postgraduate medical
   and dental education programs are also conducted with the LLU. In addition, the Medical Center is
   affiliated with 27 other educational institutions and provides training for a variety of allied health
                                                                specialists. An active research program
                                                                at the Medical Center supports 184
                                                                research projects in all major areas of
                                                                medicine and surgery, particularly
                                                                mineral      metabolism,     neurobiology,
                                                                cardiovascular, and AIDS research.
                                                                Within a short drive of Loma Linda are
                                                                three junior colleges: San Bernardino
                                                                Valley College, Crafton Hills College, and
                                                                Riverside Community College. The
                                                                University of California at Riverside, Cal
                                                                State University San Bernardino, the
                                                                University of Redlands, the California
                                                                Baptist College, and the Claremont
                                                                Colleges are available for upper division
                                                                and graduate courses.
                                                                Public education in the City of Loma Linda
                  Bryn Mawr Elementary School                   is provided by Redlands Unified School
                                                                District (RUSD) except for the western
   portion of the City, which is served by Colton Joint Unified School District (CJUSD). In addition to
   these school districts, one community day school, overseen by San Bernardino County
   Superintendent of Schools Office, is located in the City of Loma Linda. Loma Linda Academy, a
   private Seventh-day Adventist school, also provides schooling for kindergarten through high school
   grades.
   All the RUSD schools serving the City of Loma Linda have exceeded their original capacities
   (Table 8.C). To accommodate student enrollment, the three elementary schools are on a year-
   round schedule, which increases the seats available for students by approximately 25 percent.
   RUSD converted these schools to year-round schedules because funding was not available to
   construct new schools to meet enrollment demands. The recent implementation of 20:1
   student/teacher ratio significantly impacted the District’s elementary and middle schools. Portable
   classrooms have been and will continue to be placed on all campuses from year-to-year to meet
   student enrollment needs.
Chapter 8.0                       Public Services and Facilities Element                                   8-6

                                                                                                       Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                     Public Services and Facilities Element
   Table 8.C: Redlands Unified School District Enrollment
                                                          Capacity                                        Enrollment
                                                                                              2000–         2001–       Projected
               School                    Permanent            Portable          Total         20011          2002           2006
   Bryn Mawr Elementary (K-5)
   11680 Whittier Avenue                     605                311              916            891           946           1,075
   Loma Linda, CA 92354
   Smiley Elementary (K-5)
   1210 W. Cypress Avenue                    739                 25              764            681           663           1,024
   Redlands, CA 92373
   Victoria Elementary (K-5)
   1505 Richardson Street                    442                260              702            639           661            719
   San Bernardino, CA 92408
   Cope Middle School (6-8)
   1000 W. Cypress Avenue                   1,061               522             1,583         1,505         1,602           1,713
   Redlands, CA 92373
   Redlands High School (9-12)
   840 E. Citrus Avenue                     2,292               609             2.901         2,722         2,912           3,268
   Redlands, CA 92374
   1
     CBEDS: California Basic Education Date System. The state designates a day in October for reporting enrollment, which is used on
   year-to-year basis for comparison and reporting purposes. Special education students are not included.
   The western portion of the City of Loma Linda is within the boundaries of CJUSD. Currently, Reche
   Canyon Elementary School, Terrace Hills Middle School, and Colton High School serve this portion of
   the City. Individual school capacities along with current and projected enrollment at schools serving
   the City of Loma Linda within CJUSD are presented in Table 8.D.
   Table 8.D: Colton Joint Unified School District Enrollment
                                                                                                                      Projected
                                  School                                       Capacities           2000–20011       2001–20022
   Reche Canyon Elementary (K-6)
                                                                                    750                 702                723
   3101 Canyon Vista Drive, Colton CA 92324
   Terrace Hills Middle School (7-8)
                                                                                   1050                 951                979
   22579 De Berry Street, Grand Terrace CA 92313
   Colton High School (9-12)
                                                                                   2900                2,720             2,801
   777 W. Valley Boulevard, Colton CA 92324
   1
     CBEDS: California Basic Education Date System. The Designates a day in October for reporting enrollment, which is used
     on year-to-year basis for comparison and reporting purposes. Special education students are not included.
   2
     Projections are based on a District-wide annual growth of approximately 3% per year.
   Loma Linda Academy, a private educational institution associated with the Seventh-day Adventist
   Church, has three campuses on 45 acres located on Anderson Street, south of I-10. The academy
   has a current capacity of 1,550 students. However, through creative arrangements, the school is able
   to accommodate a current enrollment of 1,648 students. The school’s projected enrollment is shown
   in Table 8.E.
Chapter 8.0                               Public Services and Facilities Element                                                     8-7

                                                                                              Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                               Public Services and Facilities Element
   Table 8.E: Loma Linda Academy Enrollment
    Grade Level        2000–2001        Projected 2001–2002           Projected 2002–2003           Projected 2003–2004
         K-5                628                   647                           666                           686
         6-8                411                   423                           435                           448
        9-12                609                   627                           646                           665
        Total              1,648                 1,697                         1,747                         1,799
   Projected enrollment is based on a 3% annual growth. Enrollment has grown at 3% annually over the past 15 years.
   The San Bernardino County Superintendent of Schools oversees a County-operated day school in
   the northeast portion of the Planning Area. Known as the Mission Community School (MSC), this
   school offers an educational opportunity for students who have been expelled or are no longer
   permitted to attend schools in their appropriate school districts. The MCS accepts grades 7 through
   12 from surrounding school districts. As of January 22, 2002, enrollment ranged between 50 and 60
   students with maximum capacity ranging between 100 and 120 students. In January 2002, this
   educational facility had an unutilized classroom. Due to this surplus, it is expected to be able to
   accommodate future growth and educational needs.
   8.3.1 Identified Educational Issues
   The City of Loma Linda places a high priority on quality educational facilities. The high priority placed
   on schools by area residents is reflective of the family-oriented nature of the community. The City
   also takes pride in being the home of an internationally known university that plays a key role in the
   community’s economic well being.
   Although the construction of school is the responsibility of local school districts and not the City,
   municipal development policies, along with the ups and downs of the housing market, significantly
   affect the rate at which new schools must be built. As a result, close cooperation between the City
   and local school districts is essential both for the districts and the City to address the impact of new
   development on the all ready overcrowded educational facilities.
   School districts are exempt from local regulations and cannot be required to adhere to City General
   Plan policies. However, cooperation between the City and the School Districts is essential in order to
   provide high quality educational facilities. Present laws regulating school facility financing place
   responsibility on the State and local school districts. State law also caps development fees for
   schools, and limits the ability of cities to require new development to provide new school facilities. In
   general, payment of development fees established by local school districts is considered to be
   “mitigation in full” for the impacts of such development on schools, whether or not the maximum fees
   allowable under the law are adequate to construct new facilities.
   Additionally, there is presently only one public school located in the City of Loma Linda.
   Neighborhood schools are an asset to a community and more local public schools would enhance the
   livability of Loma Linda.
   8.3.2 Guiding Policy
   Facilitate the acquisition of sites for public and private educational institutions such that all school-age
   children have access to school facilities that are not overcrowded and that can provide superior
   educational opportunities.
Chapter 8.0                            Public Services and Facilities Element                                           8-8

                                                                                       Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                         Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.3.2.1      Implementing Policies
   a. Maintain clear, ongoing communications with area school districts on all matters related to the
        need for and provision of school sites and other administrative, educational, and recreational
        facilities. On a regular basis, exchange information with the County Superintendent of Schools on
        the Mission Community School. On a regular basis, exchange information with the Redlands and
        Colton Unified School Districts on:
        x    The status of development review and construction;
        x    The capacity of schools serving Loma Linda residents;
        x    The status of site acquisitions by the districts; and
        x    Applicable student-generation factors by type of development.
   b. Assist the various school districts in developing school sites and facilities to serve all
        neighborhoods in the City.
   c.   As more schools are built within the City, maximize the joint use of facilities by the City and the
        local school districts (including joint school/park sites and, where feasible, joint use of athletic
        fields, community meeting facilities, and provision of child and senior care facilities) by developing
        joint funding for such facilities through a combination of school district and City sources, provided
        that City contributions to joint facilities are consistent with the availability of such joint facilities to
        meet non-school recreational and other community needs.
   d. Require new development to pay all legally established fees, provide capital facilities, and/or
        participate in land-based financing districts established by local school districts for the acquisition
        and development of school sites with adequate, permanent classroom space, as required by the
        local school districts and State law.
   e. Maintain land use regulations permitting the development of public and private educational
        facilities at appropriate locations within the Planning Area.
        x    Within lands planned for residential or mixed-use development, permit public and private
             schools along arterial and collector roads at the periphery of neighborhoods where traffic
             impacts created by the school on the local neighborhood can be minimized.
        x    Provide adequate buffer areas along common property lines with residential uses.
   f.   Work with Loma Linda University to provide public transportation services, circulation system,
        affordable housing, and other public services that contribute to the maintenance and long-term
        success of this institution.
   g. Cooperate and support joint public/private endeavors, such as a performing arts center, with
        Loma Linda Academy.
   h. Work with trade schools to locate new facilities in Loma Linda.
   8.3.3 School Facilities
   Recognizing that provision of school facilities is the responsibility of the school district, as set forth in
   State law (SB 50). The intent of the General Plan in setting forth objectives and a performance
   standard for school facilities is to require the maximum mitigation allowable by law.
   8.3.3.1      Performance Objective
   Provision of schools in locations that are readily accessible to student populations, along with
   sufficient facilities to provide educational services without overcrowding.
Chapter 8.0                          Public Services and Facilities Element                                         8-9
                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                        Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.3.3.2      Performance Standard
   Require new development to provide necessary funding and/or capital improvements to mitigate
   projected impacts on school facilities, as determined by the Redlands Unified School District.
   8.4       LIBRARY SERVICES
   The Loma Linda library facility is a branch of the San Bernardino County Library system. This library
   is located in a City-owned facility operated under the jurisdiction of the San Bernardino County Library
   and is funded by the State of California and
   San Bernardino County property taxes.
   The library has a collection of 46,267 items,
   including periodicals, and is staffed by 2 full-
   time and 8 part-time employees. The Loma
   Linda Branch Library currently provides the
   following resources and services: videos,
   compact discs, books on tape, foreign
   language materials, an African-American
   collection, four computers with Internet access
   and Microsoft Office, free literary services,
   interlibrary loan services, an online public
   access catalog, and a Countywide reference
   center. The Loma Linda Branch Library serves
                                                                        Loma Linda Branch Library
   an estimated population base of 20,900.
   8.4.1 Key Library Service Issues
   The Loma Linda Branch Library current facilities and services are only a quarter to half of what is
   needed to accommodate the current population of the City. The average ratio for public library
   facilities is 0.46 square feet per capita according to the 2000 Public Library Data Service Statistical
   Report, an annual publication of the Public Library Association.
   The County of San Bernardino released a facilities study in November 2001 that analyzed future
   needs of library facilities in San Bernardino County, including the City of Loma Linda, through the
   year 2021. According to this facilities study, the City of Loma Linda Branch Library will need to
   expand and renovate the existing facility to accommodate future growth. This study proposed a
   building size of 14,974 square feet, requiring 75 public and staff parking spaces. It was estimated that
   the expanded facility would increase the square footage per capita from the present 0.33 to 0.39 by
   the year 2021.
   Future library facility funding will be the responsibility of the City with assistance from the County for
   operation of the facilities. There are currently no capital improvement dollars at the County for
   improvement or expansion of library facilities.
   8.4.2 Guiding Policy
   Provide library facilities and services necessary to meet the needs of the community.
Chapter 8.0                        Public Services and Facilities Element                                   8-10
                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                        Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.4.2.1     Implementing Policies
   a. As the library facility is City-owned, continue to work with the San Bernardino County Library
       System to maintain the facility and secure library titles consistent with the standards of the
       American Library Association.
   b. Seek opportunities to expand and renovate the existing library facility by securing State and
       Federal funds for facilities and services.
   c.  Continue and explore new ways in which the City can support the goal of expanded facilities and
       services such as book sales, corporate sponsorships, and volunteer programs.
   d. Continue to seek State funding for library facilities which will service the residents of the City.
   8.5      MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES
   Private businesses and non-profit institutions
   provide many services that are beneficial to
   the citizens of the City of Loma Linda. The
   City benefits from private business and non-
   profit institutions offering childcare, youth
   programs and senior services. With the aging
   population, single-parent families, two-worker
   households, and the increasing problem of
   drug abuse, the community is dependent
   upon social services and programs offered
   by these agencies, businesses, and non-
   profits organizations. Some of these
   services, such as Shopping 4 Seniors and
   the Ronald McDonald House, are located in
                                                                  Loma Linda University Medical Center
   the City of Loma Linda. Other services, such
   as Inland Harvest, Big Brother, Big Sister of
   the Inland Empire, and Easter Seals of Southern California, are located in nearby communities. The
   City does not control the provisions of these services; however, City policies and actions can affect
   the availability of these services.
   Of particular importance to the City are the regionally and internationally known medical facilities,
   which provide the latest in health care services. The combination of Loma Linda University
   Community Medical Center, Loma Linda University Behavioral Medicine Center, Loma Linda
   University Proton Treatment Center, and the Loma Linda University Children’s Hospital, offers nearly
   900 beds for patient care. Loma Linda University Medical Center (LLUMC) operates some of the
   largest clinical programs in the United States in areas such as neonatal care, and is recognized as
   the international leader in infant heart transplantation and proton treatments for cancer. As the only
   referral (tertiary care) center for specialties hospital in the area, LLUMC is the only level-one regional
   trauma center, which means it meets a complex set of criteria and provides the highest level of
   complete care around the clock for Inyo, Mono, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties.
   In addition, a Veterans Medical Center located in the City of Loma Linda provides care for area
   veterans under the teaching auspices of LLU School of Medicine. The Jerry L. Pettis Memorial VA
   Medical Center is part of the Desert Pacific Healthcare Network, providing services to veterans in
   Southern California and Southern Nevada. Opened in 1977, this modern facility fulfills the agency’s
   threefold mission of patient care, research and teaching. The Medical Center provides a wide variety
   of services through inpatient; outpatient and home care programs. The major services provided are in
   the areas of general medicine, surgery, psychiatry, and neurology.
Chapter 8.0                         Public Services and Facilities Element                                  8-11

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                        Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.5.1 Identified Medical and Social Services Issues
   The General Plan does not control the provision of private businesses, non-profit organizations, or
   public agencies offering services to the community of Loma Linda. It does, however, establish policies
   to facilitate the availability of services in the City.
   8.5.2 Guiding Policy
   Encourage the continuance and the development of private and public medical facilities and human
   and social services in Loma Linda.
   8.5.2.1      Implementing Policies
   a. Provide for and encourage the development of facilities offering childcare and elder care by
        providing a reasonable range of sites where such facilities could be located.
   b. Collaborate with schools, businesses, non-profit agencies, religious organizations, law enforce-
        ment, and others to prioritize needs and establish programs and services for children and youth.
   c.   Encourage the development of a variety of housing and recreational options for senior citizens in
        areas close to services and transportation.
   d. Actively work with public, private, and non-profit service providers to create and expand
        opportunities for elder care facilities, programs, and services in Loma Linda.
   e. Provide for religious facilities and preschool facilities on arterial or collector streets.
   f.   Promote development of multi-use buildings/community centers that can be utilized for youth and
        teen activities and childcare.
   g. Encourage and support private businesses and public facilities and services that contribute to the
        maintenance and long-term success of the medical facilities in the City.
   h. Encourage and support businesses that would benefit from close association to the medical
        facilities to locate on sites designated for mixed-use development.
   8.6       PARKS AND SCHOOL GROUNDS
   The City owns and administers nine parks, varying in size
   and amenities from the ¼-acre Sun Avenue Portal Park to
   the 50-acre Hulda Crooks Park. Over 73 acres of parks
   and open space areas are located within the City, over 64
   acres of which are developed. The remaining 10 acres
   consist of acreage awaiting development. Table 8.F gives
   a detailed list of all existing parks, their locations, and the
   amenities they provide, also included are future park
   facilities planned for the City.
                                                                                 Hulda Crooks Park
Chapter 8.0                           Public Services and Facilities Element                                8-12

                                                                                                             Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                Public Services and Facilities Element
   Table 8.F: Existing Parks
                                                                                                         Basketball Courts                                                   Turf/Landscaping   Volleyball/Sport Court
                                                                       Barbecue Pits   Baseball Fields                       Picnic Tables   Tennis Courts   Tot Play Area                                               Youth Play Area   Trail/Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Comments
     Park Name                   Location                  Acres
   Hulda Crooks      Mountain View Ave and Beaumont          50        9                                                     9                               9                                  9                                          9
   Park              Avenue
   Leonard Bailey    Adjacent to Bryn Mawr Elementary        10                        9                                                     99 9                                                                                                             Proposed
   Park              School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   soccer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              field
   Elmer Digneo      East Side of Anderson Street, north           4   9                                 9 9                                                                                                             9
   Park              of Van Leuven Street and the UPRR
                     tracks and right-of-way
   Sun Avenue        Northwest corner of Sun Avenue and    0.16                                                              9                                                                                                                                Unim-
   Portal Park       Mountain View Avenue                                                                                                                                                                                                                     proved
   Baseball Park     Adjacent to Mountain View viaduct      5.1                        9                                                                                                                                                                      Little
                     that crosses over the UPRR tracks                                                                                                                                                                                                        League
                     and right-of-way and the San                                                                                                                                                                                                             field
                     Timoteo Creek Flood Control
                     Channel
   Cottonwood        Northwest corner of Cottonwood         0.9                                                                                                              9                                                                                Improved
   Road Park         Road and Mountain View Avenue                                                                                                                                                                                                            with pro-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              posed play
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              area
   Edison Easement Runs linearly through the City from      3.5                                                                                                                                                                            9                  Unim-
   Park            north to south about one half mile                                                                                                                                                                                                         proved
                   east of Mountain View Avenue
   Dawson Park
   Dog Park
   8.6.1 Future Park Facilities
   San Timoteo West Park Site, Cottonwood Road Park Site, and the Edison Easement are City
   planned parks that have not yet been developed. San Timoteo West Park Site is located east and
   adjacent to the Mountain View viaduct that crosses over the UPRR tracks and right-of-way and the
   San Timoteo Creek Flood Control Channel. Due to limited access to the site and related issues, the
   City has not decided if it will pursue acquisition of this site. The Cottonwood Road Park Site is located
   at the northwest corner of Cottonwood Road and Mountain View Avenue. The site has physical
   constraints in that it is about 360 feet long and 110 feet deep, extending west from the corner. Funds
   were included in the Fiscal Year 2001/2002 budget for landscaping, irrigation, fencing, walls, and
   outdoor seating at this park. A tot lot may also be included if there is enough funding. The Edison
   Easement runs linearly through the City from north to south about one-half mile east of Mountain
   View. A portion of the easement has been improved with a trail system, orange groves, and minimal,
   natural landscaping. It has always been the intent of the City to improve the entire length of the
   easement with the previously mentioned improvements. Currently, there are fund raising efforts
   underway to improve the easement from Beaumont Avenue to Whittier Avenue.
Chapter 8.0                       Public Services and Facilities Element                                                                                                                                                                                                     8-13
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                       Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.6.2 Recreation Programs
   The City has no formal recreation programs. Organizations and members of the public are able to
   obtain no-fee Park Use Permits for special events (e.g., family reunions, large picnics, weddings, and
   showers). Long-term use is granted to organizations for league use at Baseball Park.
   8.6.3 Parks Standards, Acquisition, and Maintenance
   The City has adopted a population to parkland acreage ratio of 5 acres per 1,000 population. With a
   population of 19,418 persons in January 2001 and 64.16 acres of parkland, the City currently has a
   park ratio of 3.30 acres. With the addition of the proposed parks, the park ratio would be 3.8 acres.
   The Community Development Department provides the public with information on park usage and is
   responsible for park facility planning. The Parks, Recreation and Beautification Committee oversees
   all park planning and construction efforts. The City’s Public Works Department provides maintenance
   of the parks (but only portions of the Edison Easement).
   The City imposes a Parks Facilities Development Impact Fee on all new residential development. In
   recent years, the City Council has provided some monies from the General Fund for park facilities.
   City staff is also utilizing grant funding from the California Department of Parks and Recreation and is
   in the process of identifying other sources of grant funding. The City’s Capital Improvements Plan
   (CIP) includes some of the park facilities and improvements that have been identified in the Parks
   Master Plans for Leonard Bailey and Hulda Crooks Parks.
   8.6.4 Identified Park Issues
   The previous Parks and Recreation Element, adopted in 1992, has not been implemented due to lack
   of funding and staff time. A current Citywide Parks Master Plan does not exist and the City does not
   sponsor an ongoing recreational program. The few park and recreation services that do exist, such as
   special events and processing of park permits are funded from a combination of funding sources,
   which include Development Impact Fees, various State grant programs, and the City’s General Fund.
   As noted earlier, the City currently falls short of the park ratio of 5 acres per 1,000 population. While
   the City can require new development to provide new parks at a rate of 5.0 acres of developed park
   land per 1,000 new residents, new development can not be required to make for the City’s existing
   shortfall in park land. It is, however, the desire of the City of Loma Linda to make up its existing park
   land deficit and achieve a ratio of 5.0 acres of park land per 1,000 at General Plan buildout. In
   addition to the number and size of parks, key factors in determining the effectiveness of a local park
   network include the type of facilities offered, the level of maintenance and the distribution of parks
   throughout the community. The City’s two community parks are both located in the southeastern
   portion of the City and are partially completed. Of the existing Neighborhood Parks, one is a
   temporary park, one is developed as a Little League baseball field, and one is soon to be relocated
   and developed only with outdoor picnic areas.
   Local public school sites can act as neighborhood park and recreation facilities when not in use.
   While school facilities are primarily utilized during daytime hours, joint use of athletic fields, ball
   courts, or play areas can substantially increase the amount of available usable open space,
   especially in urbanized areas of the City. The City has one public school site, Bryn Mawr Elementary
   School that is not under control of the City.
   8.6.5 Guiding Policy for Parkland Acquisition
   The City will acquire and/or gain control of sufficient parkland to develop a system of park,
   recreational, and open space lands of sufficient size and in the appropriate locations, including
Chapter 8.0                          Public Services and Facilities Element                                8-14

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                       Public Services and Facilities Element
   provision of a range of recreational facilities, to serve the needs of Loma Linda residents of all ages
   and attain a population-to-parkland acreage ratio of 5 acres per 1,000 population.
   8.6.5.1     Implementing Policies
   a. Provide a range of public parklands for use by the community including the following:
       x    Neighborhood Park. A park or playground generally 5 to 10 acres in size primarily developed
            to meet the recreational needs of citizens living within 0.5 to 1 mile.
       x    Joint School/Park. A neighborhood park development, improved, and maintained on or
            adjacent to school grounds by the City. Joint school/park facilities are utilized jointly by
            students and residents from the surrounding neighborhoods. Since school facilities are only
            available for use by the general public when school in not in session, only half of the total
            acreage is to be applied to the City’s park standard.
       x    Community Park. A larger park facility developed to meet the park and recreational needs of
            those living or working within a 3- to 5-mile radius. Community parks generally range in size
            from 10 to 60 acres.
       x    Sports Park. A park development designed to serve the needs of organized sports activities
            including youth and adult leagues. Generally ranges in size from 5 to 30 acres.
       x    Specialized Recreational Area. These include linear parks (trails), community centers, and
            preservation areas or structures. These facilities vary in size depending on use.
   b. Complete and maintain an up to date Parks and Recreation Master Plan setting forth a program
       to meet the recreational needs of citizens of all ages and achieve 5.0 acres of developed park
       land per 1,000 population distributed throughout the community.
   c.  Utilize the resources of national, regional and local conservation organizations, corporations, and
       non-profit associations and to identify and acquire environmentally sensitive land or preservation
       areas particularly in the hill areas in the southern section of the City.
   d. Encourage the preservation of significant natural features and development of landscaped
       parkways and trail systems in new development in addition to the required park development.
       (See Conservation and Open Space Section 9.2.6.3 and Land Use Section 2.2.6.3 regarding
       existing trail plan and development of utility easement trail.)
   e. Actively pursue the acquisition of land for neighborhood parks in areas currently under served.
   f.  Use existing City-owned properties to the extent feasible for development of a 20-30 acre sports
       park within Special Planning Area D and as a means eliminating the City’s existing park land
       deficit by buildout.
   g. Cooperate with the public school districts and private educational institutions serving the City to
       promote joint development and use of school sites and facilities located within the City and its
       Sphere of Influence.
   h. Continue to seek funding resources for the acquisition, design and construction of public parks,
       trails, and recreation facilities. Participate in federal and state bonds and grants programs to
       ensure that the City is taking full advantage of all appropriate local and non-local sources of
       financial assistance.
   i.  Provide incentives for private individuals to donate land and funds for park development to the
       City by establishing a means to accept tax-deductible donations, which may also include donation
       of equipment and facilities.
Chapter 8.0                        Public Services and Facilities Element                                  8-15

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Public Services and Facilities Element
   j.  Require the provision of private play space for children in attached residential developments.
   k.  To the extent feasible, acquire and develop open space linkages between existing and future
       park facilities.
   8.6.6 Guiding Policy for Park Improvement
   Provide for the orderly and comprehensive planning of parklands and resources through specific
   planning and Master Plan procedures.
   8.6.6.1    Implementing Policies
   a. Continue to implement improvements at existing park sites through yearly capital improvements.
   b. Encourage and support development of “grass roots” community-based programs for park
       improvements such as donations from organized sports like Little League Baseball.
   c.  Ensure that neighborhood and community parks are developed with facilities appropriate to all
       ages and interests including athletic fields; active play areas, passive open space, tot lots, and
       picnic areas.
   d. Park design shall conform to standards developed by the National Recreation and Parks
       Association for access, safety, health and protection of humans and domestic animal species.
   e. Provide for the needs of special populations including the physically and mentally challenged in
       park facility and program design.
   f.  Seek partnership opportunities with the private sector and with other public agencies to enhance
       park facilities and provide leisure time activities through mechanisms such as zoning, donation,
       purchase of easement, management strategies, or establishment of resource conservation and
       recreation authorities with coordinated taxing and management roles.
   8.6.7 Guiding Policy for Recreation Programs and Services
   Provide recreation programs that are responsive to the needs of the community and offered
   throughout the City.
   8.6.7.1    Implementing Policies
   a. Promote community events, family programs and activities and other programs that serve special
       populations of the community in terms of population, age groups and interests.
   b. Conduct citizen participation and preference surveys every 3-5 years to determine and/or adjust
       recreation needs data.
   c.  Fund City staff positions dedicated to parks and recreation services and programs.
   d. Use neighborhood residents as volunteer recreation leaders and aides, where feasible.
   e. Develop joint programs and participate in joint recreation services with other community groups
       and associations, as well as surrounding communities within the local or sub-regional area to
       enhance the programs available to the community.
   f.  Encourage ongoing community input into the management of park facilities and programs through
       the Parks, Recreation and Beautification Committee.
   g. Promote historical and cultural education through special programs, the operation of museums,
       preservation of historical sites, and promotion of special events.
Chapter 8.0                       Public Services and Facilities Element                                 8-16

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                        Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.6.8 Guiding Policy for Park Maintenance
   Maintain parkland and facilities in a manner that promotes community pride, exhibits cleanliness and
   security and reduces public liability.
   8.6.8.1      Implementing Policies
   a. Develop and maintain a maintenance/management schedule that identifies preventive
        maintenance, remedial maintenance and deferred maintenance programs for parkland and
        facilities including all structures, site improvements and equipment resources.
   b. Establish maintenance service programs that protect public property and preserve its value,
        intended use, life expectancy, safety, security and appearance.
   8.7       WATER UTILITIES
   The City of Loma Linda’s Department of Public Works, Water Division, provides the production and
   distribution of water within the City. The City’s water service area consists of approximately
   10.6 square miles, which includes the City and Sphere of Influence areas.
   The City currently, and for the planned future, obtains all of its water from groundwater wells in the
   Bunker Hill Basin, a vast aquifer underlying the eastern San Bernardino Valley. Groundwater in the
   Bunker Hill Basin is replenished from rainfall and snowmelt from the San Bernardino Mountains. The
   basin is considered to be a reliable source of water.
   In addition to the groundwater wells, the City has two emergency connections with the City of San
   Bernardino. No contract is in effect that guarantees a specified amount of water from the City of San
   Bernardino. Therefore, only limited quantities of water from outside sources may be available during
   emergency events.
   Loma Linda University and Loma Linda University Medical Center are located within the limits of the
   City, but have their own water production and distribution system. With the exception of fire flow, the
   City does not provide water service to the University on a normal basis. The City of Loma Linda
   maintains an emergency connection to the City of Redlands water system.
   The City has six existing operational storage reservoirs located in the south-central and southwest
   portions of the City. These reservoirs provide storage to the City’s five pressure zones. With the
   exception of a future Zone 4, storage capacity within the City is adequate. The City’s existing water
   distribution system consists of over 71 miles of pipeline ranging from 1.5 to 24 inches in diameter.
   The overall condition of the system is good. The existing pipelines are sufficient to convey water for
   existing demand conditions.
   8.7.1 Identified Water Opportunities and Issues
   The City’s current water resources should be sufficient to meet build out demand based on existing
   resources and anticipated increases from new development. However, new development will require
   the installation of additional transmission and distribution lines and possibly new wells. If the City
   chooses to purchase water from the San Bernardino Valley Municipal Water District, rather than drill
   and equip additional groundwater wells, an evaluation of the size and location of pipelines would be
   necessary.
Chapter 8.0                           Public Services and Facilities Element                                8-17

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                       Public Services and Facilities Element
   New development in the hillside areas will also require booster stations and additional storage
   reservoirs. To allow for future growth and full capacity at the Richardson wells, a 16-inch diameter
   pipeline, paralleling the existing 18-inch line along Richardson Street is required. Funding of these
   improvements may require the joint involvement of several developers and the City; however, the
   cost of providing infrastructure and any incremental costs of providing services to the area is to be
   internalized within the south hills area.
   8.7.2 Guiding Policy
   Provide a water system that supplies high quality water to serve existing and future needs of the City
   during peak use conditions, with sufficient water in storage reservoirs for emergency and fire
   protection.
   Water quality and availability are critical to the current and future residents of the City of Loma Linda,
   its planning area, and its sphere of influence. No new development shall be approved that endangers
   the quality or quantity of water delivered to households within the City.
   8.7.2.1    Implementing Policies
   a. Ensure that adequate water supply capacity and infrastructure is in place prior to occupancy of
        new development.
   b. Maintain existing levels of water service by preserving and improving infrastructure, replacing
        water mains as necessary, and improving water transmission facilities.
   c.   Update the City’s Water Master Plan as needed, with a review occurring at least every five years.
   d. As a part of the design of water systems, ensure adequate pumping and storage capacity for both
        drought and emergency conditions as well as the ability to provide City required fire flows.
   e. To ensure long-term good quality water, complete water quality assessments and implement
        appropriate mitigation activities.
   f.   Encourage water conservation as a means of preserving water resources. Require new
        development to be equipped with water conservation devices.
   g. Maintain existing levels of water service by protecting and improving infrastructure, replacing
        water mains and pumping facilities as necessary, and improving the efficiency of water
        transmission facilities.
   h. Use of alternative infrastructure (e.g., septic systems or water systems) may be permitted in
        areas where municipal systems feasibly cannot be extended in an economically feasible manner.
        The cost of either alternative infrastructure or the extension of municipal systems shall be the
        responsibility of the developer.
   i.   No development project shall be approved which would cause the quality of water delivered to
        Loma Linda households to fail to meet State and/or Federal water quality standards, or which
        would cause an increase in residential rates, or which would result in a restriction of water usage,
        except for those projects exempt under State and/or Federal law.
Chapter 8.0                        Public Services and Facilities Element                                  8-18

                                                                                         Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                            Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.7.3 Water Storage and Distribution Facilities1
   8.7.3.1        Performance Objective
   Maintain a water system that is capable of meeting the daily and peak demands of Loma Linda
   residents and businesses, including the provision of adequate fire flows and storage for drought and
   emergency conditions.
   8.7.3.2        Performance Standard
   Adequate fire flow as established by the Fire Department, along with sufficient storage for emergency
   and drought situations and to maintain adequate service pressures.
   8.8         WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT
   Wastewater (sewer) facilities within the City of Loma Linda are operated and maintained by the City’s
   Department of Public Works, Utilities Division. The City’s sewer service area consists of
   approximately 10.6 square miles, which includes the City and Sphere of Influence areas. Sewer line
   maintenance programs within the City are administered by the City while wastewater treatment
   services are provided under provisions outlined in a Joint Powers Agreement (JPA) with the City of
   San Bernardino. The City currently provides sewer service to one “island” of County of San
   Bernardino land located in the east central portion of the City. Expansion of the sewer system to
   accommodate new development is paid for exclusively by development fees levied on new
   construction. The operation and maintenance of existing sewer facilities is funded through monthly
   user fees levied on residential, commercial, and institutional users.
   The San Bernardino Municipal Water Department wastewater facility (primary and secondary
   wastewater treatment) is located in the City of San Bernardino. This facility has the capacity to
   process up to 33 million gallons per day (mgd) of effluent, and currently processes 28 mgd. The City
   of Loma Linda utilizes less than half of its assigned 7 mgd allotment. The average wastewater flow
   generated by the City during ultimate build out conditions is projected to be 6.27 mgd. The Rapid
   Infiltration/Extraction (RIX) (tertiary treatment) facility, located in the City of Colton, has a maximum
   daily capacity of 40 mgd and currently process 32 mgd. No new facilities are planned, nor is
   expansion of existing facilities.
   8.8.1 Identified Wastewater Management Issues and Opportunities
   Several small areas of the City, not connected to the City’s sanitary sewer system, rely on private
   septic systems. These areas include the southwestern portion of the City, the Peterson Tract (an
   unincorporated County “island”), and the eastern Sphere of Influence (both north and south of Barton
   Road. These septic systems have the potential of leaking into the groundwater.
   A number of areas in the existing sewer system have been observed to be deficient because they are
   undersized or structurally compromised. A number of sewer system rehabilitation and relief repairs
   have been designed but have not yet been constructed as of 2002.
   8.8.2 Guiding Policy
   Ensure a wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal system is available to serve existing and
   future residences, businesses, institutions, and other uses within the City of Loma Linda.
   1
         The performance objectives and standards for water storage and distribution relate to the provision of capital
         facilities. Policies related to water conservation and the use of reclaimed wastewater are contained in the
         Open Space/ Conservation Element.
Chapter 8.0                              Public Services and Facilities Element                                      8-19

                                                                                        Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                           Public Services and Facilities Element
   8.8.2.1       Implementing Policies
   a. Maintain existing levels of wastewater service by preserving and improving infrastructure,
        including repairing areas known to be deficient because they are undersized or structurally
        compromised (“hot spots”) and replacing mains as necessary.
   b. At a minimum, review and update the Master Plan of Sewer Facilities every three years. As part
        of the design of sewer systems, provide adequate capacity for average and peak conditions.
   c.   Encourage water conservation as a means of reducing sewage generation.
   d. Investigate the use of reclaimed wastewater. Where reclaimed wastewater can be economically
        delivered, require the installation of dual water system supplies for irrigation purposes and
        industrial purposes.
   e. To avoid the possibility of leakage to the groundwater, existing septic systems should be
        encouraged where feasible, to connect to the sewer system. New septic systems should only be
        used where sewer connection is infeasible and for low-intensity uses where they will not have a
        negative impact on the environment.
   f.   Use of alternative infrastructure (e.g., septic systems or water systems) may be permitted in
        areas where municipal systems feasibly cannot be extended in an economically feasible manner.
        The cost of either alternative infrastructure or the extension of municipal systems shall be the
        responsibility of the developer.
   8.8.3 Sanitary Sewer Collection and Treatment Facilities2
   8.8.3.1       Performance Objective
   A wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal system that is capable of meeting the daily and peak
   demands of Loma Linda residents and businesses.
   8.8.3.2       Performance Standards
   a. Sanitary sewers (except for force mains) will exhibit unrestricted flow in normal and peak flows.
   b. Prior to approval of discretionary development projects, require written verification that the
        proposed project will not cause the rated capacity of treatment facilities to be exceeded during
        normal or peak flows.
   8.9        SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
   The collection of solid waste within the City is contracted to Waste Management of the Inland Empire.
   Loma Linda University, Loma Linda University Medical Center and the Veterans Hospital maintain
   their own separate solid waste collection contracts. The City maintains a curbside residential
   recycling program, which allows residential customers to separate “green waste” and recyclable
   materials from other solid waste. Medical waste generated by medical facilities affiliated with Loma
   Linda University and the Veterans Administration Hospital is collected and disposed of apart from the
   remainder of the City’s municipal waste stream.
   Upon collection, “green waste” is transported to Inland Empire Composting in Riverside. This facility
   processes “green waste” (via grinding, chipping or other means) and sells the end product as ground
   cover, mulch, or soil additives.
   2
        The performance objectives and standards for water storage and distribution relate to the provision of capital
        facilities. Policies related to water conservation and the use of reclaimed wastewater are contained in the
        Open Space/ Conservation Element.
Chapter 8.0                             Public Services and Facilities Element                                      8-20

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                        Public Services and Facilities Element
   Recyclable materials collected in the City are transported to a transfer station in Moreno Valley,
   where they are consolidated with loads from surrounding municipalities. Upon consolidation,
   recyclable material is transported to segregation facilities operated by Quality Paper in either Pico
   Rivera or Carson. These facilities separate aluminum, paper, cardboard, glass, plastics and other
   materials from the incoming consolidated loads.
   Solid waste not diverted to recycling or composting facilities is transported to San Timoteo Solid
   Waste Disposal Site in Redlands. The County of San Bernardino Solid Waste Management Division
   operates this facility. The San Timoteo landfill site encompasses 366 acres of which 114 acres are
   actively utilized for solid waste disposal. The County of San Bernardino Solid Waste Division has
   stated that based on current permitted disposal rates and capacity, this landfill will reach capacity by
   May 2016. Adequate room at the San Timoteo landfill is available for further expansion.
   8.9.1 Identified Solid Waste Management Issues and Opportunities
   Assembly Bill 939 (Integrated Waste Management Act) requires every California city and county to
   divert 50 percent of its waste from landfills by the year 2000. Jurisdictions select and implement the
   combination of waste prevention, reuse, recycling, and composting that best meets the needs of their
   residents while achieving the diversion requirements of the Act. While major commercial,
   governmental, and institutional entities have contributed significantly to a reduction in the amount of
   solid waste generated in the City, (according to the State) Loma Linda has not yet met the 50 percent
   diversion mandate.
   8.9.2 Guiding Policy
   Reduce the amount of solid waste requiring disposal at landfills, enhancing the potential for recycling
   of the City’s solid wastes.
   8.9.2.1     Implementing Policies
   a. Continue contracting for solid waste collections and recycling.
   b. Encourage yard waste collection services for businesses and residents.
   c.   Work with San Bernardino County Solid Waste Division to ensure capacity at the San Timoteo
        landfill or alternative site after May 2016.
   d. Require provision of attractive, convenient recycling bins and trash enclosures in new multifamily
        residential and non-residential development.
   e. Continue and expand public education programs involving waste reduction, recycling,
        composting, waste to energy, zero-waste programs, and household hazardous waste.
   f.   Require builders to incorporate interior and exterior storage areas for recyclables into new
        commercial, industrial, and public buildings.
   g. Continue to follow State regulations by implementing City goals, policies and programs which
        include source reduction, reuse, recycling, and composting in order to achieve and maintain a 50
        percent reduction in solid waste disposal.
   h. Continue to participate in the waste-to-energy program.
   i.   Plan for the transformation or elimination of waste materials that cannot be reduced, recycled, or
        composted in order to eliminate the need for additional landfill space, save energy, reduce
        greenhouse gas emissions, reduce air and water pollution, and conserve forests.
Chapter 8.0                           Public Services and Facilities Element                                8-21

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                    Public Services and Facilities Element
   j.    Foster and support use of discarded products and waste materials to stimulate and drive local
         economic and workforce development.
   8.10 UTILITIES, TELECOMMUNICATIONS, AND CABLE TELEVISION
   Utilities and communication systems are necessary to maintain a safe and healthy living environment.
   Although largely not under the control of the City, desired standards for these services are set forth in
   this section.
   8.10.1 Electricity
   The Southern California Edison Company (SCE) provides electrical service in the Planning Area.
   SCE owns, operates, and maintains both above- and below ground facilities in the Planning Area.
   Most of SCE’s facilities are located in the street right-of-way. An energy sub-station is located near
   the intersection of Redlands Boulevard and Mountain View Avenue. In addition, there is a utility
   easement located in the eastern portion of the Planning Area extending from north to south. This
   utility easement containing energy transmission lines also provides a public trail in some portions.
   Energy transmission lines extend south from this utility easement into the South Hills and join other
   lines that run east to west.
   8.10.2 Gas
   The Southern California Gas Company (SGC) provides natural gas service in the Planning Area.
   SGC owns, operates and maintains underground gas lines in most of the public streets located
   throughout the Planning Area. Aside from these high-pressure distribution gas lines, SCG maintains a
   network of distribution gas lines that extend from these high-pressure lines.
   8.10.3 Telecommunications
   Verizon provides telephone service in the Planning Area and is a utility regulated by the California
   Public Utility Commission (PUC). In addition to providing standard phone service to the City of Loma
   Linda, Verizon offers additional telecommunication services upon consumer request. Verizon is able
   to provide Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) to the majority of the City. DSL is a service that allows the
   consumer to have a high-speed computer connection via an additional phone line.
   The Loma Linda Connected Community Project (LLCCP) is designed to promote the use of advanced
   telecommunications in the City. The program will provide Loma Linda businesses and residents with
   opportunities for voice, data, video, multimedia, home automation systems, environmental control,
   security, audio, television, sensors, alarms, and intercom. LLCCP is intended to provide a highly
   evolved system of fiber optic-based network components offering the fastest common denominator of
   communications infrastructure currently available throughout the City.
   The City uses this fiber optic the infrastructure as its communications link for public safety and
   municipal services. The same infrastructure serves as the pathway for residential and commercial
   broadband services, developed to be provided on a wholesale basis to various service providers and
   in a private public partnership run as a utility, by the City.
   8.10.5 Cable Television
   Cable Television is not legally classified as a “utility” and is not regulated by the California PUC.
   Regulation of all aspects of cable television is the responsibility of the Federal Communication
   Commission (FCC). Cable Television service is provided to the City of Loma Linda by Adelphia
   Communications. Adelphia Communications has been interlinked with the Telecommunication
Chapter 8.0                       Public Services and Facilities Element                                   8-22

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Public Services and Facilities Element
   Division equipment for emergency broadcasts. Cable service subscribers in the City of Loma Linda
   can be provided with standard cable service (analog) or digital cable service. Channel 3 is locally
   recognized as the community-access channel for the City of Loma Linda.
   8.10.6 Identified Utility Issues and Opportunities
   High capacity electrical transmission lines through Loma Linda are a defining feature of the
   community and the land under the lines can become an asset if cooperatively utilized. Currently the
   transmission lines occupy wide easements throughout the City. Some of these easements are
   developed with public trails. Completion and continued maintenance of these trails would enhance
   their recreational use and provide more useable open space for the residents of Loma Linda.
   Wireless communication requires the siting of a network of wireless facilities, such as panel antennas
   and satellite dishes. Potential impacts associated with this equipment include land use compatibility
   and aesthetics. Many opportunities are available to lessen the impact of these facilities including
   camouflaging the antennae as trees or incorporating the equipment in existing structures such as the
   rooftops of three-story buildings.
   8.10.7 Guiding Policy
   Ensure the provision of adequate communication and utility systems for existing and future residents
   and the business community.
   8.10.7.1 Implementing Policies
   a. Work with Southern California Edison to improve transmission line corridors with attractive,
        community-serving uses such as ornamental planting and recreational uses, including trails and
        playing fields.
   b. Require all new development projects and building additions exceeding 50 percent (50%) of the
        original structure that are within a fiber-optic master plan area to participate in the Loma Linda
        Connected Communities Program.
   c.   Require new development to underground all utility lines needed to serve future buildings and
        their occupants, and work with Southern California Edison to underground utilities in existing
        neighborhoods.
   d. Underground existing overhead utility lines throughout the City with available funding.
   e. Continue to monitor cable services and encourage competition to ensure the highest quality
        service consistent with Federal Communications Commission guidelines.
   f.   Encourage all new development to provide the technology to support multiple
        telecommunications facilities and providers such as multi-media products, wireless technologies,
        and satellite communications.
   g. Develop appropriate siting regulations for the installation of utilities and telecommunication
        facilities to minimize potential impacts to the community.
Chapter 8.0                        Public Services and Facilities Element                                8-23
                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                    Conservation and Open Space Element
   9.0       CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
   California planning law requires that every General Plan contain a Conservation Element and an
   Open Space Element (Government Code, Section 65302 [d] and [e]). The Conservation and Open
   Space Elements are combined in this General Plan and focus on the preservation and careful use of
   natural resources within the City. “Natural resources” include biological resources, water resources,
   air resources, visual resources such as scenic vistas, trees, and hillsides, and open space. Closely
   linked to natural resources, and also included in the Conservation and Open Space Element, are
   discussions of cultural resources (fossils, archaeological remains, and historical artifacts and
   buildings), and agricultural resources. Natural features and resources have shaped both the growth
   and form of Loma Linda and provide the attractive characteristics of the area. The hillsides at the
   southerly edge of the City provide a dramatic backdrop for the City and the San Timoteo Creek
   provides a water feature within the City. A central concern of the General Plan, therefore, is to
   continue to protect natural resource areas. In concert with this concern is the desire to reduce
   greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to global warming and increase the use of renewable
   resources that do not have a negative impact on the earth’s climate.
   9.1       PURPOSE
   Under State Law a Conservation Element shall include “…the conservation, development, and
   utilization of natural resources including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other
   waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources” (Government Code, Section
   65302(d). It is the intent of this element to define and determine how these finite resources are
   preserved and managed to assure their long-term viability.
   The State Legislature has declared that the preservation of open space land, “… is necessary not
   only for the maintenance of the economy of the state, but also for the assurance of the continued
   availability of lands for the production of food and fiber, for the enjoyment of scenic beauty, for
   recreation, and for the use of natural resources.” California Government Code Section 65560 defines
   “open space land” as any parcel or area of land or water that is essentially unimproved and devoted
   to one of the following uses:
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                        9-1

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Conservation and Open Space Element
   x    Open space for the preservation of natural resources including areas for the preservation of
        plant and animal life such as natural habitat areas; rivers, streams, lakes and their banks;
        and watershed lands.
   x    Open space used for the managed production of resources including forestlands,
        rangelands, agricultural lands, areas required for the recharge of groundwater basins, and
        areas containing major mineral deposits.
   x    Open space for outdoor recreation including areas of outstanding historic and cultural value;
        areas devoted to or particularly suitable for park and recreation purposes; areas serving as
        linkage between major recreation and open space reservations, such as utility corridors,
        streams and rivers, trails, and scenic highways.
   x    Open space for public health and safety including areas that require special management or
        regulation because of hazardous or special conditions, such as fault zones, unstable soil
        areas, steep slopes, high fire hazard areas, areas required for the protection of water quality
        and water reservoirs, and floodplains.
   9.2       NATURAL AND VISUAL OPEN SPACE RESOURCES
   The designation and preservation of open space is a major responsibility of all levels of government
   and private interests. No standard exists that quantifies the amount or type of open space individual
   communities should preserve. The provision of adequate open space resources may be achieved by
   the designation of existing open space areas, the conversion of or redevelopment of urban spaces, or
   the provision of open space areas in new development. The following open space resources are
   present within the Planning Area. Open space resources within the Planning Area are depicted in
   Figure 9.1 and Figures 9.1A through 9.1C.
   9.2.1 Natural Open Space
   The southerly one-third of the City consists of the rugged, hilly terrain known as the “South Hills.” This
   area provides a dramatic backdrop for the southerly edge of the City. Because of its natural state, this
   area represents a significant open space resource for City residents.
   9.2.2 Agricultural Lands
   Active citrus production presently exists north of Barton Road, east of California Street. Portions of an
   area between San Timoteo Creek and the Badlands, east of the extension of Benton Avenue, are
   also still utilized for citrus production. Urbanization within the Planning Area has gradually decreased
   the amount agricultural land in the Planning Area.
   9.2.3 Parks and Open Space
   As outlined and summarized in the Public Services and Facilities Element, Sections 8.3 (Educational
   Facilities) and 8.6 (Park and Recreation Facilities), a number of public schools and parks are located
   within the City. While school facilities are primarily utilized during daytime hours, joint use of athletic
   fields, ball courts, or play areas can substantially increase the amount of available usable open
   space, especially in urbanized areas of the City.
Chapter 9.0                          Conservation and Open Space Element                                      9-2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                           $
                                                                                                                                                           `
                                                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                        Targeted Open Space
                         E REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1996 Hillside Intiative Area
                                                                               REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Approximate Locations of Signature Ridgelines
                                                                ANDERSON ST
                                         EVANS ST
                                                                                                                                               MI
                                                                                            VAN LEUVEN ST                                           SS
                                                                                                                                                       ION
                                                                                                                                                           R   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                CALIFORNIA ST
                                         STEWART ST
                                                                                                                            MOUNTAIN VIEW AV
                     UNIVERSITY AV
                                                    CAMPUS ST                 PROSPECT AV       BENTON ST
                                                                               BARTON RD                                                                                                                        BARTON RD
                                                                                            LAWTON AV       LOMA LINDA DR                      LAWTON AV
                                                                                                                                                                   BRYN MAWR AV   WHITTIER AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                BEAUMONT AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0       1,000     2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SOURCE: Basemap AirPhotoUSA 2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 9.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OPEN SPACE RESOURCES
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2009_Jan\FIG9.1_OpenSpace.mxd (02/11/09)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                    $
                                                                                                                                                                                    `
                                                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                   City Sphere of Influence
                          E REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        San Jacinto Fault Zone
                                                                                                         REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1996 Hillside Intiative Area
                                                                              ANDERSON ST
                                            EVANS ST
                                                                                                                                                                        MI
                                                                                                                   VAN LEUVEN ST                                             SS
                                                                                                                                                                                ION
                                                                                                                                                                                    R   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CALIFORNIA ST
                                            STEWART ST
                                                                                                                                                     MOUNTAIN VIEW AV
                       UNIVERSITY AV
                                                       CAMPUS ST                               PROSPECT AV               BENTON ST
                                                                                                     BARTON RD                                                                                                                                      BARTON RD
                                                                                                                   LAWTON AV         LOMA LINDA DR                      LAWTON AV
                                                                                                                                                                                            BRYN MAWR AV   WHITTIER AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BEAUMONT AV
                                                                   Sa
                                                                        n
                                                                            Ja
                                                                               ci
                                                                                  n     to
                                                                                             Fa
                                                                                                u   lt
                                                                                                         Zo
                                                                                                              ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0       1,000     2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SOURCE: fault: USGS, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 9.1A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ci n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tZ                                         City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1996 HILLSIDE INITIATIVE
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2009_Jan\fig9-1A_HillsideInitiative.mxd (04/17/09)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                 $
                                                                                                                                                                                 `
                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Jacinto Fault Zone
                         E REDLANDS BLVD                                                              REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Measure V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rural Estate (0 to 1 du/ac)
                                                                           ANDERSON ST                                                                                                                                                                                 Expanded Hillside Area
                                         EVANS ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hillside Conservation Area (0 to 1 du/10 ac)*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Low Density Hillside Preservation (0 to 1 du/10 ac)**
                                                                                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                                VAN LEUVEN ST                                             SS
                                                                                                                                                                             ION                                                                                       Medium Density Hillside Preservation (0 to 1 du/5 ac)**
                                                                                                                                                                                 R   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CALIFORNIA ST
                                         STEWART ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Timoteo Creek Area
                                                                                                                                                  MOUNTAIN VIEW AV
                     UNIVERSITY AV
                                                    CAMPUS ST                               PROSPECT AV               BENTON ST
                                                                                                  BARTON RD                                                                                                                                      BARTON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Conditions Specified under Measure V
                                                                                                                LAWTON AV                                            LAWTON AV                                                                                   * Potential bonus of up to 1 du/5 acres when criteria of Hillside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Conservation designation are met.
                                                                                                                                  LOMA LINDA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ** Potential bonus when specified criteria of Chapter 2A of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 General Plan are met.
                                                                                                                                                                                         BRYN MAWR AV   WHITTIER AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BEAUMONT AV
                                                                Sa
                                                                     n
                                                                         Ja
                                                                            c   in
                                                                                     to
                                                                                          Fa
                                                                                             u   lt
                                                                                                      Zo
                                                                                                           ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0        1,000       2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SOURCE: Fault: USGS, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 9.1B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ci n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e                                            MEASURE V HILLSIDE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2009_Jan\fig9-1B_MeasureV.mxd (04/17/09)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                $
                                                                                                                                                                                `
                                                                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Sphere of Influence
                         E REDLANDS BLVD                                                           REDLANDS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Jacinto Fault Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Measure T
                                                                                    ANDERSON ST                                                                                                                                                                South Hills Preserve
                                            EVANS ST
                                                                                                                                                                   MI
                                                                                                                VAN LEUVEN ST                                        SS
                                                                                                                                                                          ION
                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CALIFORNIA ST
                                            STEWART ST
                                                                                                                                                MOUNTAIN VIEW AV
                      UNIVERSITY AV
                                                        CAMPUS ST                                 PROSPECT AV       BENTON ST
                                                                                                   BARTON RD                                                                                                                             BARTON RD
                                                                                                                LAWTON AV       LOMA LINDA DR                      LAWTON AV
                                                                                                                                                                                     BRYN MAWR AV   WHITTIER AV
                                      San                                                                                                                                                                               BEAUMONT AV
                                             Ja
                                                c      in
                                                         to
                                                                Fa
                                                                     u lt
                                                                            Zo
                                                                               ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0       1,000     2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SOURCE: Fault: USGS, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 9.1C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ci
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ne                                      City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Zo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2008 MEASURE T
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2009_Jan\fig9-1C_MeasureT.mxd (04/08/09)
                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
                                                           9.2.4 Public Facilities
                                                           While not generally included in the accepted
                                                           definition of “open space,” the collection of
                                                           landscaped areas adjacent to public facilities
                                                           provides a convenient and valuable “open
                                                           space” asset for residents and workers within
                                                           the City. Features such as gardens, plazas,
                                                           fountains, and pedestrian trails provide a buffer
                                                           between adjacent uses and afford citizens the
                                                           opportunity to enjoy outdoor activities
                                                           throughout their workday. Prime examples of
                                                           such features include the landscaped areas
                                                           adjacent to the City’s Civic Center and
                                                           Veteran’s Hospital.
             Veterans Medical Center Open Space
                                                           9.2.5 Utility/Drainage Easements
                                                         Because of an increased potential for adverse
                                                         health and property damage, permitted uses
                                                         proximate to high-tension power lines and flood
                                                         control channels are generally restricted. Utility
                                                         providers manage these areas in a manner
                                                         which maximizes the health and safety benefits
                                                         to the general public, ensures the economical
                                                         and efficient upkeep of essential transmission
                                                         facilities, and safeguards these valuable assets
                                                         from unauthorized use or trespass.
                                                         A Southern California Edison (SCE) easement
                                                         runs linearly through the City in a north-south
                                                         direction approximately 0.5 mile east of Mountain
                       SCE Easement
                                                        View Avenue and at several locations in the
                                                        Badlands area. The primary purpose of these
   easements is to provide for electricity transmission lines. Portions of the easement paralleling
   Mountain View Avenue have been improved with a trail system, orange groves, and minimal
   landscaping.
   9.2.6 Riding and Hiking Trails
   In 1973 the City of Loma Linda adopted a riding and hiking trail plan, which includes the SCE
   easement and provides access to the Badlands area. The primary use of many of the trail land is for
   transmission of power, water or access to water sources. A secondary use for this same land is a
   riding and hiking trail system which when completed would provide a valuable recreational amenity in
   the City. The riding and hiking trail system shown in Figure 9.2 is designed to tie into trails planned by
   the County and adjacent cities. Completion of this linked trail system would contribute to the quality of
   life in the Inland Valley.
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                        9-7

                                                                                                                                                                                                       $
                                                                                                                                                                                                       `
                                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                     City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sphere of Influence
                                             E REDLANDS BLVD                                        REDLANDS BLVD                                                                                                                                            Targeted Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F Trail Heads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Public Trails
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Edison Easement Riding and Hiking Trail
                                                                                     ANDERSON ST
                                                              EVANS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Green Belt / Flood Control
                                                                                                                 VAN LEUVEN ST
                                                                                                                                                                    MI
                                                                                                                                                                         SS                                                                                     Private Trails
                                                                                                                                                                            ION
                                                                                                                                                                                R   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                                              STEWART ST
                                                                                                                                                 MOUNTAIN VIEW AV
                                         UNIVERSITY AV
                                                                         CAMPUS ST                 PROSPECT AV       BENTON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Warning
                                                                                                    BARTON RD                                                                                                                        BARTON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         This document depicts the approximate locations of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         unmaintained trails, trail heads, and open space areas
                                      F
                                      !         F
                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                        in the city-owned South Hills Preserve, but is not intended
                                                                                                                 LAWTON AV                                          LAWTON AV                                                                            as a formal guide to hikers or other users of the subject
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         properties. The City makes no warranty as to the accuracy
                                                                                                                                 LOMA LINDA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         of any depiction of trails, geography or other physical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         features. Nor does the City make any representation as to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the safety of any private recreational or other use of the
                                                                                         !
                                                                                         F !
                                                                                           F                                                                                                           WHITTIER AV                                       subject properties, or as to the legality or safety of any use
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         of adjoining private properties. Unauthorized entry onto any
                                                                                                                                                                                        BRYN MAWR AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         property, whether or not marked as private property on this
                                                                                                                                                    F                                                                BEAUMONT AV                         map, without the consent of the property owner, may be
                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                 F F!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         considered trespassing. By entering upon any City-owned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         land or trail, hikers and other users assume the risk of
                                                                                                                                                                                                       F
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                 injury or damages that may result from hazardous
                                               F
                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         recreational activities (Gov. Code Sec. 831.7), from the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         use of recreational trails (Gov. Code Sec. 831.4), or from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the natural conditions of unimproved property
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (Gov. Code Sec. 831.2).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0        1,000    2,000 Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                     F
                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                               SOURCE: Basemap - AirPhotoUSA, 2008; Thomas Bros. 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 9.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RIDING AND HIKING TRAILS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SYSTEM MASTER PLAN
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2009_Jan\fig9-2_trails_map.mxd (05/11/09)
                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                   Conservation and Open Space Element
                                                        9.2.7 Hazard Setbacks
                                                        This category of open space includes areas that
                                                        are set aside to distance persons and property
                                                        from natural hazards (such as floods, or unstable
                                                        slopes). An important function of open space is
                                                        to act as a buffer to separate people and
                                                        property from intermittent or persistent hazards
                                                        that could cause injury, property damage, or
                                                        death. In addition, within the Planning Area, there
                                                        are areas that are maintained as open space
                                                        because they present significant hazards when
                                                        used for urban purposes. San Timoteo Creek
                                                        flows diagonally through the central portion of the
                                                        City. Open space on either side of the channel,
            Natural Hazard – San Timoteo Creek          set aside to facilitate channel maintenance and
                                                        to limit potential flood damage, provides an
   important open space resource through the central portion of the City. This channel is also a
   designated section of the concept riding and hiking trial system in the City.
   9.2.8 Hillside Areas
   The hillside areas of the City of Loma Linda, its planning area, and its sphere of influence are
   important to the community and shall be preserved in as natural a state as possible consistent with
   the Hillside Conservations Amendments and the standards set forth in Chapter 2A.
   Hillside Preservation Area. The Hillside Preservation Area is depicted on Exhibit A of Chapter 2A.
   The boundaries of the Hillside Preservation Areas are described in Exhibit A1 of Chapter 2A.
   The Hillside Conservation Area is described in the Hillside Conservation Ordinance (Ordinance 495)
   as amended by Ordinance 541, which is codified as Chapter 20.12 of the Loma Linda Municipal
   Code, and is described in Exhibit B of that Ordinance. The boundaries of the Hillside Conservation
   Area as depicted on Exhibit A of Chapter 2A are intended to be consistent with Ordinance 541. In the
   event that any inconsistency should be found, the map set forth as Exhibit A to the Chapter 2A shall
   control over the map attached to Ordinance 541 as Exhibit A and the legal description attached to
   Ordinance 541 as Exhibit B.
   Expanded Hillside Area. The Expanded Hillside Area is depicted in Exhibit A of Chapter 2A. The
   boundaries of the Expanded Hillside Areas are described in Exhibit A1 of Chapter 2A.
   9.2.8.1     Hillside Preservation Area, Hillside Conservation Area, and Expanded
               Hillside Area Development
   (a) Permitted Development. The City shall only allow future development within the Hillside
       Preservation Area, the Hillside Conservation Area, and the Expanded Hillside Conservation Area
       which:
       i.   Protects the areas’ natural environment and sensitive environmental features, as well as
            public health and safety, maximizing the preservation of land in permanent public open
            space;
       ii.  Ensures that the design and layout of future hillside development adapts to the natural
            hillside topography; and
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                      9-9

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                    Conservation and Open Space Element
        iii. Minimizes the need for and costs of providing infrastructure, utilities, and public services to all
             hillside areas.
   (b) Ridgeline Setbacks. Development shall be set back from Primary Ridgelines 100 feet
        horizontally and 100 feet vertically. “Primary Ridgelines” include ridgelines having any of the
        following characteristics:
        i.   Ridges that have a difference in elevation of at least 200 feet from the toe of slope of the
             valley floor or the toe of slope of any canyon floor;
        ii.  Ridges which, prior to grading, are visible, or which would be visible but for man-made
             obstructions such as buildings or houses, from north of Barton Road, Interstate 10, or east of
             San Timoteo Canyon Road;
        iii. Ridges that form a prominent landform in the foreground, a major skyline ridge in the
             background, or one of the layers of ridges that may be visible in between, or which would be
             visible but for man-made obstructions such as buildings or houses; or
        iv. Ridges that frame major visual access when a person is traveling though the Hillside
             Preservation Area, the Hillside Conservation Area, or the Expanded Hillside Area and will
             provide the first view of valley and canyon areas as a traveler emerges from the other side of
             the ridge.
   9.2.8.2      Preservation of open space and agricultural land areas
   Preservation of open space and agricultural land areas is a priority in the City of Loma Linda, its
   planning area, and its sphere of influence, and dedication of open space in perpetuity shall be a
   requirement for certain development as well as for the City.
   City-owned Land. The City-owned land in the Hillside Conservation Area, the Expanded Hillside
   Area, and the Hillside Preservation Area (approximately 850 acres) are designated open space with
   no development of any type allowable except as provided in Chapter 2A. The City shall not sell, rent,
   lease, or otherwise confer any right or title to land in the Hillside Conservation Area, the Expanded
   Hillside Area, and the Hillside Preservation Area to which the City holds title without a vote of the
   people. The sole exception to this restriction is that the City-owned land southwest of the San Jacinto
   Fault Line (approximately 350 acres) may be traded for other land inside the Hillside Conservation
   Area and/or the Hillside Preservation Area and/or the Expanded Hillside Area so long as the land
   received is preserved and deeded to the City and dedicated as permanent open space and/or
   conservation area. Land southwest of the San Jacinto Fault Line that is traded by the City may be re-
   designated for use other than open space after it is traded. Land may be traded only to preserve open
   space and to reduce densities in other, more highly valued hillside areas, and for no other purposes.
   The City shall not approve a trade of land unless all of the following conditions are met: (1) Mountain
   View Avenue shall not connect to future development in the traded land, (2) All roads connecting to
   future development in traded land shall not extend farther east than Mountain View Avenue, and (3)
   The only roads which may connect to future development in the traded land are Oakwood Drive or
   roads connecting to Reche Canyon Road.
   City-owned land in the Hillside Conservation Area, the Hillside Preservation Area, and the Expanded
   Hillside Area shall be open to public non-commercial recreational uses consistent with the protection
   of environmental values. Public non-commercial recreational amenities, such as, but not limited to,
   parks, trails, and tennis courts may be allowed on City-owned land.
   Hillside Conservation Area. That area designated “Hillside Conservation” on the Land Use Element
   Map is an important conservation area for the City. This area is characterized by natural, scenic
   hillsides, rough terrain and limited services constituting the highest ridgelines visible from the City
   proper. Only that development which is consistent with the overall conservation goals for this area is
Chapter 9.0                         Conservation and Open Space Element                                       9-10

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   permitted, including residential development at a density not greater than one unit per 10 acres,
   unless the criteria specified by the Hillside Conservation Land Use Designation are met in which
   event development at a maximum of up to one unit per 5 acres is permitted. Other consistent uses
   should be limited to riding, hiking and other trails, and educational and research activities consistent
   with the conservation of the area. In addition, uses normally associated accessory to such uses, such
   as corrals, riding stables, groves, and the like may be allowed where the City determines, based upon
   environmental review, that such uses are consistent with the overall conservation goals for this area.
   9.2.8.3      Landform Grading
   a. Blend cut-and fill slopes with existing natural contours to avoid tall manufactured slopes and
        steep embankments that could lead to soil erosion and silting of lower slopes.
   b. Require manufactured slopes shall be landform graded, except within bedrock, where
        manufactured slopes in excess of 10 vertical feet feasibly cannot be avoided. “Landform grading”
        is a contour grading method which creates artificial slopes with curves and varying slope ratios in
        the horizontal and vertical planes designed to simulate the appearance of surrounding natural
        terrain (as illustrated below). Grading plans shall identify which slopes are to be landform graded
        and which are to be conventionally graded.
   c.   Design roadway improvements within hillside areas to be designed to minimize grading.
   9.2.9 Identified Visual and Natural Open Space Issues
   The City of Loma Linda’s hillside backdrop is highly prized by its residents. The residents passed the
   Hillside Preservation Initiative in 1993 to preserve the significant natural hillside amenities within the
   boundaries of the City. Additionally, the City’s slogan is based upon the City’s unique setting – “A City
   with a View.” Conserving and protecting the hillsides along with the quality and quantity of clean air,
   native plant and wildlife species, water resources, and historic resources is a significant ingredient in
   the well being of the City and its residents. Also as the City becomes more built-out, the pressure to
   develop the hillsides will increase. Conservation of the hillsides and maximizing the preservation of
   natural open space are a part of the City’s long-range plan for the South Hills area.
   Although the City has adopted a Riding and Hiking Trails Plan, guidelines for development and
   implementation policies for this Plan have not been established.
   9.2.10 Policies
   Following are the policies related to visual, natural open space, environmentally sensitive areas, and
   wildlife habitats.
   9.2.10.1 Guiding Policy for Visual Resources
   Protect views and unique landforms.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Preserve outstanding natural features, such as the skyline of a prominent hill, rock outcroppings,
        the San Timoteo Creek Aviary Sanctuary, and native and/or historically significant trees.
   b. Provide incentives such as a density bonus for clustering of allowable densities to avoid
        unnecessary grading for site development.
   c.   Require new development to be designed to conserve soil and avoid erosion by limiting cut and
        fill areas and the exporting of soil from the development site.
Chapter 9.0                        Conservation and Open Space Element                                      9-11

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   d. Limit development on ridgelines.
   9.2.10.2 Guiding Policy for Open Space
   Acquire, preserve and maintain open space and its natural resources for future generations.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Base open space preservation and acquisition on the evaluation of significant viewsheds and
       ridgelines, wildlife habitats and fragile ecosystems, significant scientifically, historically, or
       ecologically unique natural areas, passive recreational areas, and stream or creek environs.
   b. Encourage, through open space easements, development rights transfers or acquisition, or other
       incentives, the long-term maintenance of existing and future open space lands in their natural
       condition. Encourage acquisition, a land exchange program, or transfer of development rights as
       a means of placing large unbroken blocks of the South Hills in public ownership to be preserved
       as open space.
   c.  To the extent legally possible, require other local, regional, State, or Federal agencies to maintain
       an adequate inventory of open space lands within Loma Linda.
   d. Coordinate through development review, Loma Linda’s open space system with adjacent cities,
       San Bernardino County, the State, and regional and private open space systems in order to
       connect the systems and share resources.
   e. Utilize the resource of national, regional and local conservation organizations, corporations, non-
       profit associations and benevolent entities to acquire environmentally sensitive land or
       preservation areas.
   f.  The San Jacinto Fault Zone area should be preserved as open space through easement
       dedication during the review process of applicable new developments.
   g. Limit culverts or the channeling of creeks to only those situations in which public health and
       safety are at risk so as to preserve creeks and their natural habitat for open space.
   h. Encourage access to open space areas in the design of development adjacent to open space,
       such as a trail.
   i.  Continue to require through development standards, the integration of open space and
       recreational uses and facilities in all multiple-family residential projects.
   9.2.10.3 Guiding Policy for Avoidance of Environmentally Sensitive Areas
   New development shall be sited so as to maximize the permanent preservation of large blocks of
   unbroken open space and to minimize the loss of habitat, wildlife, and watershed resources.
   9.2.10.4 Guiding Policy for Development to Respect Wildlife Habitats
   Development projects are to be designed to protect habitat values and to preserve significant habitat
   areas and habitat connections in their natural condition:
   Implementing Policies
   a. Within habitat areas of rare, threatened or endangered species, disturbance of protected biotic
       resources is prohibited.
   b. Development shall avoid “canyon bottoms,” which are defined as the land occurring within 200
       feet of either side of a line referred to as a “blue line stream” as designated on a U.S. Geological
Chapter 9.0                        Conservation and Open Space Element                                     9-12

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                   Conservation and Open Space Element
       Survey (USGS) map. Within riparian and wetland areas, the vegetative resources that contribute
       to habitat carrying capacity (vegetative diversity, faunal resting areas, foraging areas, and food
       sources) shall be preserved in place or replaced so as to not result in a measurable reduction in
       the reproductive capacity of sensitive biotic resources. Development shall not result in a net loss
       of wetlands.
   c.  Buffer zones adjacent to areas of preserved biological resources shall be provided. Such buffer
       zones shall be adequate in width so as to protect biological resources from grading and
       construction activities, as well as from the long-term use of adjacent lands. The landscape design
       adjacent to areas of preserved biological resources shall be designed so as to avoid invasive
       species that could negatively impact the value of the preserved resource.
   9.2.10.5 Guiding Policy for Animal Uses Preserved
   Within single-family residential areas, existing entitlements for recreational, equestrian, and animal
   uses shall be preserved.
   9.2.10.6 Guiding Policy for Trails
   Maximize the benefits of open space through the provision of recreational trails.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Adopt standards and design guidelines compatible with the County of San Bernardino standards,
       for the Riding and Hiking Trails Plan. Include an implementation program with the standards and
       guidelines.
   b. Coordinate with public and private entitles to link open spaces with the network of paths and trails
       to create a system of connecting open space.
   c.  Work with Southern California Edison to maintain, enhance, and expand the existing trail system
       on the utility easement within the City. (See Land Use Section 2.2.7.3 for Recreation
       Implementing Policies).
   d. Work with the San Bernardino Flood Control District and other appropriate agencies to establish a
       trail for bicycling, walking and running alongside the San Timoteo Creek and where appropriate,
       other channels and creeks bordering and within the City.
   e. Limit allowable on-trail activities to those that are consistent with protection of the environmental
       values of adjacent lands
   9.3       AIR QUALITY
   The City of Loma Linda is located in San Bernardino County, an area within the South Coast Air
   Basin (Basin) that includes Orange County and the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside,
   and San Bernardino Counties. Air quality regulation in the Basin is administered by the South Coast
   Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), a regional agency created for the Basin.
   9.3.1 Climate
   The terrain and geographical location determine the Basin’s climate. The Basin is a coastal plain with
   connecting broad valleys and low hills. The Pacific Ocean forms the southwestern boundary, and high
   mountains surround the rest of the Basin. The region lies in the semi-permanent high-pressure zone
   of the eastern Pacific. The resulting climate is mild and tempered by cool ocean breezes. This
   climatological pattern is rarely interrupted. However, periods of extremely hot weather, winter storms,
   and Santa Ana wind conditions do occur.
Chapter 9.0                        Conservation and Open Space Element                                   9-13

                                                                                        Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                         Conservation and Open Space Element
   The Basin experiences a persistent temperature inversion (increasing temperature with increasing
   altitude) as a result of the Pacific high. This inversion limits the vertical dispersion of air contaminants,
   holding them near the ground. As the sun warms the ground and the lower air layer, the temperature
   of the lower air layer approaches the temperature of the base of the inversion (upper) layer until the
   inversion layer finally breaks, allowing vertical mixing with the lower layer. This phenomenon is
   observed in mid-afternoon to late afternoon on hot summer days, when the smog appears to clear up
   suddenly. Winter inversions frequently break by mid-morning.
   Winds in the vicinity of the Planning Area blow predominantly from the east-southeast, with relatively
   low velocities. Wind speeds in the Planning Area average about 4 mph. Summer wind speeds
   average slightly higher than winter wind speeds. Low average wind speeds, together with a persistent
   temperature inversion limit the vertical dispersion of air pollutants throughout the Basin. Strong, dry,
   north or northeasterly winds, known as Santa Ana winds, occur during the fall and winter months,
   dispersing air contaminants. The Santa Ana conditions tend to last for several days at a time.
   The combination of stagnant wind conditions and low inversions produces the greatest pollutant
   concentrations. On days of no inversion or high wind speeds, ambient air pollutant concentrations are
   the lowest. During periods of low inversions and low wind speeds, air pollutants generated in
   urbanized areas are transported predominantly onshore into Riverside and San Bernardino Counties.
   In the winter, the greatest pollution problems are carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen, because of
   extremely low inversions and air stagnation during the night and early morning hours. In the summer,
   the longer daylight hours and the brighter sunshine combine to cause a reaction between
   hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen to form photochemical smog.
                                                                9.3.2 Existing Air Quality
                                                                The SCAQMD maintains ambient air quality
                                                                monitoring stations throughout the Basin. The
                                                                air quality monitoring station closest to the site
                                                                with complete air quality data is the San
                                                                Bernardino station, or SB Central Valley-2
                                                                station. The criteria pollutants monitored at this
                                                                station include carbon monoxide, ozone, Fine
                                                                Suspended Particulate and Nitrogen Dioxide1
                                                                Sulfur dioxide is not listed or reported because
                                                                it has not violated Federal or State standards
                                                                for the past ten years. Carbon monoxide and
                                                                nitrogen dioxide levels monitored at this station
                                                                have not exceeded State and Federal
                                                                standards in the past three years. Ozone
                  Air pollutants limit visibility               concentrations monitored at this station
                                                                exceeded State standard from 45 to 65 days a
   year, with an improving trend. The Federal ozone standard was exceeded at this station from 7 to
   39 days a year, also showing an improving trend. The State PM10 standard was exceeded from 22 to
   33 days a year, and the Federal PM10 standard was not exceeded in the past three years.
   1
        California Air Resources Board air quality data Web site, 2001.
Chapter 9.0                         Conservation and Open Space Element                                          9-14
                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   9.3.3 Existing Air Pollution Sources
   The City of Loma Linda contains both stationary and mobile sources of air pollutant emissions. The
   most significant local source of gaseous air emissions is vehicular traffic on I-10 through the northern
   part of the City and vehicular traffic on arterials within the City. Other important sources include
   railroad activities and stationary sources associated with local hospitals.
   9.3.4 Sensitive Receptors
   SCAQMD identifies sensitive receptors as populations that are more susceptible to the effects of air
   pollution than are the general population. Sensitive receptors located in or near the vicinity of known
   air emissions sources, including freeways and intersections are of particular concern. Sensitive
   receptors include the following populations or uses:
            Long-term Health Care Facilities                    Schools
            Rehabilitation Centers                              Playgrounds
            Convalescent Centers                                Childcare Centers
            Retirement Homes                                    Athletic Facilities
            Residences
   Land use compatibility issues relative to siting of pollution-emitting uses or siting of sensitive
   receptors must be considered. In the case of schools, state law requires that siting decisions consider
   the potential for toxic or harmful air emissions in the surrounding area.
   Refer to the Loma Linda General Plan Existing Setting document and the Loma Linda General Plan
   Environmental Impact Report for additional information regarding Air quality.
   9.3.5 Identified Air Quality Issues
   The most significant local source of gaseous air emissions is vehicular traffic on I-10 through the
   northern part of the City and vehicular traffic on arterials within the City. Extensive use of personal
   motorized transportation modes contributes to the region’s poor air quality. The home-to-work trip
   constitutes the majority of these trips taken on an individual basis. Reducing the number of home-to-
   work vehicle trips would substantially diminish the amount of pollution generated. Land use
   regulations influence the distribution of housing, employment centers, and other land uses within the
   community. The widespread distribution of different land use sectors affects individuals traveling to
   various destinations with the community. A substantial amount of air pollution can be attributed to
   automobile trips traveling between these locations. Other important sources include railroad activities
   and stationary sources associated with local hospitals.
   9.3.6 Guiding Policy
   Minimize air pollutant emissions within the Loma Linda Planning Area so as to assist in achieving
   State and Federal air quality standards and seek to attain or exceed the more stringent of Federal or
   State Ambient Air Quality Standards for each measured pollutant.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Cooperate with and support regional, State and Federal agencies to improve air quality
        throughout the South Coast Air Basin.
   b. Budget for purchase of clean fuel vehicles, including electrical and hybrid vehicles where
        appropriate, and, if feasible, purchasing natural gas vehicles as diesel-powered vehicles are
        replaced.
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                     9-15

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   c.   Require developers of large residential and non-residential projects to participate in programs and
        to take measures to improve traffic flow and/or reduce vehicle trips resulting in decreased
        vehicular emissions. Examples of such efforts may include, but are not limited to the following:
        development of mixed-use projects, facilitating pedestrian and bicycle transportation, and
        permitting consolidation of vehicular trips; provision of charging stations for electric vehicles within
        large employment-generating and retail developments; and contributions for off-site mitigation for
        transit use.
   d. As part of the development review process for non-residential development, require the
        incorporation of best available technologies to mitigate air quality impacts.
   9.4      BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
   This section focuses on sensitive species and plant communities that may potentially occur in the City
   of Loma Linda and its Sphere of Influence (Planning Area). The sensitive species or plant
   communities have a defined legal status, rarity, or vulnerability and are of high concern to State and
   Federal agencies. The majority of the undeveloped portions of the Planning Area consists of coastal
   sage scrub (considered a sensitive plant community in the California Natural Diversity Database) and
   agricultural land. Within the Planning Area, critical habitat has been designated for the California
   gnatcatcher by the California Department of Fish and Game in portions of the coastal sage scrub
   Critical habitat has been proposed for designation by the California Native Plant Society for the San
   Bernardino kangaroo rat (SBKR) within portions of the riparian wash habitats.
   9.4.1 Land Uses/Vegetation
   The land uses within the Planning Area consist primarily of urban and disturbed lands and
   undeveloped land consisting of several vegetative types, including agricultural lands, non-native
   grasslands, coastal sage scrub, ruderal areas, and riparian areas. Urban and disturbed lands exist in
   the relatively flat northern area of the Planning Area and the potential for any sensitive species to
   occur in this developed area is very low, except in the area where future development may juxtapose
   against sensitive habitat. In the Planning Area, orange groves comprise the main agricultural crop,
   and are located predominantly in the eastern areas. Due to the disturbed nature of agriculture, the
   groves do not support native vegetation and provide habitat only for common wildlife species that are
   tolerant of disturbed conditions. Figure 9.3 depicts the land use and vegetation in Loma Linda.
   9.4.1.1     Coastal Sage Scrub Community
   Coastal sage scrub is considered to be a sensitive plant community by resource agencies such as the
   California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG) and the United States Forest and Wildlife Service
   (USFWS) and has the potential to contain numerous sensitive plant and animal species. The coastal
   sage scrub community is located predominately in the southern hills of the Planning Area and
   consists of approximately 2,939 acres. This community is highly interspersed with non-native
   grasslands (described below) and includes sparse patches of the chaparral plant community.
   9.4.1.2     Non-native Grasslands
   Non-native grasslands are the dominant understory of the coastal sage scrub community described
   above and often occur in large continuous blocks within the coastal sage scrub community (together
   with the coastal sage scrub community comprises approximately a total of 2,492 acres). Since this
   plant community co-occurs with the coastal sage scrub community, a majority of this community is
   included within designated critical habitat for the California gnatcatcher.
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                          9-16
                                                                                            §
                                                                                            ¦
                                                                                            ¨
                                                                                            10
                                          ANDERSON
                                                               REDLANDS BOULEVARD
                                          STREET
    WATERMAN AVENUE                                                                              CALIFORNIA STREET
                                                     BARTON ROAD
                                                                                                                                 0       1,600
                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                     3,200
                                                                                                                                  Feet
                                                                                                                                          FIGURE 9.3
                                                        JURISDICTIONAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE
LAND USE AND VEGETATION                                     CITY BOUNDARY
           OAK WOODLAND                 DEVELOPED           CITY SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
           AGRICULTURAL                 RIPARIAN            RAILROAD
           COASTAL SAGE SCRUB/          RUDERAL             WATER WAYS
           NON-NATIVE GRASSLANDS                                                                                      City of Loma Linda General Plan
                                                            NATURAL WATER WAYS*
*SOURCE: USGS 7.5' Quads: Redlands; Thomas Bros., 2009                                                               LAND USE AND VEGETATION
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig9-3_veg.mxd (10/15/08)

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   9.4.1.3    Ruderal
   Ruderal areas consist of weedy areas that have been previously cleared of brush for agricultural land.
   Ruderal land (558 acres) is primarily located within agricultural lands in the western portions of the
   Planning Area, around the San Timoteo Wash, and scattered throughout the developed areas as
   smaller parcels.
   9.4.1.4    Riparian
   Twenty-one (21) acres of riparian plant habitat occur along the San Timoteo Wash south of Barton
   Road. This riparian habitat is within the proposed critical habitat for the SBKR and is discussed in the
   following section.
   9.4.1.5    Oak Woodland
   Approximately 3 acres of coast live oak woodland occur within the Planning Area. The oak woodland
   consists of approximately 35 coast live oaks. This 3-acre habitat is located on a 20-acre parcel, on
   the south side of Redlands Boulevard, 1,500 feet west of California Street, and is surrounded by
   agricultural land and development. This stand of oak woodland habitat is isolated from other native
   habitat and therefore of reduced biological value.
   9.4.2 Special Interest Species and Habitats
   Legal protection for sensitive species varies widely, from the comprehensive protection extended to
   listed threatened/endangered species to no legal status at present. The CDFG, USFWS, local
   agencies, and special interest groups, such as the CNPS, publish watch-lists of declining species.
   These lists often describe the general nature and perceived severity of the decline. In addition,
   recently published findings and preliminary results of ongoing research provide a basis for
   consideration of species that are candidates for State and/or Federal listing. Finally, sensitive species
   that are clearly not rare or threatened statewide or regionally, but whose local populations are sparse,
   rapidly dwindling or otherwise unstable, may be considered to be of "local interest."
   Twenty-four State and federally listed as threatened or endangered species are identified in the
   existing watch-lists as potentially present within the Planning Area, although suitable habitat was
   present for only nine of these species. An additional 35 sensitive species not listed as threatened or
   endangered are considered potentially present in the Planning Area and of these 35 species,
   17 species are considered to have a moderate to high potential for occurrence.
   9.4.2.1    Critical Habitat
   Critical habitat identifies specific areas that are essential to the conservation of a listed species and
   may require special management considerations or protection (Figure 9.4). The Planning Area
   includes 1,910 acres that have been designated as critical habitat for the California gnatcatcher
   (coastal sage scrub habitat/non-native grasslands). However, focused surveys for the California
   gnatcatcher were conducted on 900 acres in the western portion of the southern hills in 1998. No
   gnatcatchers were determined to be present. The closest known occurrence for this species
   (observed in year 2000) is located in the hills in the City of Colton, within one mile southwest of the
   southwest corner of the Planning Area and contiguous with the southern hills of the Planning Area.
   Even though the California gnatcatcher was not observed during the focused surveys, it is known to
   occur in the vicinity of the Planning Area and could occur in the remaining coastal sage scrub habitat
   of the Planning Area.
Chapter 9.0                        Conservation and Open Space Element                                     9-18
                                                                                                       §
                                                                                                       ¦
                                                                                                       ¨
                                                                                                       10
                                                   ANDERSON
                                                                      REDLANDS BOULEVARD
                                                   STREET
    WATERMAN AVENUE                                                                                         CALIFORNIA STREET
                                                              BARTON ROAD
                                                                                                                                           0       1,600
                                                                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                               3,200
                                                                                                                                            Feet
                                                                                                                                                    FIGURE 9.4
LAND USE AND VEGETATION                                            JURISDICTIONAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE
           Southwestern Willow Flycatcher, Final 10/19/05              City Boundary
           San Bernardino Kangaroo Rat, final, remanded 4/23/02        City Sphere of Influence
           San Bernardino Kangaroo Rat, Proposed 4/16/08               Railroad
           Coastal Calif Gnatcatcher, proposed 4/24/03                 Water Ways                                               City of Loma Linda General Plan
           Coastal California Gnatcatcher, final 12/19/07
SOURCE: Federal Registry Critical Habitat, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007 and 2008; Thomas Bros., 2009
                                                                                                                                         CRITICAL HABITAT
R:\LLD130\GIS\Reports\GenPlan_2008_Oct\fig9-4_CritHab.mxd (10/15/08)

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Conservation and Open Space Element
   Habitat Fragmentation and Wildlife Movement. Habitat fragmentation and wildlife movement is an
   important issue in assessing habitat values for wildlife. Habitat fragmentation occurs when a
   proposed action results in a single, unified habitat area being divided into two or more areas, such
   that the division isolates the two new areas from each other. Isolation of habitat occurs when wildlife
   cannot move freely from one portion of the habitat to another or from one habitat type to another.
   The United States Fish and Wildlife Service has designated critical habitat for lands encompassing
   essential core populations of coastal California gnatcatchers and linkage areas that may require
   special management considerations or protections. The southern hills are part of an extension of
   larger undeveloped areas including Blue Mountain and Box Springs Mountain to the southwest and
   the Badlands and ultimately the San Jacinto Mountains to the southeast. The southern hills connect
   to a core open space area for Riverside County’s Multi-species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP)
   to the south through Reche Canyon and adjacent hills.
   As a part of proposed critical habitat for the San Bernardino Kangaroo Rat (SBKR), San Timoteo
   Wash provides a wildlife corridor for the SBKR, as well as other riverine associated species. San
   Timoteo Wash mainly serves as a corridor leading out of the Planning Areas toward the Badlands, as
   a result of the degraded nature (cement-lined) of the wash downstream.
   Wetlands/Jurisdictional Waters. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) regulates discharges
   of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States. These waters include wetlands and
   nonwetland bodies of water that meet specific criteria, including a direct or indirect connection to
   interstate commerce. A preliminary evaluation of potential jurisdictional waters was conducted within
   the limits of the Planning Area. The San Timoteo wash is considered to be regulated waters.
   Regulated waters include non-wetland waters and wetlands that are regulated by the Corps and the
   Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). In addition, large washes within the South Hills may
   also be considered to be regulated waters.
   9.4.3 Identified Biological Resources Issues
   The biological resources in the City are found mainly on the hillsides and include 2,492 acres of
   sensitive coastal sage scrub community/non-native grasslands, 21 acres of riparian habitat, and 558
   areas of ruderal areas which may contain endangered or sensitive species. In the Planning Area,
   1,910 acres are designated critical habitat for the federally threatened coastal California gnatcatcher
   and 158 acres are proposed as critical habitat for the federally endangered San Bernardino Kangaroo rat.
   Development on the hillsides has the potential to alter and eliminate these sensitive habitats and
   species. The South Hills also provide a wildlife connection to other areas in the County, which could
   be disrupted with development, as could the wetland areas.
   9.4.4 Guiding Policy
   Preserve habitats supporting rare and endangered species of plants and animals including wildlife
   corridors.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Comply with the Federal policy of no net loss of wetlands through avoidance and clustered
        development. Where preservation in place is found to be infeasible (such as an unavoidable a
        road crossing through habitats), require 1) on-site replacement of wetland areas, 2) off-site
        replacement, or 3) restoration of degraded wetland areas at a minimum ratio of one acre of
        replacement/restoration for each acre of impacted on-site habitat, such that the value of impacted
        habitat is replaced.
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                     9-20

                                                                                    Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   b. Require appropriate setbacks adjacent to natural streams to provide adequate buffer areas
        ensuring the projection of biological resources.
   c.   Preserve, as feasible, the oak woodland areas within the City by requiring development to
        incorporate the trees into the development design.
   d. Through the project approval and design review processes, require new development projects to
        protect sensitive habitat areas, including, but not limited to, coastal sage scrub, and native
        grasslands. Ensure the preservation in place of habitat areas found to be occupied by state and
        federally protected species. Where preserved habitat areas occupy areas that would otherwise be
        graded as part of a development project, facilitate the transfer of allowable density to other, non-
        sensitive portions of the site.
   e. Through development review, retain, as feasible, wildlife corridors in the Planning Area in
        particular, the San Timoteo Wash area.
   f.   Require the landscape design of developments adjacent to areas of preserved biological
        resources to avoid the use of invasive species which could negatively impact the value of the
        preserved resource.
   g. Cooperate with the State and Federal agencies to encourage preserving streams and creeks in
        the south hills area in their natural state in order to maintain their value as percolation and
        recharge areas, natural habitat, scenic resources, and recreation corridors. Where such
        preservation is no technically and financially feasible, require appropriate mitigation for the loss or
        modification of a creek or stream.
   9.5       AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES
   Agricultural use within Loma Linda has declined
   in recent years, primarily due to the effects of
   urban expansion and economic considerations.
   Currently there are 861 acres within the City of
   Loma Linda and its Sphere of Influence under
   agricultural production, representing 3 percent of
   total developed acreage in the City. The majority
   of existing agricultural lands is located in the
   eastern portion of the City with scattered citrus
   groves throughout the City.
   9.5.1 Identified Agricultural Resources
             Issues and Opportunities                           One of several citrus groves in Loma Linda
   While the General Plan does not require the long-term retention of agricultural lands, currently
   productive agricultural land provides open space resources in the eastern and southeastern portions
   of the Planning Area. Due to this open space amenity, the agricultural uses should be allowed to
   remain although not required to continue in the long-term.
   9.5.2 Guiding Policy
   Preservation of agricultural land areas is a priority.
   Implementing Policies
   a. No commercial uses such as, but not limited to, retail stores, professional or medical buildings,
        offices, warehouses, construction or manufacturing businesses, and hotels, shall be allowed in
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                        9-21
                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                  Conservation and Open Space Element
        the Hillside Preservation Area, the Expanded Hillside Area, or the Hillside Conservation Area
        shall be allowed, with the exception of commercial animal and agricultural uses such as ranches,
        stables, grazing, citrus and avocado groves that existed as of the Effective Date of enactment of
        Chapter 2A. Commercial recreational uses and associated uses may be allowed consistent with
        the protection of environmental values.
   b. The City recognizes the desire to maintain citrus and avocado groves and other agricultural uses
        as a means to provide open space, to provide and maintain a balanced economy, and to maintain
        green space and vegetation that will consume carbon dioxide and improve air quality. The open
        space requirement of Chapter 2A may be met by preserving citrus and/or avocado groves or
        other agricultural uses determined appropriate by the City Council, and assuring ongoing
        maintenance through a conservation easement or other legal mechanism, provided that the
        minimum percentage open space requirements of Chapter 2A are met.
   9.6      WATER RESOURCES
   The City of Loma Linda is within the Santa Ana River Watershed. This watershed drains the southern
   portions of the San Bernardino Mountains and the eastern San Gabriel Mountains. Located within the
   Planning Area are three hydrological groundwater basins/aquifers. Groundwater basins or aquifers
   can be described as natural underground water storage areas. In addition, several sub-basins also
   underlie the City of Loma Linda. The Bunker Hill Water Basin is under the northern portion of the City.
   This water basin underlies most of the San Bernardino Valley extending from the San Bernardino
   Mountain range to the south hills of Loma Linda. This aquifer supplies the majority of water to the City
   of Loma Linda. The groundwater basin underlying the southwest portion of the City is the Reche
   Canyon Basin. The San Timoteo Basin is under the southeast portion of the City.
   The Bunker Hill Basin is artificially recharged by surface stream diversions made for groundwater
   replenishment. Lytle Creek, the Santa Ana River, Mill Creek, Devil Creek, Twin Creek, Waterman
   Creek, and Sand Creek are used for groundwater recharge. In excess of 1,000,000 acre-feet of Santa
   Ana River and Mill Creek waters have been recharged to replenish the Bunker Hill Basin. In addition,
   water has been imported from the State Project Water for replenishment into the Bunker Hill Basin.
   Since 1972, an excess of 150,000 acre-feet of imported State Project Water has been recharged in
   the Bunker Hill Basin. The replenishment activities play an extremely important role in managing the
   Bunker Hill Basin to supply the current and future needs of the Basin, which includes the future needs
   of the City of Loma Linda.
   The City of Loma Linda groundwater is supplied from five wells. They include the Richardson Wells
   #1, #3, and #4; and Mountain View Wells #3, #4, and #5. All of the City’s wells are located in the
   Bunker Hill Basin. The water that replenishes the Bunker Hill Basin comes from annual rainfall and
   snow pack from the San Bernardino Mountain range. Due to seasonal variations of rainfall and
   pumping, water levels have fluctuated and will continue to fluctuate within this basin.
   Water quality is not consistent among the basins underling the City. The groundwater basins in the
   southern portion of the City do not generally consist of good water-bearing deposits and very few
   wells are known to exist in those areas. The City of Loma Linda completed a drinking water source
   assessment to protect this water supply and identify potential contamination sources. These
   assessments were completed at the following locations: Mountain View Well #3, November 1999;
   Richardson Well #4, February 2000; Mountain View Well #4, May 2000; and Richardson Wells #1
   and #3. The City of Loma Linda water supply meets or exceeds all current health and safety
   standards.
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                    9-22

                                                                                   Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   9.6.1 Identified Water Resources Issues
   The quantity and quality of the groundwater needs to be maintained and conserved to ensure water
   for future generations.
   9.6.2 Guiding Policy
   Water quality and availability are critical to the current and future residents of the City of Loma Linda,
   its planning area, and its sphere of influence. No new development shall be approved that endangers
   the quality or quantity of water delivered to households within the City.
   Implementing Policies
   a. No development project shall be approved which would cause the quality of water delivered to
        Loma Linda households to fail to meet State and/or Federal water quality standards, or which
        would cause an increase in residential rates, or which would result in a restriction of water usage,
        except for those projects exempt under State and/or Federal law.
   b. Develop and encourage the implementation of water conservation programs by residents,
        employers, students, and service providers.
   c.   Participate with State and regional agencies to monitor groundwater supplies and take steps to
        prevent overuse, depletion, and toxicity.
   d. Encourage sustainable landscapes or landscapes that require little irrigation through the use of
        drought-tolerant and native vegetation in new development.
   e. Through the development review process require that water supply capacity is available or will be
        available prior to approval of a development project. Do not approve projects for which assured
        water supply is not available.
   f.   Pursue the use of reclaimed water for the irrigation of all appropriate open space facilities and
        City projects, and encourage existing and new developments to tie to the reclaim water system
        when available and recommended by the San Bernardino Municipal Water Department
        (wastewater provider) to reduce demand on municipal water supplies.
   g. Through the development review process, encourage water conservation in all new and
        rehabilitated development through the use of water conserving fixtures in all new residential and
        commercial development.
   h. Require implementation of Best Management Practices to reduce drainage system discharge of
        non-point source pollutants originating from streets, parking lots, residential areas, businesses,
        industrial operations, and those open space areas involved with pesticide application.
   9.6.1.2     Guiding Policy for Water Efficiency
   Maximize water efficiency, water reuse, and the beneficial use of stormwater, including groundwater
   recharge and water quality improvement.
   Implementing Policy
   a. Reduce the waste of potable water through efficient technologies, conservation efforts, and
        design and management practices, and by better matching the source and quality of water to the
        user’s needs.
Chapter 9.0                       Conservation and Open Space Element                                      9-23

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                  Conservation and Open Space Element
   b. Support efforts to reduce waste and increase reuse through integrated planning of programs and
       complementary land use and building regulations. Assess and remove barriers to integrated
       water resource planning.
   c.  Initiate a Water Conservation Program. Develop model water demand management programs
       using best practices, including the following:
       x    Requiring water conservation in new construction;
       x    Requiring water conservation fixtures;
       x    Encouraging business rebates; and
       x    Encouraging plumbing maintenance programs.
   d. Require site-appropriate, drought-tolerant low water use landscaping and efficient irrigation
       systems where appropriate for new development. For parcels adjacent to publicly managed open
       space, appropriate landscaping will also be non-invasive and have low flammability. Limit the
       amount of water intensive landscaping, particularly lawn area allowed, in order to reduce the
       amount of water needed for irrigation.
   e. Encourage use of irrigation technologies such as evapo-transpiration systems—where real-time
       weather data are transmitted to installed controllers to automate water needs—that save water,
       promote greater plant health, and reduce runoff. Encourage water agencies to conduct irrigation
       training workshops for homeowners and professionals.
   f.  Encourage use of on-site rainwater capture, storage, and infiltration for irrigation and other
       nonpotable uses, and work with appropriate authorities to establish standards for rainwater
       quality and use. Ensure that catchments do not adversely affect habitat dependent on in-stream
       flow.
   9.7      CULTURAL RESOURCES
   The City of Loma Linda planning area includes several known historic sites and areas that may have
   prehistoric value.
   9.7.1 Paleontological Resources
   Paleontological resources are recognized as nonrenewable resources significant to our culture, and
   are afforded protection by Federal, State, and local environmental guidelines. Geologic formations
   are ranked by their potential to contain significant, nonrenewable paleontologic resources (SNPR).
   The Loma Linda Planning Area is in the southern San Bernardino Basin, a structural basin that filled
   with sediments as a result of activity on the San Andreas and San Jacinto Fault systems.
   Sedimentary deposition has been taking place in this basin since late Miocene time.
   Loma Linda lies on the north-sloping face of a ridge that runs east-west, south of San Timoteo Creek
   and north of Reche Canyon. The topography of the ridge is highly modified by drainage patterns
   characteristic of badlands topography, and the area is often referred to as “The Badlands.” Geological
   mapping of the Loma Linda area indicates the presence of four sedimentary units with two of the
   sedimentary units having a high potential for paleontological resources. Records in the San
   Bernardino County Museum do not indicate any record of previous paleontological resource
   assessments in one of these sedimentary units (San Timoteo Formation) and consequently no
   resource localities have been recorded in or immediately adjacent to the Planning Area.
Chapter 9.0                      Conservation and Open Space Element                                   9-24

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Conservation and Open Space Element
   9.7.2 Historical Resources
   Historic resources include sites, structures, or other physical evidence of past human activity greater
   than 50 years old. Although there are no recorded prehistoric sites within the study area, the
   Guachama Rancheria is an important historically known Native American property within the Planning
   Area with a potential for associated prehistoric resources. The Loma Linda Planning Area includes
   many sites of historic value and the area has been the subject of many historic studies with the latest
   conducted in 1988. Although a total of 197 historical properties was identified in this study only
   22 were evaluated for potential eligibility for listing in the National Register of Historic District Places
   (NRHP). The balance of the historic buildings (175) was described by street/neighborhood in general
   terms, but not inventoried or mapped. The City of Loma Linda adopted the Historic Preservation
   Ordinance in 1992 establishing the Historic Commission. The Commission recommends to the City
   Council designation of landmarks and preservation districts, reviews permits for alterations to
   landmarks, and promotes public awareness of historic resources.
   9.7.3 Potential Historical Districts
   Four potential Historic Districts were identified in the 1988 historical study and it is likely that
   additional contributing features along with buildings will be identified upon more in-depth investigation
   of the potential districts. Historic
   Districts are areas containing
   concentrations of improvements
   with historic interest or value.
   Preservation of these districts will
   retain the heritage of the City. The
   potential districts are listed below.
   9.7.3.1    Mission District
   The       Mission       architectural/
   historical district extends along
   both sides of Mission Road
   between California Street to the
   east and Pepper Way to the west.
   The district includes both a
   potential               ethnohistoric
   archaeological site and numerous
   standing structures (Table 9.A).
   The range of resources extends
   from the late Mission Period                            Craftsman home in the Mission District
   (1819) to the early 20th century.
   Table 9.A: Mission District Resources
           Resource Address/Location                                     Resource Name
               25926 Mission Road                             Adobe (moved from San Timoteo Winery)
               25949 Mission Road                             Craftsman Residence (Van Uffelen Dairy)
               26100 Mission Road                           Craftsman Residence (Van Leuven Property)
               26248 Mission Road                                           Frink Adobe
               26300 Mission Road                                      Craftsman Residence
               26432 Mission Road                                        Hinckley Ranch
          Mission Road and Pepper Way                                  Guachama Rancheria
Chapter 9.0                        Conservation and Open Space Element                                        9-25
                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   9.7.3.2     Campus District
   This potential district was identified in association
   with the growth of the Loma Linda University/ Health
   Center/Sanitarium and Adventist Health System.
   This district is important due to the historical,
   religious, educational, and scientific theme that
   binds these resources together. Minimally, however,
   the following resources are identified as potential
   contributing features:
   x    Campus Hill SDA Church
   x    Main University Campus (1934 Art Deco
        buildings)
                                                                     Nichol Hall at Loma Linda University
   x    University Church
   x    Sanitarium Complex and associated features (Nichol Hall)
   x    “Old” office buildings on hill of campus (Four original patient cottages)
   x    Bungalow on hill of campus (11057 Sanitarium Drive)
   9.7.3.3     Prospect/Starr District
   This district is generally bounded by Prospect Avenue to the north, Hillcrest Street to the east, Barton
   Road to the south and Anderson Street to the west. Starr Street represents the east-west core of this
   district, which is almost exclusively residential with a high concentration of housing from the period
   c.1890 to 1920. The majority of the structures are in good to fair condition, and many are substantially
   unaltered.
   9.7.3.4     Bryn Mawr
   Eleven properties on First, Juanita, and Mayberry Streets are remnants of the historic Hispanic
   community of Bryn Mawr (Table 9.B). This is a candidate for a historic district, as it appears to be the
   center of local Mexican cultural history within the Planning Area. At the very least, the Bryn Mawr
   School/Sacred Heart Church warrants special planning consideration as a designated cultural resource.
   Table 9.B: Bryn Mawr Historic Properties
                    Resource Address                                     Resource Name/Type
                     26359 First Street                                  Old Frame Residence
                     26379 First Street                                       Residence
                     26389 First Street                                    Victorian Cottage
                     26415 First Street                                       Residence
                     26470 First Street                                       Residence
                   25931 Juanita Street                                       Residence
                   25978 Juanita Street                                       Residence
                   25985 Juanita Street                                       Residence
                   25995 Juanita Street                                       Residence
                   26006 Juanita Street                                       Residence
                   26019 Juanita Street                                       Residence
            26271 Mayberry (Old Barton Road)                    Bryn Mawr School/Sacred Heart Church
Chapter 9.0                         Conservation and Open Space Element                                    9-26

                                                                                     Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                      Conservation and Open Space Element
   9.7.4 Identified Cultural Resources Issues
   Only a small percentage of the Planning Area has been surveyed for prehistoric resources. Although
   the Planning Area is considered moderately sensitive for such resources, the Guachama Rancheria
   (Mission Road and Pepper Way) is considered highly sensitive or very likely to contain such
   resources. The historic cultural landscape of Loma Linda is complex and in general all the potential
   historic districts should be considered highly sensitive for subsurface cultural deposits. Since the last
   Architectural/Historical Inventory has accuracy and consistency issues, an update involving at least
   the informal recordation and mapping of all historic properties listed in this report is recommended.
   9.7.5 Guiding Policy
   Preserve and protect the City’s historic structures and neighborhoods. Identify and preserve the
   archaeological and paleontological resources in Loma Linda.
   Implementing Policies
   a. Update the Survey of Historic Properties Inventory of 1988, taking into consideration buildings,
        neighborhoods, and other features of historic, architectural, or cultural significance.
   b. Establish priorities and pursue designating historic districts, following study and recommendation
        by the Historic Commission to preserve historic areas.
   c.   Consider pursuing the designation of new historic landmarks.
   d. Preserve significant historic structures through review of demolition permits or alterations to such
        structures by the Historic Commission. Permit adaptive reuse of historic landmark structures for
        institutional, office, or commercial uses, where improvements to the structure retain the integrity
        of the historic landmark (see Community Design Element, Section 3.2).
   e. Where new development occurs around an historic structure, ensure that the surrounding setting
        is compatible with the historic structure (see Community Design Element).
   f.   As a standard condition of approval for new development projects, require that, if cultural or
        paleontological resources are encountered during grading, alteration of earth materials in the
        vicinity of the find be halted until a qualified expert has evaluated the find and recorded identified
        cultural resources.
   9.8       GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION
   Local agencies, such as the City of Loma Linda, have an important role to play in California’s fight
   against global warming, which has been identified as one of the most serious environmental effects
   facing the State today. Cities are being encouraged by the State to incorporate sustainable design
   into projects from the start, addressing global climate change considerations at the earliest feasible
   time. Through its General Plan, the City of Loma Linda intends to encourage well-designed,
   sustainable development projects to help move the State away from “business as usual” and toward a
   low-carbon future.
   Assembly Bill (AB) 1493 of 2002 required the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to develop and
   adopt the nation’s first greenhouse gas standards for automobiles. On June 1, 2005, Governor
   Schwarzenegger signed Executive Order S-3-2005, which calls for a reduction in greenhouse gas
   emissions to 1990 levels by 2020, and for an 80 percent reduction in GHG emissions by 2050. In
   addition, Governor Schwarzenegger signed AB 32, the California Climate Solutions Act of 2006
   (Health & Safety Code Section 38500 et seq.), in September 2006. AB 32 codified the state’s
Chapter 9.0                         Conservation and Open Space Element                                      9-27

                                                                                Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                  Conservation and Open Space Element
   greenhouse gas emissions target by requiring that California’s greenhouse gas emissions be reduced
   to 1990 levels by 2020. In addition, AB 32 directs CARB to make available a list of early action GHG
   emission reduction measures by June 30, 2007. These measures were updated in October 2007
   (CARB, 2007). Regulations to implement these measures are to be adopted before January 1, 2010,
   and the finalized emissions reduction measures will become operative and enforceable January 1,
   2012.
   To address the issue of global climate change and reducing carbon emissions requires a brad range
   of policies and actions. By providing a balance between local employment and housing, the General
   Plan provides the opportunity for Loma Linda residents and workers to reduce their daily commute,
   with consequent reductions in air pollutant and carbon emissions. Providing for compact, walkable
   communities and infill development in areas served by existing infrastructure, utilizes the resources
   that existing neighborhoods offer, and conserves open space and natural resources.
   Building “green” will reduce energy consumption reduce carbon emissions, and is a sound financial
   choice. Investments in green buildings pay for themselves, according to a new study for 40 California
   agencies. This study, drawing on national data for 33 green buildings and an in-depth review of
   several hundred existing studies, found that sustainable buildings are a cost-effective investment. The
   report concluded that financial benefits of green design are between $50 and $70 per square foot in
   an LEED building, over 10 times the additional cost associated with building green.
   Much of our built environment is now powered by fossil fuels, which create the greenhouse gases that
   contribute to global warming. Thus, reducing energy consumption and increasing the use of
   renewable energy sources is a key component of addressing global climate change concerns.
   9.8.1 Guiding Policy
   Minimize greenhouse gas emissions that are reasonably attributable to the City’s discretionary land
   use decisions and internal government operations, with the goal of reducing Loma Linda’s
   greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020.
   Implementing Policies
   Compact Community Measures
   a. Encourage the development of vacant and underutilized parcels consistent with neighborhood
       character in a way that best adds value to the surrounding area.
   b. Facilitate employment opportunities that offer low vehicle use and minimize the need for
       automobile trips, such as live/work, telecommuting, satellite work centers, and home occupations,
       in addition to implementation of mixed-use development strategies.
   c.  Encourage patterns of commercial development that support use of public transit, including
       modifying development regulations to facilitate commercial and/or mixed use projects at sites
       near transit stops.
   Energy Conservation and Air Quality Measures
   d. Encourage energy-efficient landscaping for resource conservation by developing guidelines that
       emphasize proper irrigation techniques and sustainable landscaping (organic fertilizers and
       pesticides).
   e. Consider light-colored surfacing on pavements and rooftops where feasible to reduce heat
       absorption.
Chapter 9.0                     Conservation and Open Space Element                                      9-28

                                                                                  Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                     Conservation and Open Space Element
   f.  As part of the development review process, work with builders to maximize energy conservation
       benefits in the placement of buildings on a site with regard to sun and natural breezes.
   g. Actively support provision of infrastructure needed for alternative fuel vehicles, including fueling
       and charging stations. Review and consider revising applicable codes applying to refueling and
       recharging infrastructure to facilitate their inclusion in new development where appropriate.
   h. Prohibit the installation of wood-burning fireplaces and other devices in new or renovated homes.
   i.  Facilitate implementation of renewable technologies through streamlined planning and
       development rules, codes, processing, and other incentives.
   j.  Incorporate measures to protect solar access from shading by neighboring structures and trees,
       thereby facilitating the use of passive or active solar systems.
   k.  Provide incentives such as expedited processing for facilities that use renewable energy sources.
       Work with State and Federal agencies to secure tax exemptions, tax rebates, or other financial
       incentives for such facilities.
   l.  Preserve and encourage planting trees in neighborhoods to provide shade in summer and reduce
       heat loss in winter. Successful methods include placing trees to the west and northwest of houses
       to shade from the hot summer sun and grouping trees to protect them from harsh elements and
       support their longevity. Trees can reduce air temperatures 5–10° F from shading and evapo-
       transpiration (water in leaves converting into vapor, cooling the air).
   Transportation Measures
   m. Promote transit routes and link neighborhoods with transit.
   n. Encourage businesses and public agencies to offer telecommuting as a work alternative, and
       allow corporate satellite work centers near housing concentrations to enable residents who are
       employees of out-of-city businesses to reduce their commutes.
   o. Require new development to incorporate features that reduce energy used for transportation,
       including pedestrian and bicycle pathways, and access to transit (where available).
   p. Include recycled and energy-conserving materials for road construction and repair, as well as
       resource-efficient materials, such as rubberized asphalt concrete and pervious pavement, in road
       repair and construction where it is cost effective and feasible.
   q. Work with Omnitrans to provide turnouts for transit stops.
   r.  Pursue traffic signal timing coordination as a means of improving traffic and reducing vehicle
       idling times.
   s.  As appropriate, require new development and redevelopment projects to address the following:
       bicycle and pedestrian access internally and to other areas; safe access to public transportation
       and construction of paths that connect with other non-motorized routes; safe road crossings at
       major intersections for school children and seniors; and secure, weatherproof bicycle storage
       facilities. Ensure that such facilities will have ongoing maintenance.
   t.  Support and participate in the development of intermodal transit hubs that expand alternative
       transportation use.
   u. Encourage the use of public transit and alternative modes of transportation through land use
       designations and zoning which cluster employment centers with a mix of other uses, and project
       design that incorporates car pool areas, “park and ride” facilities and similar incentives.
   v.  Ensure that transit systems provide for the storage of bicycles on transit as well as at transit
       centers.
Chapter 9.0                        Conservation and Open Space Element                                   9-29

                                                                                 Loma Linda General Plan
                                                                    Conservation and Open Space Element
   w. Work with Omnitrans to post current schedules and maps at all transit stops and other key
       locations, to make real-time arrival information available to riders, and to provide shelters that
       adequately protect riders from inclement weather.
   City Operations Measures
   x.  Minimize Loma Linda’s contributions to greenhouse gas emissions by shifting to low-carbon and
       renewable fuels, and employing zero-emission technologies, where feasible in City purchasing
       and ongoing operations and maintenance activities.
   y.  Provide incentives for City employees to carpool to work.
   z.  Incorporate energy efficiency as a key criterion in the City’s procurement process.
Chapter 9.0                      Conservation and Open Space Element                                   9-30

