



















            C ITY OF I ONE
       C ITY OF J ACKSON
C ITY OF S UTTER C REEK
    HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE
                                   Prepared for:
                                    CITY OF IONE
                            1 EAST MAIN STREET
                                   P.O. BOX 398
                                IONE, CA 95640
                                CITY OF JACKSON
                                   33 BROADWAY
                            JACKSON, CA 95642
                          CITY OF SUTTER CREEK
                                18 MAIN STREET
                       SUTTER CREEK, CA 95685
                                   Prepared by:
            2729 PROSPECT PARK DRIVE, SUITE 220
                    RANCHO CORDOVA, CA 95670
                                 MARCH 2015

        CITY OF IONE
     CITY OF JACKSON
 CITY OF SUTTER CREEK
HOUSING ELEMENT
       2014-2019
          Prepared by:
2729 Prospect Park Drive, Suite 220
   Rancho Cordova, CA 95670
          March 2015

 POLICY DOCUMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................... 1
  Framework for the Joint Amador County Housing Element................................................................. 1
  Data Sources .................................................................................................................................................. 1
  Housing Element Overview ........................................................................................................................ 2
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................................... 6
  Document Organization .............................................................................................................................. 6
  Joint Policy document .................................................................................................................................. 6
  Appendix A: Housing Needs Assessment ................................................................................................. 6
  Appendix B: Constraints .............................................................................................................................. 7
  Appendix C: Resources ..............................................................................................................................10
  Appendix D: Review of Previous Housing Elements ...........................................................................11
  Appendix E: SB 244 Analysis ....................................................................................................................12
Goals, Policies and Programs .........................................................................................................................12
  Joint Goals, Policies and Programs ..........................................................................................................12
  Individual Programs ....................................................................................................................................20
  Quantified Objectives .................................................................................................................................36
Appendices
  Appendix A: Housing Needs Assessment
  Appendix B: Constraints
  Appendix C: Resources
  Appendix D: Review of Previous Housing Elements
  Appendix E: SB 244 Analysis
Table
Table HE-1a Summary of Quantified Objectives – City of Ione .............................................................36
Table HE-1b Summary of Quantified Objectives – City of Jackson .......................................................37
Table HE-1c Summary of Quantified Objectives – City of Sutter Creek ...............................................37
March 2015                                                       2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                            i


  POLICY DOCUMENT
INTRODUCTION
FRAMEWORK FOR THE JOINT AMADOR COUNTY HOUSING ELEMENT
In California, it is typical for each city or county to prepare and maintain its own general plan and
housing element. However, Amador County and four of the five cities in the county have chosen to
collectively prepare a joint countywide housing element. While unusual, this collaborative approach
to the housing element has a number of advantages, including the following:
    Over the past several decades, the trend in dealing with complex public policy issues has been
     toward a regional approach to problem-solving.
    Housing markets are regional in nature and do not stop at jurisdictional boundaries.
    Coordinated regional strategies offer the potential to be more effective in addressing housing
     needs than when each jurisdiction operates individually.
    In difficult economic times such as these, economies of scale accruing from shared resources
     can result in significant cost savings to jurisdictions that jointly prepare housing elements.
DATA SOURCES
In preparing the Housing Element, various sources of information were consulted. The California
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) developed a data packet for
jurisdictions in Amador County that contains much of the information required for the Housing
Needs Assessment of this Housing Element and is the primary source of data for this document.
Where additional information is required, the US Census, which is completed every ten years, is the
preferred data source, as it provides the most reliable and in-depth data for demographic
characteristics of a locality. This report uses the 2010 US Census for current information and the
2000 US Census to track changes since the year 2000. The California Department of Finance (DOF)
is another source of valuable data that is more current than the Census. However, the DOF does
not provide the depth of information that can be found in the 2010 US Census. Whenever possible,
the Amador County data packet, DOF data, and other local sources were used in the Housing
Needs Assessment in order to provide the most current profile of the community.
The 2010 US Census did not collect information in several categories that are required for the
Housing Needs Assessment. Where this is the case, historical DOF data is used. Where DOF data
is not available, information from the 2000 US Census is retained. In cases where this is not feasible
or useful, this assessment references US Census Bureau American Community Survey (ACS) data.
The ACS provides estimates of numerous housing-related indicators based on samples averaged
over a five-year period. Where the US Census provides complete counts of various demographic
indicators, the ACS provides estimates based on statistically significant samples. Due to the small
size of the sample taken in Amador County, the estimates reported by the ACS have large margins
of error. Where ACS data is used, the numbers should not be interpreted as absolute fact, but rather
as a tool to illustrate general proportion or scale. Although Amador City is not a participating
March 2015                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                       1

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
jurisdiction in this joint Housing Element update, information for Amador City is included in many
tables in the Housing Needs Assessment section in order to show complete totals for the whole
county.
HOUSING ELEMENT OVERVIEW
Accommodating the County’s fair share of the housing needs of the State of California is an
important goal. To accomplish this goal, a comprehensive assessment of housing needs provides the
basis for developing responsive policies and programs. This section presents and analyzes
demographic, economic, and housing characteristics and their impact upon housing needs in the
cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek and in unincorporated Amador County.
Recognizing the importance of providing adequate housing, the state has mandated a Housing
Element within every General Plan since 1969. This Housing Element was created in compliance
with state General Plan law pertaining to Housing Elements and was certified by HCD on
XXXXXXXX. [to be completed after Housing Element certification]
Purpose
The State of California has declared that “the availability of housing is of vital statewide importance
and the early attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California
family is a priority of the highest order.” In addition, government and the private sector should
make an effort to provide diverse housing opportunities and accommodate regional housing needs
through a cooperative effort, while maintaining a responsibility toward economic, environmental
and fiscal factors and community goals within the general plan.
Further, state Housing Element law requires “[a]n assessment of housing needs and an inventory of
resources and constraints relevant to the meeting of these needs.” The law requires the element to
include the following:
    An analysis of population and employment trends.
    An analysis and documentation of households characteristics.
    An inventory of land suitable for residential development.
    The identification of a zone or zones where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use
     without a conditional use or other discretionary permit.
    An analysis of potential or actual governmental and non-governmental constraints on the
     improvement, maintenance, and development of housing.
    An analysis of any special housing needs.
    An analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to residential development.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                              March 2015
                                                    2

  POLICY DOCUMENT
    An analysis of publicly assisted housing developments that may convert to non-assisted housing
     developments within the next 10 years.
    An analysis of the County’s fair share of the regional housing needs.
The purpose of these requirements is to develop an understanding of the existing and projected
housing needs within the community and to set policies and schedules promoting the preservation,
improvement, and development of diverse housing types available at a range of costs in Amador
County.
Relationship to Other Elements
State law requires that “the general plan and elements and parts thereof comprise an integrated,
internally consistent, and compatible statement of policies.” Each element of the General Plans of
the four cities and Amador County, including the goals, policies, and implementation measures
(actions) for environmental management, community development, public safety, circulation, and
land use, have been reviewed for their internal consistency with this Housing Element. In addition,
the Zoning Code of each of the four cities and the county has been reviewed for compatibility with
this Housing Element’s goals, policies, and implementation measures to identify places where the
Zoning Codes will need to be updated for consistency.
Due to the passage of Assembly Bill (AB) 162 relating to flood protection in 2007, the jurisdictions
may be required to amend the Community Safety and Seismic Safety Element and the Open Space,
Conservation and Recreation Element of their General Plans. If amendments are needed, the
Housing Element will be amended to be consistent with these elements. As required by law, the
jurisdictions will continue to review any amendments to other elements of the General Plan, or to
the Housing Element, to ensure that internal consistency is maintained. If any disadvantaged
unincorporated communities are identified in the cities’ spheres of influence (SOI) or in the
unincorporated county (outside cities’ SOIs) due to analysis required to comply with Senate Bill (SB)
244, the jurisdiction or jurisdictions will amend their Land Use Elements per SB 244 requirements.
Public Participation
The County and the Cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek held a housing stakeholder
meeting on February 27, 2014, at 3 p.m. in the Amador County Administration Center-Board
Chambers. A flyer inviting over 65 service providers in the region was sent out. There were
approximately 25 participants at the meeting, which started with a brief presentation made by the
consultant. The presentation included a summary of Housing Element state law requirements,
identification of new laws affecting this Housing Element update, a summary of demographic
information from the 2010 Census, and a timeline for the next step in the process for adoption of
the 5th round Housing Element update.
March 2015                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                    3

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
Agencies, advocacy groups, and residents in attendance included the following:
  A representative from Ability Mortgage
  A representative from Coldwell Banker
  A representative from Cavaliere Properties
  A representative from Mother Lode Tea Party
  A representative from Area 12 Agency on Aging
  A representative from Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency
  Residents from Pine Grove, Pioneer, and Jackson
  A representative from the California Senior Legislature representing older Californians in Alpine,
   Amador, Calaveras, Mariposa, and Tuolumne counties
  A representative Board of Supervisors, District 3
Following the presentation a roundtable discussion was held about needs throughout the
county.
During the group discussion, participants were asked to provide feedback on housing issues and the
programs on which they would to see more emphasis placed during this Housing Element update.
The group identified the following needs/programs:
  The majority of age 60+ individuals desire to age in place; incorporate aging in place options.
  Additional senior housing: Increase low-income multi-unit housing, single-family dwellings that
   have been modified for accessibility and in close proximity to needed services (medical offices,
   hospital, pharmacy, grocery store).
  Expand on veterans housing that is accessible and in close proximity to needed services (medical
   office, hospital, pharmacy, grocery store).
  Add home modification or residential repair programs to ensure that seniors who have home
   repairs are able to access programs which provide funding for the specific service.
  Add a program that gives incentives to developers who desire to build smoke-free, tobacco-free
   multi-unit housing.
  Better access to loans and grants for affordable housing.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
                                                  4

 POLICY DOCUMENT
   Provide more information regarding the grants that are available to residents throughout the
    county.
   What housing programs/loans are available to second- and third-time buyers?
   USDA funding: What types of programs are available with this funding?
   The high cost of building fees throughout the county is contributing to the lack of housing being
    built.
   There are currently no construction loans or loans available in the county for purchasing land.
   More incentives are needed to build housing throughout the county.
Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency and Area 12 Agency on Aging provided
information on their current funding sources programs and needs.
   There is a need for more transitional housing for large families.
   There is a need for more supportive housing programs.
   Currently operating a first-time homebuyer program.
   Current funding sources:
   ESG grants
   CDBG grants
   Neighborhood Stabilization Programs
[REMAINDER OF PUBLIC PARTICIPATION SUMMARY TO BE INCLUDED WHEN
COMPLETED]
March 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                  5

                                                                   POLICY DOCUMENT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Below is an outline of the document and all its components.
DOCUMENT ORGANIZATION
    Joint Policy Document
         o Introduction
         o Executive Summary
         o Goals Policies and Programs (Joint)
         o Individual Programs
    Appendix A: Housing Needs Assessment
    Appendix B: Constraints
    Appendix C: Resources
    Appendix D: Review of Previous Housing Elements
    Appendix E: SB 244
JOINT POLICY DOCUMENT
This section includes the introduction and basis for the joint Housing Element approach, executive
summary, Goals, Polices and Programs countywide and then individual programs for each of the
jurisdictions.
APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The Housing Needs Assessment analyzes population and housing characteristics, identifies special
housing needs among certain population groups, evaluates housing conditions, and provides other
important information to support the goals, policies, and programs that will meet the needs of
current and future residents.
Key findings include the following:
    The county’s population is expected to increase by 29 percent over its 2010 population of 35,009
     to a little over 45,100 by 2060. With this rate of anticipated population growth, the demand for
     new housing to accommodate these new residents will increase.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            March 2015
                                                    6

 POLICY DOCUMENT
   More than half of the very-low and extremely-low-income households in each jurisdiction, in
    most cases in both owners and renters, were reported to be overpaying for housing. With the
    exceptions of Amador City and Jackson, over three-quarters of renters were overpaying. Ione
    had the highest percentage of renters overpaying (83%), while Amador City had the highest
    percentage of owners overpaying (79%). Overall, 57% of households in Amador County were
    overpaying in 2011.
   Although population growth strongly affects total demand for new housing, housing needs are
    also influenced by age characteristics. Typically, different age groups have distinct lifestyles,
    family characteristics, incomes, and housing preferences. As people move through each stage of
    life, their housing needs and preferences change. Age characteristics are therefore important in
    planning for the changing housing needs of residents. The median age for Amador County in
    2012 was 48.4 years, significantly older than the California average (33.2). The most populous
    age cohort across most of the jurisdictions was 50 to 59 year olds.
   The large majority of seniors own rather than rent their home in Amador County. This is true
    across all jurisdictions, although seniors are much more likely to rent in Plymouth (26%) and
    Sutter Creek (25%) than in the rest of the county.
   A high proportion of female-headed and single-parent households have incomes below the
    poverty line. Jackson has the highest percent of female-headed households in the county living
    under the poverty line, 12% of all households, while the other cities range from 0 to 5% of
    female-headed households living under the poverty line.
   Commuting patterns reflect that there is an imbalance between where people live and work in
    Amador County. Roughly a fifth (19%) of residents in Amador County drive between 25 and 60
    minutes to work each day and another 15% drive more than an hour to work. Those in Amador
    City (26%) and Plymouth (22%) are most likely to commute the longest, while Jackson residents
    are most likely to have the shortest commute, with over 90% traveling less than 25 minutes. The
    median commute time for residents countywide is 28.5 minutes.
Refer to Appendix A for the complete Housing Needs Assessment.
APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Various interrelated factors may constrain the ability of the private and public sectors to make
available adequate housing and meet the housing needs for each economic segment of the
community. These factors can be divided into two categories: (1) non-governmental and (2)
governmental. Non-governmental constraints consist of land availability, the environment, vacancy
rates, land cost, construction costs, and availability of financing. Governmental constraints consist
of land use controls, development standards, processing fees, development impact fees, code
enforcement, site improvement costs, development permit and approval processing, and provision
for a variety of housing.
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                   7

                                                                   POLICY DOCUMENT
In general, non-governmental constraints can be looked at in an integrated fashion across the cities
of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, Sutter Creek, and the unincorporated area of Amador County while
governmental constraints are specific to each jurisdiction.
Key findings include the following:
Non-governmental constraints
   Portions of Amador County have flood risks because of the county’s high average annual
    rainfall, the number of watercourses that traverse the County, and the location of development
    adjacent to flood-prone areas. Flooding events occur countywide, and have caused significant
    damage in the western portion of the county near population centers, especially in the
    incorporated areas surrounding the Cities of Jackson, Ione, and Sutter Creek.
   Substantial water exists beyond the projected 2020 demand and therefore there is no supply
    constraint to housing development. However, there are specific issues with water treatment that
    affect each jurisdiction’s ability to provide water and could potentially constrain residential
    development.
Governmental constraints
   California law states that local governments must provide incentives to developers of specified
    housing developments, and a density bonus can be used to accomplish this requirement. In
    return for these requirements, the developer must reserve these units for this purpose for a
    certain number of years (OPR, 2003). Requirements for density bonuses are not included in the
    zoning ordinances of Amador County and Sutter Creek. While density bonuses are mentioned in
    Section 17.32 of the City of Jackson’s Development Code, an ordinance to allow density
    bonuses per state law has not been included in the code. This can be a constraint in the
    development of affordable housing. In addition, since density bonus ordinances are required
    under state law, modifying the zoning ordinance to include density bonus regulations is included
    in the Housing Element’s implementation programs for these three jurisdictions.
   Senate Bill (SB) 2 requires that transitional and supportive housing types be treated as residential
    uses and subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in
    the same zone. Both transitional and supportive housing types must be explicitly permitted in
    the municipal code. In addition, SB 2 requires that jurisdictions allow emergency shelters
    without discretionary review in at least one zone. The jurisdictions in the joint Housing Element
    have complied with this portion of SB 2. Amador County and Sutter Creek will need to amend
    their Zoning Code to allow transitional and supportive housing by right in zones that allow
    residential uses in the same way other residential uses are allowed.
   State law (Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 of the Health and Safety Code, Employee Housing Act)
    require that employee housing for farmworkers and other employees be allowed ministerially in
    zones allowing single-family residential structures (Section 17021.5). Section 17021.6 requires
    that farmworker housing consisting of 36 beds or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a single
    family or household be allowed ministerially in zones that allow agricultural uses. No conditional
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                              March 2015
                                                    8

 POLICY DOCUMENT
   use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance shall be required of this employee
   housing that is not required of any other agricultural activity in the same zone. Programs will be
   included for the City of Ione, Jackson, and Sutter Creek to amend their Zoning Codes to comply
   with the Employee Housing Act.
  To ensure fair and efficient process for persons with disabilities to make necessary accessibility
   adjustments to their homes, Amador County and the City of Jackson will amend their codes to
   create a reasonable accommodation procedure. The City of Sutter Creek will amend their
   reasonable accommodation procedure to fully comply with SB 520 (see County Program H-13,
   Jackson Program H-11, and Sutter Creek Program H-7). Additionally the definition of “family”
   in the City of Ione, City of Jackson and Amador County’s Development Code has been updated
   to state “One or more persons living together in a dwelling unit with common access to and
   common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit.”
  Extremely low-income households have special housing needs because they are unlikely to find
   market-rate housing that is affordable. Many of the extremely low-income households will fall
   within a special needs category (disabled, seniors, large families or female-headed households)
   and require supportive housing services. Assembly Bill 2634 (Lieber, 2006) requires the
   quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of extremely low-income
   households. Housing elements must identify zoning to encourage and facilitate supportive
   housing and single-room occupancy units (SROs). Amador County has included Program H-12
   which states that the County will update its Zoning Code to allow for single-room occupancy
   units. Program H-2.2 states that the County and four cities will prioritize funding and/or offer
   financial incentives or regulatory concessions to encourage the development or rehabilitation of
   single-room occupancy units and/or other units affordable to the extremely low-income, such as
   supportive and multi-family units. The cities of Jackson, Ione, and Sutter Creek currently allow
   SROs.
  Manufactured and factory-built housing can be integral parts of the solution for addressing
   housing needs. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.3, the siting and permit process for
   manufactured housing should be regulated in the same manner as a conventional or stick-built
   structure. Specifically, Government Code Section 65852.3(a) requires that with the exception of
   architectural requirements, a local government, shall only subject manufactured homes (mobile
   homes) to the same development standards to which a conventional single-family residential
   dwelling on the same lot would be subject, including, but not limited to, building setback
   standards, side and rear yard requirements, standards for enclosures, access, and vehicle parking,
   aesthetic requirements, and minimum square footage requirements. The City of Plymouth and
   Sutter Creek have included programs to review their Zoning Codes to comply with Government
   Code Section 65852.3.
Refer to Appendix B: Constraints for a complete analysis of governmental and non-governmental
constraints.
March 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                  9

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
APPENDIX C: RESOURCES
Appendix C: Resources provides an overview of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), land
inventory, and energy conservation measures in each of the five jurisdictions. The Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to plan for anticipated
growth. The RHNA quantifies the anticipated need for housing within each jurisdiction for the 5-
year period from January 2014 through June 2019. Communities then determine how they will
address this need through the process of updating the Housing Elements of their General Plans.
The intent of the RHNA is to ensure that local jurisdictions address their fair share of the housing
needs for the entire region. A major goal of the RHNA is to assure that every community provides
an opportunity for a mix of affordable housing to each economic segment of its population. The
RHNA jurisdictional allocations are made to ensure that adequate sites and zoning are provided to
address existing and anticipated housing demands during the planning period and that market forces
are not inhibited in addressing the housing needs of a particular community.
State law (Government Code Section 65583[a][7]) requires housing elements to contain an analysis
of opportunities for residential energy conservation. The energy conservation section of a housing
element must inventory and analyze the opportunities to encourage the incorporation of energy
saving features, energy saving materials, and energy efficient systems and design for residential
development. Housing element policies and programs should address the environmental significance
and operational benefits of employing energy conservation in the building and retrofitting of
housing.
Opportunities for residential energy conservation exist at all levels: individual dwelling units,
residential projects, neighborhoods, communities, and regions. Conservation can be achieved
through a variety of approaches, including reducing the use of energy-consuming appliances and
features in a home, physical modification of existing structures or land uses, and reducing the
reliance on automobiles by encouraging more mixed-use and infill development and providing
pedestrian access to commercial and recreational facilities.
Key findings include the following:
    Each jurisdiction has sufficient land zoned for residential development to accommodate their
     RHNAs for the 5th Housing Element cycle.
    The County and Cities actively promote energy conservation programs offered through local
     service and utility providers including the CARE program, REACH, and The Family Electric
     Rate Assistance (FERA). The CARE program provides a 20 percent monthly discount on gas
     and electric rates to households with qualified incomes, certain nonprofit organizations,
     homeless shelters, hospices, and other qualified nonprofit group living facilities. The REACH
     program provides one-time energy assistance to customers who have no other way to pay their
     energy bill. The intent of REACH is to assist low-income households, particularly the elderly,
     disabled, sick, working poor, and the unemployed, who experience hardships and are unable to
     pay for their necessary energy needs. FERA is a program that provides a rate reduction for large
     households of three or more people with low to middle income.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            March 2015
                                                  10

 POLICY DOCUMENT
Refer to Appendix C: Resources for a complete analysis of the RHNA, land inventory, and energy
conservation.
APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENTS
In an effort to ensure the policies and implementation programs included in the Housing Element
are relevant to addressing the current housing needs in Amador County, an evaluation of
achievements under the previous Housing Elements was undertaken in Appendix D: Review of Previous
Housing Elements. This evaluation provided the basis for recommended modifications and the
establishment of new objectives in the Housing Element.
Key achievements from the previous planning period include:
   Amador County reduced development-related fees during Fiscal Year 2008-2009. So far no
    affordable housing projects have taken advantage of the fee reduction.
   Amador County has amended the Zoning Code to allow small family day care homes as a
    permitted use in all residential zones and large family day care homes as a conditional use in all
    residential zones, to amend the definition of “family” to comply with state law, and to allow
    emergency and transitional housing as a permitted use in the C-1 zone.
   The City of Ione’s density bonus program (codified in Zoning Code Section 17.46) was updated
    to be consistent with State density bonus law as part of the 2009 comprehensive Zoning Code
    update.
   As part of the General Plan update, the City of Ione rezoned land to allow higher density
    residential development. 8.4 acres were rezoned to the High Density Multiple-family or Light
    Commercial.
   In February 2014, the City of Jackson amended Section 17.32 of the Development code to
    require portions of new development to provide for housing opportunities for extremely low
    income households.
   The City of Jackson is currently working with Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency
    (A-TCAA) on a transitional housing project located on Clinton Road. The City will continue to
    meet regularly and support A-TCAA in their efforts to provide transitional, supportive and
    female headed household housing.
   The City of Plymouth adopted a comprehensive update to its Zoning Code on March 27, 2014.
    The update achieves consistency with the General Plan and implements a number of the
    programs listed in the Housing Element. Amendments incorporated a range of densities and
    uses within the City’s residential zoning districts and incorporated several affordable housing-
    related concepts, including density bonus provisions and use listings required by state law.
   In 2010, the City of Sutter Creek amended the Zoning Ordinance to provide minimum densities
    for the R-3 and R-4 zoning districts.
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                  11

                                                                  POLICY DOCUMENT
A separate review of the previous Housing Element was completed for each jurisdiction and can be
found in Appendix D: Review of Previous Housing Elements.
APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
Senate Bill (SB) 244 (Wolk) was approved by Governor Brown in October 2011 and requires cities
and counties to address the infrastructure needs of disadvantaged unincorporated communities
(DUC) in city and county general plans, Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) Municipal
Service Reviews (MSR), and annexation decisions.
Government Code Section 65302.10(a) requires that before the due date for adoption of the next
housing element after January 1, 2012, the general plan land use element must be updated to identify
and describe each DUC (fringe community, legacy community, and/or island community) that exists
within unincorporated areas of the county or in spheres of influence (SOI) of each city; analyze for
each identified community the water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, and structural fire protection
needs; and identify financial funding alternatives for the extension of services to any identified
communities.
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
JOINT GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
This section describes Amador County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek’s
future housing plan, including housing goals, policies, and implementation programs to achieve
those goals. The section begins with joint goals, policies, and programs, followed by individual
programs for each of the jurisdictions.
The goals of the Housing Element provide a framework for compliance with California
Government Code Section 65583, which requires the Housing Element contain a “statement of the
community’s goals, quantified objectives, and policies relative to the maintenance, improvement, and
development of housing.”
GOAL H-1:       Provide adequate sites to encourage provision of affordable housing.
        Policy H‐1.1: Ensure sufficient sites are appropriately zoned to accommodate each
                       jurisdiction’s share of regional housing needs.
            Program H-1.1:      To ensure that there is a sufficient supply of multi-family- and single-
                                family-zoned land to meet the regional housing needs allocation
                                (RHNA), the County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and
                                Sutter Creek will annually review their land inventory. Each
                                jurisdiction will consider single-family-zoned, vacant infill lots for
                                potential reuse and additional development of affordable second
                                units, multi-family dwellings, and special needs housing.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
                                                   12

 POLICY DOCUMENT
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning Department of each jurisdiction
                            Time Frame:              Annually
                            Funding Source(s):       General Fund
      Policy H-1.2: Make use of state and federal programs to support housing provision,
                    including funding programs. Work with nonprofit and for-profit developers
                    to make use of those programs for which the developer must be the
                    applicant.
          Program H-1.2:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                            Creek will consider jointly pursuing funding through various state
                            and federal programs or apply individually. The jurisdictions will
                            consider jointly pursing funding on an annual basis or pursue funding
                            individually by submitting grant applications depending on the
                            availability of funding. Local, state, and federal programs include:
                               BEGIN (federal)
                               CalHome Program (federal)
                               Community Development Block Grant (federal)
                               Multifamily Housing Program (federal)
                               Section 8 (federal)
                               State Homeownership Program (state)
                               Residential Energy Conservation (state)
                               Community Reinvestment Act (federal)
                               Mortgage Credit Certificate
                               Non-Profit Housing Development Corporation
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning Department of each jurisdiction,
                                                     Grants Coordinators
                            Time Frame:              Annually, and as NOFAs are released
                            Funding Source(s):       General Fund, Program           Administration
                                                     Funds (Housing Authority)
March 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                               13

                                                              POLICY DOCUMENT
      Policy H-1.3: Promote the development of second units.
          Program H-1.3:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                            Creek should promote the development of second unit dwellings by
                            publicizing information at City Halls, the County Administration
                            Center, and posting information on the each jurisdiction’s website.
                            Each jurisdiction should provide information regarding permit
                            requirements, changes in State law, and benefits of second unit
                            dwellings to property owners and the community.
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning Department of each jurisdiction
                            Time Frame:              Review and update annually
                            Funding Source:          General Fund
      Policy H-1.4: Assist in the development of housing affordable to extremely low-, very low-
                    and low-income households through financial and/or technical assistance.
          Program H-1.4:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                            Creek shall consider applying jointly or individually to use CDBG
                            funding for the First-time Homebuyer Program.
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning Department of each jurisdiction
                            Time Frame:              Apply annually
                            Funding Source:          General Fund
      Policy H-1.5: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek will
                    consider establishing countywide or individual Affordable Housing Trust
                    Fund(s).
          Program H-1.5:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter
                            Creek will consider developing an Affordable Housing Trust Fund
                            with funds that could be acquired from housing developers and or
                            employers throughout the County. Funds could be collected from
                            housing developers when new residential projects are built or new
                            employers locating in the County when their workplaces are
                            established. Once funds start being collected, the newly established
                            Countywide Housing Committee comprised of a representative from
                            each jurisdiction would develop a priority list for the use of these
                            funds. Funds could be used to build new affordable housing or to
                            rehabilitate existing housing.
                            The jurisdictions would apply for matching funds from the Local
                            Housing Trust Fund Matching Grant Program though the State
                            Housing and Community Development Department (HCD).
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                      March 2015
                                                14

 POLICY DOCUMENT
                           Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, County Planning,
                                                     Planning Commission, Board of Supervisors
                                                     and City Council.
                           Time Frame:               Consider developing a trust fund by June
                                                     2016.
                           Funding Source:           General Fund
Goal H-2:     Provide support for affordable and special-needs housing in Amador County.
      Policy H-2.1: Provide for a variety of housing types to meet the housing needs of special
                    population groups.
          Program H-2.1:   The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                           Creek will consider working together or individually with nonprofits
                           and for-profit housing development corporations specializing in
                           housing for various special needs groups to accommodate housing
                           that meets the needs of these groups.
                           Each jurisdiction will work with nonprofit housing corporations to
                           educate its citizens regarding the necessity of providing the affordable
                           housing needed to support the job growth occurring throughout the
                           County. Specifically, this information will focus on the need to
                           provide affordable housing close to jobs in an effort to reduce the
                           traffic and air quality impacts that result from long commutes.
                           Programs will target community opposition to affordable housing
                           projects in an effort to establish positive perceptions. Education will
                           occur through public meetings, presentations to the community, and
                           articles published in the local newspaper.
                           Should the County and the cities successfully receive funding either
                           jointly or individually, each jurisdiction will promote and publicize
                           the availability of funding for loans and grants (when additional
                           CDBG/HOME funds are acquired) through the local media,
                           mailings to property owners in targeted areas, and mailings to local
                           contractors and developers.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Council, Board of Supervisors,
                                                     City/County       Administrators,    Planning,
                                                     Engineering, and Finance Departments
                           Time Frame:               Annually
                           Funding Source(s):        State and Federal Grants
March 2015                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                              15
                                                              POLICY DOCUMENT
          Program H-2.2:    Assembly Bill (AB) 2634 requires the quantification and analysis of
                            existing and projected housing needs of extremely low-income
                            households. To facilitate housing for extremely low-income persons,
                            the County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                            Creek will prioritize funding and/or offer financial incentives or
                            regulatory concessions to encourage the development or
                            rehabilitation of single-room occupancy units and/or other units
                            affordable to the extremely low-income, such as supportive and
                            multi-family units.
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning Departments
                            Time Frame:              December 2015
                            Funding Source(s):       General Fund
          Program H-2.3:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                            Creek shall consider working together or individually with the A-
                            TCAA to find suitable sites for transitional, supportive, and female
                            heads of households housing. The County and the cities of Ione,
                            Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek shall consider working together
                            to host an annual meeting with A-TCAA to insure that opportunities
                            for transitional and special needs housing are implemented to the
                            greatest extent possible.
                            Responsibility:          Building Inspector, County Planning, City
                                                     Planners, County Administrators and City
                                                     Managers
                            Time Frame:              Ongoing with annual meetings
                            Funding Source:          General Fund
Goal H-3: Support the conservation and rehabilitation of the existing housing stock and
           promote the reduction of energy use and the conservation of natural resources in
           the development of housing.
      Policy H-3.1: Pursue a combination of public and private actions to rehabilitate and
                     maintain the existing stock of housing.
          Program H-3.1:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                            Creek shall consider surveying the conditions of housing stock jointly
                            or individually to determine the number of housing units in need of
                            rehabilitation and replacement.
                            The jurisdictions should consider utilizing the survey results to
                            pursue available funding sources to develop a countywide
                            rehabilitation program (or continue with individual programs). The
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                      March 2015
                                               16
 POLICY DOCUMENT
                            County and the Cities shall keep in contact with Department of
                            Housing and Community Development for changes which will
                            improve the chances of obtaining funding, including the availability
                            of new programs.
                            Responsible Agencies: Building Departments, Planning Departments
                            Time Frame:              June 2016
                            Funding Source:          CDBG, HOME, USDA Rural Housing
                                                     Services funds
      Policy H-3.2: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek shall
                    promote energy and water conservation designs and features in residential
                    developments.
          Program H-3.2:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                            Creek will enforce the State of California’s Title 24 energy
                            requirements. Title 24 energy requirements define construction
                            standards that promote energy conservation. In addition, each
                            jurisdiction will consider partnering with AC-TCAand ACES, Inc.
                            (formerly Amador County Environmental Services) to promote
                            energy conservation.
                            Some measures the County and the cities could undertake jointly or
                            individually to assist in the implementation of the A-TCAA program
                            include providing brochures at public counters, providing brochures
                            to senior centers, or applying for funds either jointly or individually
                            to assist homeowners in undertaking weatherization projects in
                            conjunction with government-assisted rehabilitation projects.
                            Responsible Agencies: Planning,       Building,    and    Engineering
                                                     Departments
                            Time Frame:              Ongoing
                            Funding Source(s):       None required
      Policy H-3.3: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek
                    should consider working together with local utility companies to implement
                    energy awareness programs.
          Program H-3.3:    The County and cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek
                            shall continue to support PG&E’s weatherization program as an
                            important means of lowering housing costs and preserving housing
                            affordability.
          Program H-3.4:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                            Creek will consider partnering with Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E)
March 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                               17

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
                             to promote energy saving programs by notifying home builders of
                             the design tools offered by PG&E and by posting a link on each
                             jurisdiction’s website to notify ratepayers of the variety of programs.
                             The County and cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek
                             will also consider partnering with the California Alternate Rates for
                             Energy (CARE), the Relief for Energy Assistance through
                             Community Help (REACH) and the Family Electric Rate Assistance
                             (FERA).
                             Responsible Agencies: Planning,        Building,     and     Engineering
                                                      Departments
                             Time Frame:              Ongoing
                             Funding Source(s):       None required
Goal 4: Provide decent housing and quality living environment for Amador County
        residents, regardless of age, race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national
        origin, color, disability, or economic level.
       Policy 4-1    The jurisdictions shall promote housing opportunities for persons regardless
                     of age, race, religion, sex, marital status, national origin, color, disability, or
                     economic level.
           Program H-4.1:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                             Creek shall obtain information on fair housing laws from the
                             Department of Housing and Community Development and have
                             copies of the information available for the public on each
                             jurisdiction’s website, at City Halls, the County Administration
                             Center, and the local library(ies).
                             Responsible Agencies: Planning Departments
                             Time Frame:              2014
                             Funding Source:          General Fund
           Program H-4.2:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                             Creek shall refer housing discrimination complaints to the A-TCAA
                             and the fair housing authority for Amador County.
                             Responsible Agencies: Planning Departments
                             Time Frame:              2014-2019
                             Funding Source:          General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
                                                18

 POLICY DOCUMENT
Goal 5: Reduce public and private constraints to housing production while providing an
        appropriate level of environmental review, as well as maintaining design and
        construction quality and fiscal responsibility.
       Policy H-5.1: The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek shall
                     enforce its land use policies that allow residential growth for a variety of
                     housing types.
           Program H-5.1:    The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                             Creek will ensure that residential development projects are consistent
                             with the goals and policies of their General Plans and that there is
                             internal consistency between the Housing Element and the rest of
                             the General Plan. Each jurisdiction will prepare an General Plan
                             Annual Progress Report in compliance with State direction and
                             provide it to City Councils and Board of Supervisors on progress
                             toward meeting its goals, objectives, policies and programs.
                             Monitoring will include an evaluation of the Housing Element
                             objectives by the responsible agencies and departments, meeting
                             timing and funding commitments for implementing actions, as well
                             as the number of housing units provided or other measurable
                             indicators achieved for each measure that has been put into place.
                             The final reports will be submitted to OPR and HCD annually.
                             Responsible Agencies: City/County Administrators, Planning, Public
                                                      Works,      Engineering,    and      Finance
                                                      Departments, City Councils and Board of
                                                      Supervisors
                             Time Frame:              Annually, 2015
                             Funding Source(s):       General Fund
       Policy H-5.2: The agencies shall continue efforts to fast-track residential applications in
                     order to promote the construction of housing.
           Program H-5.2:    Complex permit processing procedures can be an obstacle in housing
                             development, especially for affordable housing projects under tight
                             timelines imposed by state and federal funding programs. The
                             County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth and Sutter Creek
                             will minimize processing time for residential development permits,
                             especially affordable residential projects and those that conform to
                             respective jurisdiction’s development requirements.
March 2015                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                19

                                                            POLICY DOCUMENT
                            The County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter
                            Creek will monitor the development processing/review procedures
                            to minimize the time required for review. This reduction in time will
                            reduce the cost to developers and may increase the housing
                            production throughout the County. Each jurisdiction, on an annual
                            basis, will review and update their processing/review procedures as
                            necessary
                            Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planners and County
                                                   Planning
                            Time Frame:            Annually
                            Funding Source:        General Fund
       Policy H-5.3: Reestablish a countywide housing task force to implement this housing
                     element.
           Program 5.3:     Pursue formation of a County Housing Task Force to consolidate
                            countywide housing needs.
                            Build on contacts with city managers, city planners, and County staff
                            to reestablish a housing task force. The purpose of the task force
                            would be to explore the joint county/cities housing element
                            programs.
                            Responsible Agencies: City Administrator, Cities and County
                                                   Planning departments, Public Works,
                                                   Engineering, and Finance Departments,
                                                   Planning Commission, City Council and
                                                   Board of Supervisors
                            Time Frame:            Establish in 2015 and meet biannually or a
                                                   necessary.
                            Funding Source(s):     General Fund
INDIVIDUAL PROGRAMS
Ione Individual Programs
             Program H-1:   Building Code Review.
                            The City will continue to annually review the City’s building codes
                            for current compliance and adopt the necessary revisions so as to
                            further local development objectives.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       March 2015
City of Ione Individual Programs
                                               20

 POLICY DOCUMENT
                       Responsible Agencies: City Manager, Building           Inspector,     City
                                                 Planner, and City Council
                       Time Frame:               Annual evaluation of the adequacy of the
                                                 City’s building codes
                       Funding Source:           General Fund
          Program H-2: Wastewater Capacity.
                       The City is committed to ensuring that there is enough wastewater
                       treatment capacity to support its fair share of the region's housing
                       needs. The current approach is to provide more disposal space
                       through land application. This allows the City to drain the various
                       percolation ponds and complete the necessary maintenance on a
                       regular basis. By completing the maintenance and moving to land
                       application, the City is able to increase capacity to (1) satisfy existing
                       approved development, (2) satisfy development agreement
                       commitments; and (3) satisfy RHNA obligation. The City complies
                       with Government Code Section 65589.7, the City shall grant a
                       priority for the provision of these services to proposed developments
                       that include housing units affordable to lower income households.
                       Responsible Agencies: City Council, City Manager, Wastewater
                                                 Operator, City Engineer, City Planner
                       Time Frame:               Ongoing through 2019
                       Funding Source:           Wastewater Fund
          Program H-3: Ione Program Potable Water Capacity.
                       The City is committed to ensuring that there is enough potable water
                       to support its fair share of the region's housing needs. The City will
                       continue to work collaboratively with the region's potable water
                       provider, Amador Water Agency, to identify both short and long-
                       term viable and cost effective solutions to maintaining potable water
                       availability in the City.
                       Responsible Agencies: City Council, City Manager, City Engineer,
                                                 City Planner
                       Time Frame:               On-going
                       Funding Source:           General Fund
March 2015                            2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                           City of Ione Individual Programs
                                           21

                                                             POLICY DOCUMENT
             Program H-4:   Ione Beautification (Code Enforcement) Program.
                            The City currently handles violations of its Municipal Code on a
                            demand-driven basis. Staff responds to housing code complaints
                            initiated by Ione tenants. The City plans to sponsor debris hauling
                            and clean-up programs and plans to limit the number of garage sales
                            permitted during the year.
                            Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Building Inspector, Police
                                                   Chief, City Planner
                            Time Frame:            Ongoing as complaints are received; debris
                                                   hauling and cleanup program biannually.
                            Funding Source:        General Fund
             Program H-5:   Infill Development Program
                            Infill development is one technique in meeting the housing needs
                            required by expanding populations. The City will encourage the use
                            of vacant small individual lots in the central City by reviewing, and
                            amending as appropriate, development standards to accommodate
                            housing development.
                            The City will encourage the use of infill for the development of
                            housing by addressing density requirements, which may constrain the
                            development of housing on infill lots, and if necessary remove those
                            constraints. The City will consider reduced impact fees for infill
                            development.
                            Responsible Agencies: City Planner, City Manager,            Planning
                                                   Commission, City Council
                            Time Frame:            June 2015
                            Funding Source:        City General Fund
             Program H-6:   Affordable Housing Program
                            To encourage the development and availability of housing affordable
                            to a broad range of households with varying income levels
                            throughout Ione, the City requires that residential projects of ten or
                            more units include five percent of the units in the project as
                            affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
                            Developers of less than ten housing units are exempt from this
                            requirement.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       March 2015
City of Ione Individual Programs
                                              22
 POLICY DOCUMENT
              Developers of ten or more housing units shall provide the following:
                In a rental housing project of ten or more units two percent of
                 the units shall be affordable to very low -income households, two
                 percent shall be affordable to low-income households and one
                 percent shall be affordable to moderate-income households.
                In a for-sale project of ten or more units two percent shall be
                 affordable to low-income households and three percent shall be
                 affordable to moderate-income households.
                Affordable units shall be built on site and must be comparable in
                 infrastructure (including wastewater, water and other utilities),
                 construction quality, and exterior design to the market-rate
                 residential units. Affordable units may be smaller in aggregate
                 size and have different interior finishes and features than market-
                 rate units, so long as the interior features are durable, of good
                 quality, and consistent with contemporary standards for new
                 housing. The number of bedrooms should be the same as those
                 in the market-rate units, except that if the market-rate units
                 provide more than three bedrooms, the affordable units need not
                 provide more than three bedrooms
                All affordable units must be constructed and occupied
                 concurrently with or prior to the construction and occupancy of
                 market-rate units. In phased developments, the affordable units
                 must be evenly distributed throughout the development and will
                 be constructed and occupied in proportion to the number of
                 units in each phase of the residential development
                Deed restrictions shall be provided to assure that rental units
                 developed for very low-, low- and moderate-income persons will
                 remain affordable for 55 years and ownership units developed for
                 low- and moderate-income units will remain affordable for 45
                 years.
                If an owner sells an affordable unit before the end of the 45 year
                 resale restriction term, the owner shall repay the City/ subsidy
                 balance. The balance is any remaining principal and accrued
                 interest after the subsidy has been reduced as defined in the
                 Buyer’s Resale Agreement (to be determined at the time of
                 purchase).
                Per the deed restriction of the affordable units, all affordable
                 units resold shall be required to be sold to an income-eligible
                 household.
March 2015                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                               City of Ione Individual Programs
                                 23

                                                                 POLICY DOCUMENT
                               The City will develop and maintain a waiting list of eligible
                                persons wishing to purchase or occupy an affordable housing
                                unit.
                            Alternatives
                            Payment of an in-lieu fee for ownership or rental units may be
                            acceptable and the amount of in-lieu fees shall be established by a
                            nexus study to be completed by June of 2010. The money will then
                            be placed into an affordable housing trust fund. The City will
                            develop a set of priorities for the use of Housing Trust Fund monies
                            once the Housing Trust Fund is established (Joint Action).
                               If the developer is permitted to dedicate land for the
                                development of affordable units in satisfaction of part or all of its
                                affordable housing requirement, the agreement shall identify the
                                site of the dedicated land and shall provide for the
                                implementation of such dedication in a manner deemed
                                appropriate and timely by the City.
                            Incentives
                            Possible incentives that may be included but are not limited to the
                            following:
                               Assistance with accessing and apply for funding (based on
                                availability of federal, state, local foundations, and private funds);
                               Mortgage-subsidy or down payment assistance programs to assist
                                first time homebuyers and other qualifying households, when
                                such funds are available;
                               Expedited/streamlined application processing and development
                                review;
                               Modification of development requirements, such as reduced set
                                backs and parking standards on a case-by-case basis; and
                               Density Bonuses.
                            Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner,                 Planning
                                                     Commission, and City Council.
                            Time Frame:              Implement as residential projects are
                                                     processed through the Planning Department.
                                                     Nexus study to be completed by June 2016.
                            Funding Source:          General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
City of Ione Individual Programs
                                                24

 POLICY DOCUMENT
          Program H-7: Large Family Housing Program.
                       Renter households with seven or more persons do not have an
                       adequate number of dwelling possibilities in the City. The number of
                       large rental housing units is very limited in the City and as such large
                       renter households cannot obtain adequate housing.
                       The City will continue to provide incentives, such as modifications to
                       development standards, and regulatory incentives for the
                       development of rental housing units with four or more bedrooms
                       Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner,              Planning
                                              Commission and City Council
                       Time Frame:            Ongoing
                       Funding Source:        General Fund
          Program H-8: Senior Housing Program.
                       To encourage the development of affordable senior projects, the City
                       will offer density bonuses, help interested developers apply for
                       government financing and/or other government subsidies, assist
                       interested developers in acquiring surplus government land suitable
                       for multifamily development, expedite permit processing, consider
                       reducing parking standards and lot sizes, and consider waiving impact
                       fees for low-income dwelling units.
                       Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner,              Planning
                                              Commission, City Council
                       Time Frame:            Ongoing
                       Funding Source:        General Fund
          Program H-9: Child Care Program.
                       In cooperation with private developers, the City will evaluate on a
                       case by case basis the feasibility of pairing a child care center in
                       conjunction with affordable, multifamily housing developments or
                       nearby to major residential subdivisions.
                       Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner,              Planning
                                              Commission, City Council
                       Time Frame:            Ongoing
                       Funding Source:        General Fund
March 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                         City of Ione Individual Programs
                                         25
                                                              POLICY DOCUMENT
            Program H-10: Assisting “At-Risk: Units
                           The City currently contains no deed-restricted units and therefore
                           there are no “at-risk” units at this time. Should the City have any
                           affordable units in the future, the City will contact all state and
                           federal agencies that might provide affordable housing funds to
                           determine whether any funding is available for future preservation of
                           assisted housing developments. The City will work with not-for-
                           profit housing providers to apply for affordable housing subsidies
                           that may be available for this use, if necessary in the future.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Planner
                           Time Frame:              As needed
                           Funding Source(s):       State and Federal Grants
Jackson Individual Programs
            Program H-1:   Resources Constraints and Priority Allocation.
                           The Planning Commission and City Council will continue to monitor
                           the need for growth control and consider re-instating the Resources
                           Constraints and Priority Allocation ordinance to encourage in-fill
                           housing development prior to annexing properties within the Sphere
                           of Influence. The allocation ordinance requires the Planning
                           Commission and City Council to consider infill projects prior to
                           projects in the Sphere of Influence and also promotes higher density
                           development, to ensure housing developments offer amenities which
                           promote conservation of the City’s natural resources and the
                           reduction of energy use and therefore more affordable, which is
                           closer to retail and service centers.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Planner, Planning Commission, and City
                                                    Council
                           Time Frame:              Ongoing, continue to monitor the Ordinance
                                                    annually.
                           Funding Source:          General Fund
            Program H-2:   Planning Development.
                           The City’s Development Code includes provisions for planned
                           developments, which serve to maximize the use of the land. The City
                           will continue to use this zoning tool where applicable and
                           appropriate, and implemented as a continuous program by the City
                           Planning Commission and Council.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          March 2015
City of Jackson Individual Programs
                                               26

 POLICY DOCUMENT
                         Responsible Agencies: City Planner, Planning Commission, and City
                                                 Council
                         Time Frame:             Ongoing
                         Funding Source:         General Fund
          Program H-3:   Development Agreements.
                         The City will continue to utilize development agreements as they
                         formally document work to be accomplished, timing and/or
                         sequencing, and require bonding to guarantee task completion.
                         These agreements serve to ensure “fair-share” funding of off-site
                         improvements and thus minimize additional construction costs from
                         being passed onto the housing consumer.
                         Responsible Agencies: City Planner, City Engineer, and City Council
                         Time Frame:             Ongoing
                         Funding Source:         Application Fees
          Program H-4:   Building Code.
                         The City will continue to annually review the City’s building codes
                         for current compliance and adopt the necessary revisions so as to
                         further local development objectives. The City will annually ensure
                         that local building codes are consistent with state mandated or
                         recommended green building standards.
                         Responsible Agencies: Building Inspector, City Planner, and City
                                                 Council
                         Time Frame:             Annual evaluation of the adequacy of the
                                                 City’s building codes
                         Funding Source:         General Fund
          Program H-5: Potable Water.
                         The City is committed to ensuring that there is enough potable water
                         to support its fair share of the City’s housing needs (including the
                         Sphere of Influence). The City will continue to work collaboratively
                         with the region’s potable water provider, the Amador Water Agency,
                         to identify both short- and long-term viability and cost effective
                         solutions to maintaining potable water availability in the City.
                         Additionally, the City will continue to review water resources through
                         implementation of the City’s Resource Constraints and Priority
                         Allocation Ordinance that is intended to ensure that there is adequate
March 2015                            2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                       City of Jackson Individual Programs
                                           27

                                                            POLICY DOCUMENT
                           water supply for new housing development in the City of Jackson
                           with preference given to affordable housing projects.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Engineer, City Planner, City Manager,
                                                   Planning Commission, and City Council
                           Time Frame:             Annual review of the City’s resources
                           Funding Source:         General Fund
            Program H-6:   Wastewater Treatment Capacity.
                           The City is committed to ensuring that there is enough wastewater
                           treatment capacity to support its housing needs.              Annual
                           implementation of the City’s Resource Constraints and Priority
                           Allocation Ordinance is intended to ensure that there is adequate
                           wastewater treatment for new housing development in the City of
                           Jackson with preference given to affordable housing projects.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Engineer, City Planner, City Manager,
                                                   Planning Commission, and City Council
                           Time Frame:             Annual review of the City’s resources
                           Funding Source:         General Fund
            Program H-7:   Child Care Centers.
                           The City will continue to implement the Resource Constraints and
                           Priority Allocation Ordinance to include child care centers in or
                           around new development.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Planner, Planning Commission, and City
                                                   Council
                           Time Frame:             Annually
                           Funding Source:         General Fund
            Program H-8:   Inclusionary Affordable Housing.
                           The City will continue to implement the Section 17.32 (Affordable
                           Housing) of the Development Code. This ordinance requires
                           subdivisions of ten or more parcels to provide ten percent
                           inclusionary affordable housing.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Planner, Planning Commission, and City
                                                   Council
                           Time Frame:             Ongoing
                           Funding Source:         General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       March 2015
City of Jackson Individual Programs
                                             28

 POLICY DOCUMENT
          Program H-9:   Development Fees.
                         The City will annually review its fees for development permits in
                         order that they represent a fair charge for review and processing of
                         applications. Review of charges implemented by the City Manager
                         on an “as needed” basis.
                         Responsible Agencies: City Manager and City Council
                         Time Frame:               Annually
                         Funding Source:           General Fund
          Program H-10: Multi-family Development.
                         To assist the development of housing for lower income households
                         on larger sites, the City will facilitate land divisions, lot line
                         adjustments, and specific plans resulting in parcel sizes that facilitate
                         multifamily developments affordable to lower income households.
                         The City will work with property owners and non-profit developers
                         to target and market the availability of sites with the best potential for
                         development. In addition, the City will offer incentives for the
                         development of affordable housing including; permit streamlining,
                         ministerial review of lot line adjustments, deferral of subdivision fees,
                         technical assistance to acquire funding, and modification of
                         development requirements consistent with the Planned Development
                         Overlay program.
                         Responsible Agencies: City Planner, City Engineer,              Planning
                                                   Commission, and City Council
                         Time Frame:               On-Going
                         Funding Source:           General Fund
          Program H-11: Reasonable Accommodations.
                         “Reasonable accommodation” refers to flexibility in standards and
                         policies to accommodate the needs of persons with disabilities. State
                         law requires jurisdictions to specify a formal procedure for evaluating
                         and granting reasonable accommodations for people with disabilities
                         and special housing needs. The City will amend the zoning code to
                         address reasonable housing accommodation for persons with
                         disabilities, including, but not limited to, the following:
                            Providing notice to the public of the availability of an
                             accommodation process. The notice will be provided at all
                             counters where applications are made for a permit, license or
March 2015                              2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                        City of Jackson Individual Programs
                                             29

                                                             POLICY DOCUMENT
                               other authorization for siting, funding, development or use of
                               housing.
                              Procedures for requesting reasonable accommodation, including
                               preparation of a Fair Housing Accommodation Request form
                               and designating the appropriate individual, committee,
                               commission or body responsible for acting on requests.
                              Review procedures for requests for reasonable accommodation,
                               including provisions for issuing a written decision within 30 days
                               of the date of the application.
                              Criteria to be used in considering requests for reasonable
                               accommodation.
                              Appeal procedure for denial of a request for reasonable
                               accommodation. The procedure should establish that there is no
                               fee for processing requests for reasonable accommodation or for
                               appealing an adverse decision related to a request for reasonable
                               accommodation.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Planner working with the Building
                                                   Department
                           Time Frame:             June 2015
                           Funding Source:         General Fund
            Program H-12: Large Family Housing.
                           The City will provide incentives, such as modifications to
                           development standards, and regulatory incentives for the
                           development of housing units with four or more bedrooms.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Planner and City Manager
                           Time Frame:             Ongoing
                           Funding Source:         General Fund
            Program H-13: Density Bonus
                           The City shall adopt a density bonus ordinance pursuant to State
                           Government Code Section 65915, which requires local governments
                           to grant a density bonus of at least 35 percent.
                           Responsible Agencies: City Planner and City Council
                           Time Frame:             June 2015
                           Funding Source:         General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                       March 2015
City of Jackson Individual Programs
                                              30

 POLICY DOCUMENT
          Program H-14: Conservation of At-Risk Units
                        The City shall reduce the potential conversion of the 82 assisted
                        affordable housing units at risk during the current planning period to
                        market rate through the following actions:
                           Require a one-year notice to residents, the City, the Stanislaus
                            County Housing Authority, and any local non-profit housing
                            developers, of all proposed conversions of assisted affordable
                            (extremely low, very low, low, and/or moderate income) housing
                            units. Following revision of the zoning code, provide the owner
                            of each assisted affordable housing complex in the City with the
                            noticing requirements.
                           Continue to maintain communication with the Stanislaus County
                            Housing Authority and local nonprofit housing organizations to
                            monitor the potential conversion of assisted housing units to
                            market-rate housing.
                           If conversion of units is likely, work with the Stanislaus County
                            Housing Authority and other organizations as appropriate to seek
                            funding to subsidize the at-risk units in a way that mirrors the
                            HUD Housing Choice Voucher (Section 8) program. Funding
                            sources may include state or local funding sources. Refer tenants
                            of at-risk units to the Housing Authority for education regarding
                            tenant rights and conversion procedures and information
                            regarding Section 8 rent subsidies and any other affordable
                            housing opportunities in the City.
                        Responsible Agencies: City Planner
                        Time Frame:              Ongoing communication with the Housing
                                                 Authority of the County of Stanislaus and
                                                 local nonprofits
                        Funding Source:          General Fund; CDBG; HOME
          Program H-15: Removal of Parking Constraints
                        The City shall amend the zoning code to change the parking
                        requirement for duplexes and multi-family dwellings to allow a
                        carport instead of a fully enclosed garage where currently required in
                        the zoning code.
                        Responsible Agencies: City Planner
                        Time Frame:              Amend the zoning code by December 2017.
                        Funding Source:          General Fund
March 2015                            2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                      City of Jackson Individual Programs
                                           31

                                                              POLICY DOCUMENT
Sutter Creek Individual Programs
            Program H-1:    Water and Sewer Hook-Ups
                            The City shall review and advise the Amador Water Agency on water
                            and sewer hook-up fees for residential second unit dwellings to
                            ensure the rates provide an incentive to the development of
                            residential second unit dwellings
                            Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                            Time Frame:              Annually
                            Funding Source:          General Fund
            Program H-2:    Application Processing Procedures.
                            The City shall review the application processing procedures annually
                            to determine their effectiveness and recommend necessary
                            amendments to the Planning Commission.
                            Responsible Agencies: Community         Development       Department,
                                                     Planning Commission
                            Time Frame:              Annually
                            Funding Source:          General Fund
            Program H-3:    The City shall continue to annually review the City's development
                            fees so that they represent a fair charge for review and processing of
                            permit applications.
                            Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department, City
                                                     Council
                            Time Frame:              Annually
                            Funding Source:          General Fund
            Program H-4:    Planned Development
                            The City shall encourage developer constructed affordable housing in
                            large, undeveloped portions of the City's planning area through use
                            of the Planned Development (PD) land use zoning designation. The
                            City shall encourage clustering of units on small lots to reduce the
                            cost of lots, housing construction, improvements, site preparation,
                            and infrastructure. The City shall require that developers providing
                            affordable housing units or lots in planned developments show how
                            the lots or units will be made affordable to low- and very low-income
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                        March 2015
City of Sutter Creek Individual Programs
                                               32
 POLICY DOCUMENT
                       households, and maintained as such, prior to approval of a
                       development plan or tentative map for the project.
                       Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                       Time Frame:            Ongoing
                       Funding Source:        Developer and General Fund
          Program H-5: Density Bonus
                       The City shall adopt a density bonus ordinance pursuant to State
                       Government Code Section 65915, which requires local governments
                       to grant a density bonus of at least 35 percent.
                       Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                       Time Frame:            June 2015
                       Funding Source:        General Fund
          Program H-6: Fee Waiver or Deferral.
                       The City shall review its fees imposed on development and identify
                       those fees that could be waived or reduced for low- and moderate-
                       income housing developments on a case-by-case basis. The City shall
                       review its subdivision, zoning, and building codes for unnecessary
                       and costly requirements, which could be waived for low-income
                       housing. The City shall ensure that proposed modifications will not
                       create safety hazards, increase liability, or develop inconsistencies
                       with the General Plan, City regulations or State law. The City shall
                       amend its codes as necessary.
                       Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department, City
                                              Council, Planning Commission
                       Time Frame:            Annually and        with  each   development
                                              application.
                       Funding Source:        Developer and General Fund
          Program H-7: Reasonable Accommodations
                       The City shall review and amend its Municipal Code to provide
                       individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation (in full
                       compliance with Senate Bill 520) in rules, policies, practices, and
                       procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.
                       The City shall create a public information brochure on reasonable
                       accommodation for disabled persons and provide that information
                       on the City's website.
March 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                              City of Sutter Creek Individual Programs
                                          33
                                                                POLICY DOCUMENT
                            Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department, City
                                                      Council
                            Time Frame:               June 2015
                            Funding Source:           General Fund
            Program H-8:    Transitional and Supportive Housing
                            The City shall review the General Plan Land Use Element and
                            Zoning Ordinance to assure compliance with SB 2 requirements to
                            allow transitional and supportive housing in zones that allow for
                            residential housing.
                            Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department, City
                                                      Council, Planning Commission
                            Time Frame:               January 2015
                            Funding Source:           General Fund
            Program H-9:    Historically Significant Structures.
                            The City shall assist, as appropriate, in the rehabilitation and adaptive
                            reuse of historically-significant structures. This shall include assisting
                            private property owners of historically-significant structures in
                            applying for and utilizing State and Federal assistance programs as
                            appropriate.
                            Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                            Time Frame:               Ongoing
                            Funding Source:           State and Federal funds
            Program H-10: Allow Residential Care Facilities per state law.
                            The Zoning Ordinance shall be amended to allow residential care
                            facilities by right in residential zones for small facilities (six persons
                            or fewer) and with a conditional use permit for large facilities (seven
                            persons or more) consistent with state law.
                            Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department, City
                                                      Council, Planning Commission
                            Time Frame:               January 2015
                            Funding Source:           General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
City of Sutter Creek Individual Programs
                                                34
 POLICY DOCUMENT
          Program H-11: Assisting “At-Risk: Units
                        The City currently contains no deed-restricted units and therefore
                        there are no “at-risk” units at this time. Should the City have any
                        affordable units in the future, the City will contact all state and
                        federal agencies that might provide affordable housing funds to
                        determine whether any funding is available for future preservation of
                        assisted housing developments. The City will work with not-for-
                        profit housing providers to apply for affordable housing subsidies
                        that may be available for this use, if necessary in the future.
                        Responsible Agencies: City Planner
                        Time Frame:             As needed
                        Funding Source(s):      State and Federal Grants
March 2015                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                City of Sutter Creek Individual Programs
                                          35

                                                                                          POLICY DOCUMENT
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                                            TABLE HE-1A
                          SUMMARY OF QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES – CITY OF IONE
                                                                                Income Level
               Task                   Extremely                                                                        Above
                                                           Very Low               Low            Moderate                               Total
                                           Low                                                                       Moderate
New Construction
Fair Share Allocation1                        1                  2                  3                   3                   7              16
Residential Permits
                                              0                  0                  0                   0                   1               1
Issued 1/14-8/14
New Construction
                                              1                  2                  3                   3                   6              15
Objectives
Rehabilitation                                0                  1                  1                   0                   0               2
Preservation2                                 0                  0                  0                   0                   0               0
Total                                         1                  3                  4                   3                   6              17
Notes:
1 The RHNA planning period for the Housing Element is January 1, 2014, through June 30, 2019. These numbers are the RHNA
allocation for Ione.
2 Corresponds to units at risk of converting to market rate and Ione doesn’t have any assisted units at risk of converting to market rate.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                 March 2015
                                                                     36

  POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                           TABLE HE-1B
                        SUMMARY OF QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES – CITY OF JACKSON
                                                                                       Income Level
                        Task                            Extremely        Very                                        Above
                                                                                      Low       Moderate                              Total
                                                            Low           Low                                      Moderate
New Construction
Fair Share Allocation1                                         2            2           3              4                  8             19
Residential Permits Issued 1/14-8/14                           0            0           0              0                  0             0
New Construction Objectives                                    2            2           3              4                  8             19
Rehabilitation                                                 1            1           1              0                  0             3
Preservation2                                                  0           82           0              0                  0             82
Total                                                          3           85           4              4                 8             104
Notes:
1 The RHNA planning period for the Housing Element is January 1, 2014, through June 30, 2019. These numbers are the RHNA
allocation for Jackson.
2 Corresponds to the 82 units at risk of converting to market rate.
                                                           TABLE HE-1C
                   SUMMARY OF QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES – CITY OF SUTTER CREEK
                                                                                      Income Level
                        Task                           Extremely        Very                                        Above
                                                                                    Low       Moderate                              Total
                                                           Low          Low                                      Moderate
 New Construction
 Sutter Creek 2007-2014 Fair Share
                                                            21           21          30              36                81            189
 Allocation
 Fair Share Allocation1                                      1            1            2             2                  4             10
 Residential Permits Issued 1/14-
                                                             0            0            0             0                 11             11
 8/14
 New Construction Objectives                                 1            1            2             2                  0              6
 Rehabilitation                                              0            1            1             0                  0              2
 Preservation2                                               0            0            0             0                  0              0
 Total                                                      22           23          33              38                81            197
Notes:
1 The RHNA planning period for the Housing Element is January 1, 2014, through June 30, 2019. These numbers are the RHNA
allocation for Sutter Creek.
2 Corresponds to units at risk of converting to market rate and Sutter Creek doesn’t have any assisted units at risk of converting to market
rate.
March 2015                                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                    37

                                              POLICY DOCUMENT
This page intentionally left blank
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element           March 2015
                                       38
  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The Housing Needs Assessment analyzes population and housing characteristics, identifies special
housing needs among certain population groups, evaluates housing conditions, and provides other
important information to support the goals, policies, and programs that will meet the needs of
current and future residents.
POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
According to the Census and shown in Table HE-2 below, the population of Amador County in
2010 was 35,009, with a population of 20,503 (59 percent) in unincorporated areas, and 14,506 (41
percent) in incorporated areas. In 2013, the population was 37,123. Amador County’s population has
increased substantially over the past 50 years from just 9,151 in 1950 to 35,100 in 2000. The rate of
growth increased during the 1980s and 1990s but slowed significantly thereafter. Population
numbers fluctuated differently across jurisdictions between 2000 and 2013. The unincorporated
county population, for instance, increased by nine percent, while Ione’s population only grew less
than one percent. Countywide, population grew by six percent.
                                              TABLE HE-2
                                              POPULATION
                                                       Population                   Percent
                           Location                                                 Change
                                                2000      2010         2013        2000-2013
         Amador County                         35,100    35,009       37,123          6%
         Amador City                             201       196          182           -9%
         Ione                                  7,214      7,129        7,259          1%
         Jackson                               4,467      3,898        4,600          3%
         Plymouth                                957       980          991           4%
         Sutter Creek                          2,342      2,303        2,478          6%
         Unincorporated County                 19,919    20,503       21,640          9%
         Source: 2000-2010 DOF (E-8)
Population by Age. Although population growth strongly affects total demand for new housing,
housing needs are also influenced by age characteristics. Typically, different age groups have distinct
lifestyles, family characteristics, incomes, and housing preferences. As people move through each
stage of life, their housing needs and preferences also change. Age characteristics are therefore
important in planning for the changing housing needs of residents. The median age for Amador
County as a whole in 2012 was 48.4 years, significantly older than the California average (33.2). The
most populous age cohort across most of the jurisdictions was 50 to 59 year olds.
Housing needs often differ by age group. For instance, most young adults (under 34) are single or
starting families. Housing needs for younger adults are addressed through apartments or first-time
March 2015                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                  A–1

                         APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
homeownership opportunities. Middle-aged residents (34-64) may already be homeowners, are
usually in the prime earning power of their careers, and thus tend to seek larger homes. Seniors
often own a home but, due to limited income or disabilities, may need assistance to remain in their
homes.
Table HE-3 shows the ages of householders in the county and cities. As shown, Amador City has a
much higher number of younger householders than the rest of the county, with 44 percent under
age 25. Each of the remaining communities has a fairly large number of householders in the 45-54
year range. Senior households (age 65+) represent at least 20 percent of households across all
jurisdictions but are most common in Sutter Creek (29%) and the unincorporated county (21%) of
households.
                                                 TABLE HE-3
                                    AGE CHARACTERISTICS OF HOUSEHOLDERS
                                                   Percent of Householders by Age Group
                           Number of
    Jurisdiction                         Under  5-   15-  25-   35-  45-    54-  65-   75-    85 and
                          Households
                                           5    14    24   34    44   54     64   74   84     above
  Amador County               14,283      4%   9%    11%   9%   12%  17%    18%  12%   6%       3%
  Amador City                    73       13%  15%   16%  13%    6%  15%    16%   3%   3%       2%
  Ione                         1,365      4%    8%   13%  13%   21%  20%    13%   5%   2%       1%
  Jackson                      1,942      6%   10%   13%  14%   12%  11%    15%   7%   6%       6%
  Plymouth                      428       8%   16%   9%   14%   11%  19%    9%    5%   6%       3%
  Sutter Creek                 1,192      3%    9%    9%   6%   10%  12%    22%  21%   6%       2%
  Unincorporated               9,283      0%    9%   10%   8%   11%  18%    20%  13%   7%       2%
Source: 2008- 2012 ACS (DP05)
The generally modest rate of population growth throughout the county is also reflected in DOF
population projections for 2020–2060. According to DOF estimates, the county’s population is
expected to increase by 14.6 percent over its 2020 population to a little over 45,100. With this rate of
anticipated population growth, the demand for new housing to accommodate these new residents
will increase. Table HE-4 shows projected population growth for Amador County between the
years 2020 and 2060. DOF projections do not provide splits for the incorporated and
unincorporated portions of the county.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            March 2015
                                                    A–2

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                    TABLE HE-4
                         PROJECTED POPULATION GROWTH, AMADOR COUNTY
                          Projected Population             Projected
                                                                      Percent Change
                      Growth, Amador County               Population
                                    2020                     39,352           -
                                    2030                     42,036          7%
                                    2040                     44,200          5%
                                    2050                     44,829          1%
                                    2060                     45,116          1%
                 Source: 2013 DOF (P-1)
Income and Employment Characteristics
Income. Along with housing prices and rents, household income is the most important factor
affecting housing opportunities in Amador County. Housing choices such as tenure, housing type,
and location are dependent on household income. Tenure refers to whether a household owns or
rents its housing unit. On the other hand, household size and type often affect the proportion of
income that can be spent on housing. The median income countywide according to the 2008–2012
ACS is $53,462 as shown in Table HE-5. Ione had significantly higher median incomes than the
rest of the jurisdictions in the county. Jackson has the lowest median income at $44,386, which was
83% of the county’s as a whole. Income information is only available Countywide not broken out by
the unincorporated area.
                                                    TABLE HE-5
                                          MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME
                                                           Median
                                                                        % of
                                    Jurisdiction         Household
                                                                       County
                                                           Income
                             Amador County                 $53,462      100%
                             Amador City                   $46,094      86%
                             Ione                          $63,033      118%
                             Jackson                       $44,386      83%
                             Plymouth                      $45,625      85%
                             Sutter Creek                  $46,859      88%
                             2008-2012 ACS (S01903)
March 2015                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                       A–3

                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Although median household income is a common benchmark for comparison, the distribution of
household income also provides a useful measure of housing needs in a community. In housing
analysis, households are typically grouped into categories, expressed relative to the area median
income (AMI) and adjusted for family size. Using State of California income thresholds, the income
groups analyzed were as follows:
       Extremely low income: Up to 30% of AMI
       Very low income: 31–50% of AMI
       Low income: 51–80% of AMI
       Moderate income: 81–120% of AMI
       Upper income: Above 120% of AMI
Table HE-6 estimates the number of households within each income category for the county as a
whole, as reported in the HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) database.
Data is based on the 2010 Census. Countywide, 19 percent of households were in the extremely low-
and very low-income categories, and 37 percent were 80 percent or below of the AMI.
                                            TABLE HE-6
                                   HOUSEHOLD INCOME DISTRIBUTION
                      Income Distribution        Number of               Percent of
                            Overview             Households             Households
              Extremely Low (<30% of
                                                    1,235                   8%
              Area Median Income)
              Very Low (31-50% of AMI)              1,680                   11%
              Low (51-80% AMI)                      2,615                   18%
              Moderate (81-120% AMI)                1,680                   11%
              Upper (>120% AMI)                     7,505                   51%
              Total                                14,715                  100%
            Source: 2006-2010 CHAS
In 2006, state law was amended (AB 2634) to add the extremely low-income category to the required
analysis of household characteristics and housing growth needs. Due to their limited incomes, these
households have the greatest difficulty finding suitable housing at an affordable price. Further
discussion of housing costs and affordability, as well as housing growth needs by income category, is
provided later in this chapter. In 2011, the number of extremely low-income households in Ione is
85 (6% of the city population), in Jackson is 200 (10% of the city population), and in Sutter Creek is
105 (9% of the city population) (CHAS, 2011).
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
                                                 A–4

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Employment. Future housing needs depend, in part, on employment trends, as well as wages.
Changes in the types of jobs available, along with the associated pay levels in Amador County and
the surrounding region, will affect the type and cost of housing available to future residents.
As shown in Table HE-7, countywide employment grew by 5,280 jobs between 1990 and 2009 to
16,140 persons employed in the labor force. Unemployment rates were more than double that of
2000 in 2009, as Amador County, like much of the rest of the US, experienced the impacts of the
economic recession that began in 2008. Employment levels and the unemployment rate have begun
to recover, and in 2014 were 14,260 and 9.8 percent, respectively.
                                                        TABLE HE-7
                                 LABOR FORCE CHARACTERISTICS, 1990–2014
                              Labor
            Year                               Employment    Unemployment  Unemployment Rate
                              Force
           1990              11,460              10,860           600              5.2
           2000              15,300              14,500           800              5.2
           2009              18,430              16,140          2,280             12.4
           2014              15,800              14,260          1,550             9.8
         Source: 1990, 2000, 2009, and 2014, EDD
The 2007–2011 ACS data provides employment by industry data. It reported that in 2011, Amador
County had a resident civilian labor force of 13,260. The labor force includes those people ages of
16 and over who are able to work. Table HE-8 shows employment by major industries in each of
the jurisdictions. As shown, educational service and health care services along with recreation-
related industries and retail trade have some of the highest employment numbers across
jurisdictions. Public administration is also a significant industry of employment in the county as a
whole.
March 2015                                              2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                           A–5

                             APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                      TABLE HE-8
                                         EMPLOYMENT BY INDUSTRY, 2011
                              Amador     Amador
   Employment by                                       Ione      Jackson  Plymouth Sutter Creek   Unincorporated
                               County      City
         Industry
                              #       % #       %   #       %    #     %   #    %    #       %      #       %
 Civilian employed
                           13,260     - 59      - 1,579      - 1,860    - 435    - 1,058      -   8,269      -
 population
 Agriculture and
                             362     3%  0     0%   13      1%   40    2%  14   3%    6      1%    289      4%
 related
 Construction                906     7%  5     9%  242     15%   48    3%  25   6%  117     11%    469      6%
 Manufacturing               755     6%  0     0%   18      1%  150    8%  12   3%   32      3%    543      7%
 Wholesale trade             240     2%  0     0%    0      0%   19    1%  19  4%     8      1%    194      2%
 Retail trade               1,640   12%  2     3%  109      7%  266   14%  79  18%  171     16%   1013     12%
 Transportation and
                             808     6%  6    10%   96      6%   70    4%  19   4%   20      2%    597      7%
 warehousing
 Information                 156     1%  0     0%   10      1%    8    1%   0   0%    9      1%    129      2%
 Finance and real
                             363     3%  8    14%   27      2%   46    3%  13   3%   66      6%    203      3%
 estate
 Professional,
 scientific, and            1,308   10%  0     0%   90      6%  139    8%  36   8%  114     11%    929     11%
 management
 Educational
 services and               2,601   20% 30    51%  310     20%  257   14%  63  15%  282     27%   1659     20%
 health care
 Recreation
                            1,840   14%  0     0%  209     13%  431   23%  81  19%   96      9%   1023     12%
 services
 Other services,             540     4%  1     2%   48      3%  156    8%  29   7%   61      6%    245      3%
 Public
                            1,741   13%  7    12%  407     26%  230   12%  45  10%   76      7%    976     12%
 administration
Source: 2007-2011 ACS (DP-03)
    Major Employers. Major sources of employment in Amador County are a mix of public agencies,
    including the county sheriff and schools, hospitals, major grocery and other large warehouse
    retailers, and utilities. Table HE-9 shows the largest employers in the county according to the
    California Employment Development Department (EDD) in 2014. All of these employers have on
    record 10 or more employees on-site.
    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                               March 2015
                                                           A–6

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                           TABLE HE-9
                                        MAJOR EMPLOYERS
                 Employer Name               Location                    Industry
  Amador County Sheriff and Coroner       Jackson        Sheriff/Government Offices-County
  Camanche Recreation Co                  Ione           Recreation Centers
  Jackson Junior High School              Jackson        Schools
  Jackson Rancheria Casino and
                                          Jackson        Casino, Full Service Restaurant
  Restaurant
  Kit Carson Nursing & Rehab              Jackson        Hospitals
  Lowe's Home Improvement                 Jackson        Home Centers
  Mule Creek State Prison                 Ione           State Govt-Correctional Institutions
                                          Jackson,
  Pacific Gas & Electric Co                              Electric Companies
                                          Pioneer
  Raley's                                 Jackson        Grocers-Retail
  Safeway                                 Jackson        Grocers-Retail
  Save Mart                               Jackson        Grocers-Retail
  Sierra Pine Ltd                         Sutter Creek   Lumber-Manufacturers
  Sutter Amador Hospital and Lab          Jackson        Hospitals, Medical Laboratories
                                                         Radio/Internet/TV
  Volcano Telephone                       Pine Grove
                                                         Broadcasting/Comm Equip
  Walmart                                 Jackson        Department Stores
 Source: EDD, 2014
EDD estimates future job growth in fast-growing occupations. Estimates for Amador County are
aggregated with those for Calaveras, Mariposa, and Tuolumne Counties into the “Mother Lode
Region,” as shown in Table HE-10. These occupations indicate areas of the economy that are
positioned for faster growth in Amador County and surrounding areas. A more rapid growth rate is
projected in the health care industry, for instance. This trend may be related to the growing
population of senior citizens in the Mother Lode Region.
March 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                               A–7

                           APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                                     TABLE HE-10
                   FAST-GROWING INDUSTRIES, MOTHER LODE REGION1 2010–2020
                                                                                         Annual Average
                                                                                             Employment
                                                                                                                                         2010–2020
                       Occupational Title                                             2010                       2020                      Change
                                                                                  Estimated                 Projected
                                                                               Employment                  Employed
  Cost Estimators                                                                      110                        160                          46%
  Home Health Aides                                                                    240                        330                          38%
  Carpenters                                                                           440                        590                          34%
  Medical Secretaries                                                                  340                        430                          27%
  Hairdressers, Hairstylists, and
                                                                                        90                        110                          22%
  Cosmetologists
  Insurance Sales Agents                                                                90                        110                          22%
  Emergency Medical Technicians and
                                                                                       150                        180                          20%
  Paramedics
  Postal Service Mail Carriers                                                         100                        120                          20%
  Operating Engineers and Other
                                                                                       160                        190                          19%
  Construction Equipment Operators
  Dental Assistants                                                                    180                        210                          17%
   Source: California Employment Development Department, October 2013
   1 Estimates for Amador County are aggregated with those for Calaveras, Mariposa, and Tuolumne Counties into the “Mother Lode Region” by the EDD for analysis.
Jobs-Housing Balance. Commuting patterns in Amador County have an important implication for
housing needs. Larger employers in the county (e.g., County government, PG&E, Jackson
Rancheria, large retailers) generate a number of jobs. However, the workforce employed at these
institutions may live in other communities for a variety of reasons, including preferences, the
availability of suitable housing, or other reasons.
Table HE-11 summarizes commuting patterns of residents in Amador County. Data for the
unincorporated county is not separately calculated and so is not shown below. The majority of
individuals do not live and work in the jurisdictions but commute to other places for work.
Countywide, only 27 percent of residents lived and worked in the same community, and 59 percent
of workers in the county live elsewhere and commute in for work. The live-work ratio varies across
the cities. In Amador City, there is no overlap between those who work and live within the city. In
Ione, 10 percent of the employed population lives in the city. Countywide, 74 percent of residents
drive more than 10 miles to reach their place of work, and 43 percent drive more than 25 miles.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                 March 2015
                                                                             A–8

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                 TABLE HE-11
                                            JOBS-HOUSING BALANCE
                                         Live in         Work in          Live and            Total
               Jurisdiction           Jurisdiction     Jurisdiction        Work in       Employed in
                                          Only             Only         Jurisdiction      Jurisdiction
        Amador County                    11,785           6,045             4,296           10,431
        Amador City                         88              23                0                23
        Ione                              1,998           1,810              161             1,971
        Jackson                           1,917           3,030              336             3,366
        Plymouth                           491              150               2                152
        Sutter Creek                      1,161           1,006               31             1,037
      Source: US Census 2013 (LODES)
Commuting Patterns. Commuting patterns reflect that there is an imbalance between where
people live and work in Amador County. As shown in Table HE-12 roughly a quarter (26%) of
residents in Amador County drive for between 25 and 60 minutes to work each day and another 15
percent drive for more than an hour to work. Those in Amador City (26%) and Plymouth (22%) are
most likely to commute the longest, while Jackson residents are most likely to have the shortest
commute, with around 90 percent traveling less than 25 minutes. The median commute time for
residents countywide is 28.5 minutes. Commute time information is only available Countywide not
for the unincorporated area of the County only.
                                                 TABLE HE-12
                                                 COMMUTE TIME
                                                                  Minutes
            Jurisdiction
                                     Less than 10    10 to 24     25 to 44      45 to 59    More than 60
  Amador County                          20%           38%          19%           7%              15%
  Amador City                            18%           46%          0%            10%             26%
  Ione                                   25%           36%          18%           10%             11%
  Jackson                                53%           37%          3%            4%               3%
  Plymouth                               21%           27%          24%           6%              22%
  Sutter Creek                           21%           58%          8%            4%               9%
  Source: ACS 2008–2012 (S0802)
March 2015                                         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                      A–9

                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
    Housing Overpayment. Generally, overpayment compares the total housing cost for a household
    to the ability of that household to pay for housing. Specifically, overpayment is defined as monthly
    housing costs in excess of 30 percent of a household’s income. Housing cost is defined as the
    monthly owner costs (mortgages, deed of trust, contracts to purchase or similar debts on the
    property and taxes, insurance on the property, and utilities) or the gross rent (contract rent plus the
    estimated average monthly cost of utilities).
    Housing overpayment is especially problematic for lower-income households that have limited
    resources for other living expenses. As shown in Table HE-13, a significant portion of lower-
    income households in each community overpaid for housing according to ACS 2007–2011 data.
                                               TABLE HE-13
                                  HOUSING OVERPAYMENT BY TENURE
                                      Extremely     Very                           Above                 Lower
            Household                                       Low     Moderate                   Total
                                         Low        Low                          Moderate              income*
                                               Amador County
Ownership Households                    1,348      1,539   1,902       1,607        4,820     11,216     4,789
Overpaying owner households              909        827     691         588         1,333      4,348     2,427
Percentage of overpaying owners          67%        54%     36%         37%          28%        39%       51%
Renter Households                        698        471     663         433          503       2,798     1,832
Overpaying renter households             554        444     362         104           28       1,492     1,360
Percentage of overpaying renters         79%        94%     55%         24%          6%         72%       74%
                                                  Amador City
Ownership Households                      14          1       3           7           17         42        18
Overpaying owner households               11          1       -           7            1         20        12
Percentage of overpaying owners          79%       100%      0%         97%          6%         48%       79%
Renter Households                          3           -     10           5           14         32        13
Overpaying renter households               -           -      9           -            -          9         9
Percentage of overpaying renters          0%         0%     87%         0%           0%         28%       0%
                                                      Ione
Ownership Households                      77         82     106         174          619       1,058      265
Overpaying owner households               40         66      27          66          142        341       133
Percentage of overpaying owners          51%        81%     25%         38%          23%        32%       50%
Renter Households                         50           -     96          79           44        269       146
Overpaying renter households              50           -     72          42            -        164       122
    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            March 2015
                                                    A–10

     APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                           Extremely           Very                                                   Above                           Lower
                Household                                                                       Low           Moderate                                     Total
                                                               Low             Low                                                 Moderate                         income*
Percentage of overpaying renters                              100%               0%             75%                53%                    0%                61%        83%
                                                                              Jackson
Ownership Households                                            131             112             179                 164                   383                969       422
Overpaying owner households                                     116              18               13                 60                    81                288       147
Percentage of overpaying owners                                89%             16%               7%                36%                   21%                30%        35%
Renter Households                                               254                -            223                 125                   153                755       477
Overpaying renter households                                    130             125               50                 13                      -               318       305
Percentage of overpaying renters                               51%               0%             22%                10%                    0%                42%        64%
                                                                             Plymouth
Ownership Households                                            61               63               39                 33                    99                295       163
Overpaying owner households                                     32               12                8                 23                     6                 81        52
Percentage of overpaying owners                                52%             20%              21%                70%                    6%                27%        32%
Renter Households                                               20               60               35                 10                     8                133       115
Overpaying renter households                                    20               52               18                  -                      -                90        90
Percentage of overpaying renters                               98%             87%              52%                 0%                    0%                68%        78%
                                                                           Sutter Creek
Ownership Households                                            116             118             127                  48                   244                653       361
Overpaying owner households                                     106              52               80                 44                    78                360       238
Percentage of overpaying owners                                91%             44%              63%                91%                   32%                55%        66%
Renter Households                                               96              109             124                 127                    77                533       329
Overpaying renter households                                    79              109               83                  8                      -               279       271
Percentage of overpaying renters                               82%            100%              67%                 6%                    0%                52%        82%
                                                           Unincorporated Amador County
Ownership Households                                            948           1,164            1,449              1,180                 3,459              8,200      3,561
Overpaying owner households                                     605             677             563                 388                 1,025              3,258      1,845
Percentage of overpaying owners                                64%             58%              39%                33%                   30%                40%        52%
Renter Households                                               698             471             663                 433                   503              2,798      1,832
Overpaying renter households                                    554             444             362                 104                    28              1,492      1,360
Percentage of overpaying renters                               79%             94%              55%                24%                    6%                72%        74%
    Source: 2007-2011 ACS B25106
    *Lower Income is the total of the Extremely Low, Very Low and Low-Income categories and is all households with incomes of 80 percent or lower of median income.
    March 2015                                                            2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                               A–11

                              APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
    However, the overpayment rate varied by tenure and income level. More than half of all very low-
    and extremely low-income households in all jurisdictions, in most cases both owners and renters,
    were reported to be overpaying. With the exceptions of Amador City and Jackson, over three-
    quarters of renters were overpaying in all jurisdictions. Ione had the highest percentage of renters
    overpaying (83%), while Amador City had the highest percentage of owners overpaying (79%).
    Sutter Creek had the most households overpaying overall; 74% of lower income households were
    overpaying and 54% of all households were overpaying. Overall, 57% of households in Amador
    County were overpaying in 2011.
    HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
    A household refers to the people occupying a home, such as a family, a single person, or unrelated
    persons living together. Families often prefer single-family homes or condominiums to
    accommodate children, while single persons generally occupy smaller apartments or condominiums.
    Single-person households may include seniors living alone or young adults.
    According to the Census, shown in Table HE-14, there were 12,759 households in Amador County
    in 2000 which grew slightly to 14,569 households in 2010, a 14.2 percent increase. Jackson and Ione
    saw increases in households of more than 15 percent. The other incorporated cities addressed in
    this joint Housing Element saw more moderate growth rates under 10 percent in that decade.
    Household Tenure. Tenure is also represented in Table HE-14. As shown, most households
    (75%) are owner-occupied, although renter households are more common in the cities than
    unincorporated Amador County, especially in Jackson and Sutter Creek where 46 percent of units
    are renter-occupied.
                                   TABLE HE-14 HOUSEHOLD TRENDS – 2000-2010
      Existing
                                            2000                           2010                    10-year change
   Households
                            # Existing                          # Existing                 # Existing
        Year                                 Owner      Renter              Owner  Renter                Owner    Renter
                          Households                           Households                 Households
Amador County                12,759           9,629     3,130    14,569     10,883 3,686     14.2%       13.0%    17.8%
Amador City                     85              56        29        85         54    31      0.0%         -3.6%    6.9%
Ione                          1,081            662       419      1,466      1,026  440      35.6%       55.0%     5.0%
Jackson                       1,746            983       763      2,065      1,122  943      18.3%       14.1%    23.6%
Plymouth                       392             253       139       403        259   144      2.8%         2.4%     3.6%
Sutter Creek                  1,025            603       422      1,168       626   542      14.0%        3.8%    28.4%
Unincorporated                8,430           7,072     1,358     9,382      7,796 1,586     11.3%       10.2%    16.8%
    Source: US Census 2000 (DP05); US Census 2010(DP-1)
    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                       March 2015
                                                                A–12

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
In addition to the population living in households, 4,430 people lived in group quarters in the
county in 2010, the majority of which lived at Mule Creek State Prison, Preston Youth Correctional
Facility, and the Pine Grove Youth Conservation Camp. With the exception of the prison
population, the county’s population is overwhelmingly housed in households.
Household Size. According to the 2007–2011 ACS, the average household size for Amador
County as a whole was 2.3 persons per household for owner-occupied units and 2.4 persons per
household for renter-occupied units. Table HE-15 displays the percentage of each household size
within each jurisdiction. Countywide, the proportion of single-person households was approximately
19 percent in owner-occupied units and six percent in rented units. However, the percentage of
single-person households varied by location. The cities of Jackson (34%) and Sutter Creek (33%)
had the highest percentage of single-person households, while Ione (20%) had the lowest.
                                       TABLE HE-15 HOUSEHOLD SIZE – 2011
                       Amador          Amador
                                                      Ione          Jackson  Plymouth Sutter Creek Unincorporated
                        County            City
                       #       %       #       %   #        %       #     %   #    %    #       %    #       %
  Total:            14,283      -      73      - 1,365       -    1,942    - 428    - 1,192      - 9,283      -
  Owner             11,213    79%      41    56% 1,079     79%     969   50% 295  69%  653     55% 8,176    88%
  occupied
  1-person           2,661    19%      14    19%  169      12%     317   16%  51  12%  195     16% 1,915    21%
  household
  2-4-person         7,886    55%      27    37%  778      57%     606   31% 209  49%  445     37% 5,821    63%
  household
  5+ person           666      5%       0     0%  132      10%      46    2%  35   8%   13      1%  440      5%
  household
  Renter             3,070    21%      32    44%  286      21%     973   50% 133  31%  539     45% 1,107    12%
  occupied
  1-person            876      6%       3     4%  104       8%     342   18%  48  11%  201     17%  178      2%
  household
  2-4-person         1888     13%      18    25%  161      12%     553   28%  65  15%  301     25%  790      9%
  household
  5+ person           306     <1%      11    15%   21      <1%      78   <1%  20  5%    37     <1%  139     <1%
  household
Source: US Census 2007-2011 ACS Table B17010
Overcrowded Households. Overcrowding is defined as a situation where there is more than one
person per room in an occupied housing unit. Overcrowding can result from a low supply of
affordable and adequate housing. Households that are unable to afford larger housing units may be
forced to rent or purchase housing that is too small to meet their needs.
The 2007–2011 ACS reported overcrowding is fairly rare throughout the county, accounting for less
than one percent of all households. Overcrowding is slightly more common in Jackson and
Plymouth, accounting for two percent and three percent of total households respectively. Of the 104
overcrowded households countywide, 49 are severely overcrowded, representing 35 percent of all
March 2015                                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                               A–13

                         APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
overcrowded units. As Table HE-16 shows, the level of overcrowding by tenure is higher in owner
households, representing 83 percent of the overcrowded households in 2011. Overcrowding is not
an issue in Amador County.
                                                 TABLE HE-16
                                          OVERCROWDED HOUSEHOLDS
                          Amador     Amador                                  Sutter
                                                Ione    Jackson  Plymouth           Unincorporated
                           County       City                                 Creek
  Total
                           14,283        73     1,365    1,942      428      1,192       9283
  Households
                                   Overcrowded Households (1.01 or more/rm)
  Owner
                             116          0      17        29        13        0          57
  Occupied
  Renter
                              24          0       0        10        0         6           8
  occupied
  Total                      140          0      17        39        13        6          65
                                Severely Overcrowded Households (1.5 or more/rm)
  Owner
                              39          0       0        29        0         0          10
  Occupied
  Renter
                              10          0       0        10        0         0           0
  occupied
  Total                       49         0        0       39         0         0          10
 Source: ACS 2007-2011 (B25014)
HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
This section describes the housing characteristics and conditions that affect housing needs in
Amador County. Important housing stock characteristics include housing type, tenure, vacancy rates,
age, condition, cost and affordability.
Housing Type
The DOF provides annual estimates of the number of housing units by type for each jurisdiction
based on reported building and demolition permits. The DOF estimated that Amador County had a
total of 18,174 housing units in 2013, representing a growth of 142 new units (less than one percent
growth) countywide since 2010 and five percent growth since 2000, as shown in Table HE-17. As is
typical in small towns and rural areas, the majority of housing stock in all jurisdictions comprises
single-family detached houses. However, the dominance of such detached units varied a great deal,
from under 60 percent of units in Plymouth and Sutter Creek to nearly 90 percent in Ione and the
unincorporated areas (see Table HE-18).
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
                                                     A–14

  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                   TABLE HE-17
                                 HOUSING STOCK, AMADOR COUNTY 1990–2013
                                                                                 % Change    % Change
                  Location                  1990      2000      2010      2013
                                                                                 1990-2000    2000-2013
  Amador County                            12,814    15,113    18,032    18,174      18%         20%
  Amador City                                 87       94        108       108       8%          15%
  Ione                                       910     1,168      1,635     1,744      28%         49%
  Jackson                                   1,618    1,816      2,309     2,312      12%         27%
  Plymouth                                   359       372       493       492       4%          32%
  Sutter Creek                               952     1,084      1,367     1,373      14%         27%
  Unincorporated Areas                      8,888    10,579    12,120    12,145      19%         15%
                Source: DOF 2009, 2013
Multi-family units, including smaller complexes (2-4 units) and larger complexes (5+), were more
popular in Jackson and Sutter Creek, but accounted for less than six percent of units in all other
jurisdictions, as shown in Table HE-18. Notably, more than a quarter of units in Plymouth are
mobile homes.
                                                   TABLE HE-18
                                             HOUSING UNITS BY TYPE
                                 Single      Single       Two to                   Mobile
  County / City                                                       Five Plus              Total
                              Detached     Attached        Four                    Homes
Amador City                    90      83% 12    11%     6    6%       0     0%    0     0%   108    100%
Ione                         1,556     89% 31     2%     0    0%     104     6%   53     3% 1,744    100%
Jackson                      1,430     62% 134    6%    288   12%    252    11%  208     9% 2,312    100%
Plymouth                      275      56% 30     6%     23   5%      25     5%  139    28%   492    100%
Sutter Creek                  802      58% 82     6%    136   10%    243    18%  110     8% 1,373    100%
Unincorporated              10,742     88% 270    2%    159   1%      66     1%  908     7% 12,145   100%
Amador County               14,895     82% 559    3%    612   3%     690     4% 1,418    8% 18,174   100%
 Source: 2011-2013 DOF, (E-5)
Age of Housing Stock
Housing element law requires an estimate of substandard housing in the community. Housing over
30 years old is more likely to be in need of repair and rehabilitation. According to 2012 ACS data,
the majority of housing (53%) in Amador County was built over 30 years ago, before 1980. The
largest percentage of the county’s housing stock, 43 percent, was built between 1970 and 1989 (see
March 2015                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                        A–15

                                   APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
   Table HE-19). Amador City has the oldest overall housing stock, with over 70 percent of units built
   before 1980 while Ione has the newest, with only 36 percent built before 1980.
                                                                                 TABLE HE-19
                                                                       AGE OF HOUSING STOCK
                                         2010          2000                                        1970          1960         1950                       1939              Total
                                                                      1990-         1980-                                                 1940-
                                           or             -                                            -            -             -                        or           housing
                                                                       1999          1989                                                  1949
                                         later         2009                                        1979          1969         1959                      earlier           units*
                               #
Amador                                     42         2,410           2,566          3,581         4,151         1,615         657          895          2,100            18,017
County                         %
                                          0%            13%            14%            20%           23%            9%           4%           5%           12%              100%
                               #
                                            0             3               8            20              3            0            7             8           56               105
Amador City                    %
                                          0%             3%             8%            19%            3%            0%           7%           8%           53%              100%
                               #
                                           14           414             286           211             68          122           27          121           172              1,435
Ione                           %
                                          1%            29%            20%            15%            5%            9%           2%           8%           12%              100%
                               #
                                            0           336             288           442           330           151          157          184           477              2,365
Jackson                        %
                                          0%            14%            12%            19%           14%            6%           7%           8%           20%              100%
                               #
                                            0            83              23           168           126            23           57           16            77               573
Plymouth                       %
                                          0%            15%             4%            29%           22%            4%          10%           3%           13%              100%
                                #           0           151             173           219           142           133           48           53           431              1,350
Sutter Creek
                               %          0%            11%            13%            16%           11%           10%           4%           4%           32%              100%
Unincorporated                  #          28         1,423           1,788          2,521         3,482         1,186         361          513           887             12,189
County                         %          0%            12%            15%            21%           29%           10%           3%           4%            7%              100%
   Source:2008-2012 ACS (DP04)
   *Due to the small size of the sample taken in Amador County, the estimates reported by the ACS have large margins of error. Where ACS data is used, the numbers should
   not be interpreted as absolute fact, but rather as a tool to illustrate general proportion or scale. Therefore numbers for the same type of data may vary when based on the ACS
   versus another data source.
   Condition of the Housing Stock
   Amador County
   Since many of the homes in Amador County are older, it is likely that many may be in need of
   repair. To assess the overall condition of housing, County staff conducted a windshield housing
   condition survey of 905 housing units in 2008. The survey included a range of areas, including older
   and new subdivisions and mobile home parks. A rating system based on exterior housing conditions
   using the HCD criteria, was used to determine whether housing units would require repair or
   replacement. The system rates the conditions of foundations, roofs, siding, windows, and electrical
   systems. The status of the items evaluated suggests the condition of the overall structure; however,
   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                              March 2015
                                                                                        A–16

  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
the specific needs of any particular unit are not known until a complete housing inspection is
conducted.
Those units in the “minor rehabilitation” category appeared structurally sound but showed signs of
deferred maintenance or upkeep. The house may need a roof replacement or new windows and a
paint job. Units with the designation of “moderate rehabilitation” involved repair or replacement of
more than one rated system. This category varies widely and may include, for example, a unit that
needs replacement of the roof, electrical system, and windows.
“Substantial rehabilitation” involves the replacement of several major systems in the home, such as
complete or partial foundation work, repair or replacement of exterior siding or reconstruction of
the roof system. “Dilapidated” units are those that would require all of the rated systems to be
replaced or significantly repaired to bring the structure into compliance with the current Uniform
Building Code, which would make rehabilitation ineffective from a cost perspective.
Table HE-20 below shows the results of the housing conditions survey. Nearly 90 percent of the
units surveyed were considered to be in sound condition. Overall, 111 units surveyed were rated to
be in need of some rehabilitation, which represents about 12 percent of the units surveyed. Since it
is not feasible to survey the entire housing stock, an estimate of the total number of homes in need
of repair is needed. Overall, in the areas targeted in the survey, nearly 90 percent of all housing units
were in sound condition, so it is assumed that a similar percentage of housing units in the remainder
of the county would be considered in sound condition.
                                             TABLE HE-20
                          2008 HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY RESULTS
                                              Number of Housing
               Degree of Deterioration                                 % of Total Surveyed
                                                      Units
              Sound                                   794                     87.7%
              Minor                                    59                      6.5%
              Moderate                                 42                      4.6%
              Substantial                               8                      0.9%
              Dilapidated                               2                      0.2%
              Total                                   905                      100%
Units in Need of Repair and Replacement
The County estimates that 23 units in the unincorporated area were in need of replacement in 2008,
and that approximately 642 units were in need of repair or rehabilitation.
The estimate of 23 units in need of replacement was based on 0.2 percent of the county’s housing
stock which was found to be dilapidated in the housing condition survey. The estimate of 642 units
in need of repair or rehabilitation was based on the 5.5 percent of the units surveyed which showed
March 2015                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                 A–17

                              APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
moderate or substantial deterioration. The County estimates that as of 2014 conditions of the
housing stock remain comparable to those in 2008.
Ione
As a part of the 2005 Housing Element update process, the condition of the City of Ione’s housing
stock was ascertained through a Housing Condition Survey. The survey of 1,106 residential housing
units in Ione was performed by Mercy Housing California in the summer and fall of 2003. Mobile
homes were included and apartment buildings were counted as a single unit. The survey rated all
housing units within the city limits based on the methodology developed from the HCD program
survey format.
As classified by HCD, a housing unit is deemed in need of rehabilitation if it is classified as minor,
moderate, or substantial. Housing units classified as dilapidated are not considered as eligible for
rehabilitation because it is assumed that the cost of rehabilitation exceeds the cost to replace the
existing structure.
Each structure was rated according to criteria established by HCD, which establishes five structure
categories: foundation, roofing, siding, windows, and doors. Within each category, the housing unit
is rated from “no repairs needed” to “replacement needed.” Points are added together for each unit
and a designation made as follows:
                                                     9 points or less: New or well maintained. Structurally intact and
  Sound                                              undamaged – straight roof lines – no signs of deferred
                                                     maintenance.
                                                     10 to 15 points: Shows signs of deferred maintenance – only one
  Minor repair
                                                     component needs replacement.
                                                     16 to 39 points: Repairs needed for one or more major
  Moderate rehabilitation                            component and other repairs – i.e., roof replacement, painting,
                                                     and window repairs.
                                                     40 to 55 points: Replacement needed for several major systems
  Substantial rehabilitation                         and possibly other repairs – i.e., complete foundation work and
                                                     roof replacement, along with painting and windows.
                                                     56 or more points: Structurally unsound – not fit for human
  Dilapidated
                                                     habitation – major rehabilitation needed –demolition suggested.
Source: City of Ione Housing Condition Survey, November 2003, Mercy Housing California
In general, the purpose of the study is to determine the eligibility of areas in need of community
development activities. The results of the Housing Condition Survey may be used as a basis for an
application to the state Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program, Home
Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) program, Redevelopment Agency Low and Moderate
Income Housing Fund (LMIHF), or other programs that support the City’s Housing Rehabilitation
Program.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                 March 2015
                                                                           A–18

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The survey evaluated a total of 1,106 housing units (1,030 single-family, 21 duplexes, 46 mobile
homes, and 9 multifamily (considered one unit)). Of these units, 14 percent (152 units) needed
minor repairs, 11 percent (121 units) needed moderate repairs, one percent (15 units) needed
substantial rehabilitation, and 0.4 percent (4 units) were dilapidated and required replacement.
Approximately 27 percent of Ione’s housing stock is considered substandard and in need of
rehabilitation or demolition (see Table HE-21 below).
                                                                 TABLE HE-21
                                                      IONE HOUSING CONDITIONS
                                                                                           Surveyed Units
                         Condition
                                                                        Number                            Percentage
       Sound                                                               814                                74%
       Minor                                                               152                                14%
       Moderate                                                            121                                11%
       Substantial                                                          15                                1%
       Dilapidated                                                           4                               0.4%
       Total                                                              1,106                             100.0%
      Source: City of Ione Housing Condition Survey, November 2003, Mercy Housing California
After conversations with City staff in 2008, it is estimated that approximately 20 percent of the
housing stock was in need of rehabilitation in 2008.
Jackson
The following are definitions of housing condition types as listed in CDBG’s Grant Manual:
SOUND - A unit that appears new or well maintained and structurally intact. The foundation should
appear structurally undamaged and there should be straight roof lines. Siding, windows and doors
should be in good repair with good exterior paint condition. Minor problems such as small areas of
peeling paint and/or other maintenance items are allowable under this category.
MINOR - A unit that shows signs of deferred maintenance or which needs only one major
component such as a roof.
MODERATE - A unit in need of replacement of one or more major components and other repairs,
such as roof replacement, painting and window repairs.
SUBSTANTIAL - A unit that requires replacement of several major systems and possibly other
repairs (e.g., complete foundation work, roof structure replacement and re-roofing, as well as
painting and window replacement).
March 2015                                                        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                       A–19

                             APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
DILAPIDATED - A unit suffering from excessive neglect, where the building appears structurally
unsound and maintenance is non-existent, not fit for human habitation in its current condition, may
be considered for demolition or, at minimum, major rehabilitation will be required.
                                                                      TABLE HE-22
                             HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY RESULTS CITY OF JACKSON
        Sound                     Minor                  Moderate                   Substantial Dilapidated   Total
         1,067                     133                         123                      33            5       1,361
        78.4%                     9.8%                        9.0%                     2.4%         0.4%      100%
Source: Mercy Housing California Housing Condition Survey of Jackson. November 2003
Because nearly 90% of Housing types were either Sound or needed Minor repair, a breakdown by
Housing type was not done.
The 2003 Housing Condition prepared by Mercy Housing California was updated in 2011 by a visual
survey of the City by the Senior Building Inspector and the City Planner. The revised information is
displayed in Table HE-23.
                                                                      TABLE HE-23
                   UPDATED HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY RESULTS CITY OF JACKSON
        Sound                     Minor                  Moderate                   Substantial Dilapidated   Total
         1678                      107                          91                      11           10       1901
        88.3%                     5.6%                        4.8%                     0.6%         0.5%      100%
The updated survey demonstrates that the overall housing condition has improved for the City of
Jackson; however there are more dilapidated units in need of abatement. The 2011 results are still
representative of the City’s housing stock in 2014.
Plymouth
There are four housing units in Plymouth in need of major rehabilitation. They are all currently
unoccupied.
Sutter Creek
There are currently no houses in the City of Sutter Creek that have noticed code violations. The
number of houses in need of minor to major rehabilitation is 6% and the percent of houses in need
of replacement is .004%.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                               March 2015
                                                                           A–20

  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
In June 2014, a building permit was issued for a complete interior remodel of an older, creek side
home that was in need of repair. The issuance of building permits is common in Sutter Creek with
commercial and residential properties.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
State and federal law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing programs based on
the area (i.e., County) median income (AMI): extremely low (30% or less of AMI), very low (31-50%
of AMI), low (51-80% of AMI), moderate (81-120% of AMI) and above moderate (over 120% of
AMI). Housing affordability is based on the relationship between household income and housing
expenses.
According to HCD and the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), housing
is considered “affordable” if the monthly housing cost is no more than 30 percent of a household’s
gross income. Table HE-24 shows current (2014) affordable rent levels and estimated affordable
purchase and rental prices for jurisdictions in Amador County by income category for a family of
four.
Based on state-adopted standards, the maximum affordable monthly rent for extremely low-income
households in Amador County is $543, while the maximum affordable rent for very low-income
households is $904.
Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage interest
rates and qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments, homeowner association
fees, property insurance rates, etc. However, home affordability was calculated assuming that a
household of four can purchase a home with a 30-year fixed-interest mortgage and a 10% down
payment, a 30% expense-to-income ratio, and 5.25 percent interest rate. With these assumptions, a
four-person household in the extremely low-income category could, at maximum, afford a sales
price of $104,255 for a home, while a very low-income household could afford a home costing
$161,235. Table HE-24 shows affordable prices for all income levels.
March 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                               A–21

                                  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                                           TABLE HE-24
                                                                HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
                             HCD Income Limits                       Monthly Housing Costs                            Maximum Affordable Price
    Income                    Max.           Affordable                                  Taxes and
      Group                  Annual                Total                                 Insurance                                                           Monthly
                                                                    Utilities1                                           Ownership2
                            Income             Monthly                                       (for                                                             Rental3
                                               Payment                                 homeowners)
  Extremely                 $21,700                $543               $150                   $61                           $104,255                             $393
  Low
  Very Low                  $36,150                $904               $150                  $116                           $161,235                             $754
  Low                       $57,850              $1,446               $150                  $218                           $182,045                            $1,296
  Moderate                  $86,750              $2,169               $150                  $397                           $191,388                            $2,019
Notes:
Assumes a four-person household.
1. Monthly utility costs are assumed as $75/person and $25 for each additional person.
2.Total affordable mortgage based a 10 percent down payment, an annual 5.25 percent interest rate, 30 year mortgage, and monthly payment equal to 30 percent of income (after
utilities, taxes, and insurance).
3. Monthly affordable rent based on 30 percent of income less estimated utilities costs.
Source: 2014 HCD income limits; http://www.realtor.com/home-finance/financial-calculators/
Rental Prices. According to current data available on online rental listing websites including
realtor.com, padmapper.com, and trulia.com, the current (2014) actual listings across jurisdictions
ranged from $495 to $1,635 for a one-bedroom unit. Few (7) rentals were listed as of March 2014.
The median rental price in Amador County according to realtor.com over the last year is $887.
Based on this price, an extremely low-income household could not afford the average unit, but very
low-, low-, and moderate-income households could.
Home Sales Prices. The residential real estate market in Amador County jurisdictions has
experienced fairly steady home sales in the last two years. Sales prices have also proved fairly stable,
as shown in Table HE-25. The California Association of Realtors (CAR) publishes median monthly
homes sales prices for each county in the state. According to the association, the 2014 median
home sales price in Amador County in February 2014 was $206,250, eight percent lower than
February 2013, but that the March 2014 average sales price was $214,280, seven percent higher than
the previous year.
Another source, DataQuick News, breaks down sales between resale homes and new homes, which
reveals that the median sales price for new homes dropped by as much as 18.4 percent over the last
year since March 2013, but that resale prices have increased by 26.2 percent. The fact that CAR data
combines new and resale transactions could be one reason for the monthly variations and lack of
clear trends in median home sales price in the CAR data.
With current sales prices, only above moderate-income households could afford to purchase an
existing market rate home in Amador County.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                       March 2015
                                                                                    A–22

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
For a fuller picture, Table HE-26 also displays median sales prices of listed homes by jurisdiction
recorded by Trulia.com. Since it is only one listing source, this table only displays a segment of the
market. However, this table indicates that, among listings of homes over the last year, market-rate
homes in certain zip codes in unincorporated Amador County could be affordable to extremely low-
income households. Market-rate homes would also be affordable to low-income group households
in the cities of Plymouth and Ione.
                                                                  TABLE HE-25
                                                   MEDIAN HOME SALES PRICE
                                 Median Sales
                                                                        2013        2014   Change
                                         Price
                             February                                $225,000     $206,250   -8%
                             March                                   $200,000     $214,280   7%
                           Source: California Association of Realtors 2014,
                           (Home Sales and Price Report, http://www.car.org/)
                                                                  TABLE HE-26
                                     LISTED MEDIAN SALES PRICES BY COUNTY
                                                                Median Sales Price            Number of
                     Jurisdiction                                                               Listings
                                                          (March 2013–March 2014)
                Amador City                                              $250,000                  11
                Ione                                                     $179,500                   5
                Jackson                                                  $200,000                   1
                Plymouth                                                 $179,500                   7
                Sutter Creek                                             $235,500                   3
                Unincorporated                                           $146,000                  43
                Countywide                                               $179,500                  66
               Source: Trulia.com, February 2014
Housing Vacancy. Vacancy trends in housing are analyzed using a “vacancy rate” which
establishes the relationship between housing supply and demand. For example, if the demand for
housing is greater than the supply, then the vacancy rate is probably low and the price of housing
will most likely increase. A vacancy rate of five percent suggests that there is a balance between the
demand and supply of housing. Generally, when the vacancy rate drops below five percent, the
demand for housing exceeds the supply of housing. Subsequently, prospective buyers and renters
may experience an increase in housing costs.
According to the DOF, in 2010 the total vacancy rate for Amador County was 19.2 percent, which
includes all types of housing in the county. However, more than half of these vacant units were
seasonal or recreation in nature. The county is tourism-oriented and thus is expected to have a high
March 2015                                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                         A–23

                            APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
number of seasonal units. Vacancy rates for the county, including only homeowner and rental units,
are 3% and 9% respectively. Thus, the County’s vacancy rate excluding seasonal use unit is
considered appropriate for stable housing prices. Table HE-27 shows the vacancy rates for each
jurisdiction by type of housing in Amador County.
                                                      TABLE HE-27
                                           HOUSING STOCK BY TYPE OF VACANCY
                                                Rented,    For
                            Vacant        For                   Sold, not  Seasonal/   All other  Vacancy
   Geography                                      not     sale
                             units       rent                   occupied  recreational vacant       rate
                                               occupied   only
Amador County                3,463        373     24       355     51        2,052        608      19.2%
Amador City                    23          3       0        4       0          11          5       21.3%
Ione                          169          49      4        45      9          22          40      10.3%
Jackson                       244          58      2        58      2          39          85      10.6%
Plymouth                       90          20      2        11      2          30          25      18.3%
Sutter Creek                  199          93      1        17      1          45          42      14.6%
Unincorporated               2,738        150     15       220     37        1,905        411      22.6%
Source: 2010 U.S. Census; (DP-1) ; DOF 2010
SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
Certain groups have greater difficulty finding decent, affordable housing due to special
circumstances. Special circumstances may be related to one’s income, family characteristics, and
disability status, among others. In Amador County, persons and households with special needs
include seniors, families with children (large households and female-headed households with
children) agricultural employees, persons with disabilities including developmental disabilities, and
the homeless. This section analyzes these special needs groups and identifies resources and
programs designed to address these needs.
Senior Population and Households. Senior citizens are considered those individuals 65 or older
in age. Seniors generally have special housing needs primarily resulting from physical disabilities and
limitations, income, and health care costs. Additionally, senior households also have other needs to
preserve their independence including supportive services to maintain their health and safety, in-
home support services to perform activities of daily living, conservators to assist with personal care
and financial affairs, public administration assistance to manage and resolve estate issues, and
networks of care to provide a wide variety of services and daily assistance. In 2012, 21 percent of
residents were senior citizens and roughly a third of households were headed by senior citizens, as
shown in Table HE-28.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                 March 2015
                                                         A–24

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                      TABLE HE-28
                                   SENIOR HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS, 2012
                                                                  Senior        Percent of Seniors with
                 Location                 Senior Citizens
                                                               Households             Disability
     Amador County                             21%                 33%                   30%
     Amador City                                7%                 12%                   45%
     Ione                                       7%                 22%                   32%
     Jackson                                   19%                 27%                   50%
     Plymouth                                  14%                 32%                   44%
     Sutter Creek                              29%                 36%                   20%
     Unincorporated
                                               22%                 35%                   24%
     County
    Source: 2008-2012 ACS (B25007, S0101)
As shown in Table HE-29, the large majority of seniors own rather than rent their home in
Amador County. This is true across all jurisdictions, although seniors are much more likely to rent in
Plymouth (26%) and Sutter Creek (25%) than in the rest of the county.
                                                      TABLE HE-29
                                          SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS BY TENURE
                                                    Own                   Rent                Total
                  Location
                                            Number        Percent   Number   Percent  Number      Percent
     Amador County                            4,191         89%       509      11%      4,700       100%
     Amador City                                9          100%         0      0%         9         100%
     Ione                                      280          92%        26      8%        306        100%
     Jackson                                   437          82%        97      18%       534        100%
     Plymouth                                  102          74%        36      26%       138        100%
     Sutter Creek                              321          75%       107      25%       428        100%
     Unincorporated County                    3,042         93%       243      7%       3285        100%
    Source: 2007-2011 ACS (B25007)
Disabled Persons. According to the California Government Code, a “disability” includes, but is
not limited to, any physical or mental disability as defined in Section 12926. A “mental disability”
involves having any mental or psychological disorder or condition, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, or specific learning disabilities that limits a
major life activity. A “physical disability” involves having any physiological disease, disorder,
condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss that affects body systems including
March 2015                                             2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                          A–25

                    APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
neurological, immunological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory, speech organs,
cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine. In
addition, a mental or physical disability limits a major life activity by making the achievement of
major life activities difficult including physical, mental, and social activities and working.
Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities could prevent a person from working, restrict a
person’s mobility, or make caring for oneself difficult. Therefore, disabled persons often require
special housing needs related to potential limited earning capacity, the lack of accessible and
affordable housing, and higher health costs associated with disabilities. Additionally, people with
disabilities require a wide range of different housing, depending on the type and severity of their
disability. Housing needs can range from institutional care facilities to facilities that support partial
or full independence (i.e., group care homes). Supportive services such as daily living skills and
employment assistance need to be integrated in the housing situation. The disabled person with a
mobility limitation requires housing that is physically accessible. Examples of accessibility in housing
include widened doorways and hallways, ramps, bathroom modifications (e.g., lowered countertops,
grab bars, adjustable shower heads), and special sensory devices including smoke alarms and flashing
lights.
Since there are no DOF, 2010 US Census, or reliable ACS data, 2000 US Census information is used
for this analysis.
According to the 2000 Census, an estimated 33 percent of Amador County residents (11,504
persons) had one or more disabilities. Of the county’s population aged 65 and older, approximately
39 percent had a disability (see Table HE-30). The distribution of residents with disabilities is
similar between the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county. According to HUD
CHAS data, nearly 34 percent of all households which include a person with a disability, experience
some kind of housing problem, including inadequate facilities, overcrowding, or paying more than
30 percent of their monthly income for housing.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                March 2015
                                                   A–26

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                 TABLE HE-30
                     PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BY AGE AND EMPLOYMENT STATUS
                                        Disabled Population                 Employment Characteristics
                              Total            Total          Total         Age 16–64,      Age 16–64,
         Location          Disabilities    Disabilities   Disabilities for   Employed      Not Employed
                                           for Ages 5-    Ages 65 and      Persons with a  Persons with a
                                                 64           Over            Disability      Disability
                        #       74               52             22               24              12
Amador City
                        %        -              70%            30%                -               -
                        #     1060              744            316               236             154
Ione
                        %        -              70%            30%                -               -
                        #     2124             1197            927               432             306
Jackson
                        %        -              56%            44%                -               -
                        #      363              258            105               136             47
Plymouth
                        %        -              71%            29%                -               -
                        #      687              383            304               134             86
Sutter Creek
                        %        -              56%            44%                -               -
                        #     7,196            43,39          2,857             1,392           1,028
Unincorporated
                        %        -              60%            40%                -               -
Amador                  #    11,504            6,973          4,531             2,354           1,633
County Total            %        -              61%            39%                -               -
Source: US Census 2000
PERSONS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
SB 812 requires cities and counties to include the needs of individuals with a developmental
disability within the community in the special housing needs analysis. According to Section 4512 of
the Welfare and Institutions Code, a “developmental disability” means a disability that originates
before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and
constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which can include mental retardation, cerebral
palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently in a conventional housing
environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where
supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional
environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental
disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally
March 2015                                        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                     A–27

                      APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of
independence as an adult.
The California Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based
services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through
a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based
facilities. The Valley Mountain Regional Center is one of 21 regional centers in California that
provides point of entry to services for people with developmental disabilities. The center is a private,
nonprofit community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to
individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. Table HE-31 provides information
about Amador County’s population of developmentally disabled persons displayed by zip code.
                                            TABLE HE-31
                     DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY LIVING SITUATION BY ZIP CODE
                           Zip  Community     Home Parent/        Independent
         Jurisdiction                                       ICF                   Other    SNF    Total
                          Code     Care         Guardian              Living
 Amador City              95601       0             1        0           0           0       0      1
 Ione                     95640       6             31       0          20           0       0      57
 Jackson                  95642       2             30       0          19           0       2      53
 Plymouth                 95669       6             6        0           1           0       0      13
 Sutter Creek             95685       1             20       0          10           0       0      31
                         95629,
                         95665,
 Unincorporated
                         95666,       5             38       0           3           0       0      46
 Amador County
                         95675,
                          95685
 Amador County
                            -        20            126       0          53           0       2     200
 Total
Source: DDS 2014
There are seven residential care facilities located in Amador County that provide assistance to
persons with disabilities. The facilities have a combined capacity of 209 and are located in Ione,
Jackson, and Sutter Creek (see Table HE-32).
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
                                                A–28

   APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                   TABLE HE-32 SERVICES FOR THE DISABLED
           Location                                      Name                                            Type            Capacity
1400 Marlette St.,
                                 Beone Home Of Compassion                                    Senior Residential Care        4
#66 Ione
155 Placer Drive,                                                                            Assisted Living Residential
                                 Amador Residential Care Facility                                                          49
Jackson                                                                                      Care
185 Placer Drive,
                                 Jackson Gardens                                             Senior Residential Care       30
Jackson
223 New York Ranch               Oak Manor Senior Retirement                                 Assisted Living Residential
                                                                                                                           70
, Jackson                        Home                                                        Care
15 Bryson Drive,                                                                             Assisted Living Residential
                                 Gold Quartz Inn Retirement Home                                                           47
Sutter Creek                                                                                 Care
280 Ursula, Sutter
                                 Harrold Hospitality                                         Senior Residential Care        6
Creek
210 Patricia Lane,               Patricia Gardens Assisted Living                            Assisted Living Residential
                                                                                                                            3
Sutter Creek                     Co., Llc                                                    Care
18483 Davis Street,                                                                          Assisted Living Residential
                                 Schwabe Residential Home                                                                   4
Plymouth                                                                                     Care
 Source: http://www.seniorcareauthority.com, accessed March 2014; and City of Plymouth 2014.
 Female-Headed Households. Female-headed households, especially those households with
 children under the age of 18 at home, generally have a higher ratio between their income and their
 living expenses (that is, living expenses take up a larger share of income than is generally the case in
 two-parent households). Single-parent households, whether headed by a male or female, generally
 have this challenge. Single-parent male-headed households were not reported on in the HCD
 Amador County data packet and typically make up a smaller percentage of households than female-
 headed single-parent households. Additional research indicates that there are 222 single-parent
 households in the County that are headed by a male with no female present and having related
 children under the age of 18 present in the home (ACS 2007-2011 B17010). Finding affordable,
 decent, and safe housing is often more difficult for single-parent households. Additionally, single-
 parent households have special needs involving access to day care or child care, health care, and
 other supportive services.
 According to 2011 ACS data, 15 percent (1,362 households) of all households in Amador County
 are female-headed households. Approximately half of those households have children under the age
 of 18. Nearly a third of households in Jackson were female-headed, the highest percentage of the
 jurisdictions in the County. Table HE-33 shows breakdowns of female-headed households for all
 jurisdictions.
 March 2015                                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                      A–29

                         APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
A high proportion of female-headed and single-parent households have incomes below the poverty
line. About three percent of female-headed households are also living below the poverty level in the
county. Jackson has the highest percent of female-headed households in the county, 12 percent of all
households, while the other cities and the unincorporated county have five percent of households
under the poverty line.
                                            TABLE HE-33
                                    FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS
                                                                                      Under
                                     With      Without
                                                                   Total             Poverty
                                   Children    Children
                                                                                      Level
                 Location
                                                           Percent of               Percent of
                                      Percent of all
                                                               all       Number         all
                                       Households
                                                          Households               Households
      Amador County                  8%           8%          15%         1,362        3%
      Amador City                    0%           0%          0%            0          0%
      Ione                           15%          5%          20%          200         4%
      Jackson                        20%          9%          29%          313         12%
      Plymouth                       5%           13%         18%          51          5%
      Sutter Creek                   13%          2%          15%          108         4%
      Unincorporated                 4%           7%          11%          690         3%
     Source: 2007-2011 ACS B17010)
Large Family Households. Large family households are defined as households of five or more
persons. Large family households are considered a special needs group because there is a limited
supply of adequately sized housing to accommodate their needs. The more persons in a household,
the more rooms are needed to accommodate that household. To not be considered overcrowded, a
five-person household would require three or four bedrooms, a six-person household would require
four bedrooms, and a seven-person household would require four to six bedrooms. Rental units,
usually in multi-family apartment style units, especially are rarely built with enough rooms to
accommodate large families. Since renting is often the most affordable option for low income
families, this can become an issue for larger low-income families.
Data from the 2007–2011 ACS indicates that 972 households in Amador County have five or more
persons (six percent) (see Table HE-15 above). There were 666 large owner households, compared
with 306 renter households.
Large households make up a very small number (less than six percent) of households in most of the
county), but this varies significantly by jurisdiction. In Ione and Plymouth large households make
up more than 10 percent of all households.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                         March 2015
                                                  A–30

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Agricultural Workers. Agricultural workers earn their primary income through permanent or
seasonal agricultural labor. The 2007 Agricultural Census indicates that there were 616 farmworkers
in Amador County, as shown in Table HE-34.
Farmworker labor need is frequently seasonal in nature. Therefore, housing needs vary drastically
based on the time of year. As shown in Table HE-35, 60 farms are operational most of the year in
Amador County, but another 87 only operate less than 150 days out of the year.
The county has approved permits for farm labor quarters in unincorporated areas of the county.
However, considering the number of laborers employed in this occupation, it is believed that
additional specialized housing is needed for this group in the incorporated and unincorporated areas
of Amador County.
As of 2012, the County Planning Commission was considering approval of amendments to Title 19,
a change in zoning that would allow agricultural employers to house up to four farm-workers and
their families in specified zone districts.
                                                           TABLE HE-34
                                       HIRED FARM LABOR, FARMWORKERS
                        Farms                                     Workers                 $1,000 payroll
                         120                                         616                      3,854
           Source: 2007 USDA Agricultural Census http://www.usda.gov/fundinglapse.htm
                                                           TABLE HE-35
                              SEASONAL FARMWORKERS BY DAYS WORKED
                                                         150 Days or More
            Farms                                                                      60
            Workers                                                                   N/A
                                               Farms with 10 or More Workers
            Farms                                                                      3
            Workers                                                                    47
                                                       Fewer than 150 Days
            Farms                                                                      87
            Workers                                                                   N/A
          Source: 2007 USDA Agricultural Census http://www.usda.gov/fundinglapse.htm
March 2015                                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                  A–31

                            APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Homeless Persons. Homeless individuals and families have some of the most immediate housing
need of any group. They also have one of the most difficult sets of housing needs to meet, due to
both the diversity and complexity of the factors that lead to homelessness and due to community
opposition to the siting of facilities that serve homeless clients. California law requires that housing
elements estimate the need for emergency shelter for homeless people. Point-in-time homelessness
surveys were conducted in 2011, 2012 and 2013 for the Central Sierra Continuum of Care of which
Amador County is a participating member. The surveys resulted in a combined homeless count for
Tuolumne, Calaveras, and Amador Counties. The survey found that there were 649 homeless
individuals in 2013, an increase from 204 homeless individuals counted in 2012, and 181homeless
individuals counted in 2011, as shown in Table HE-36. The 2013 count split the data by county. In
Amador County in 2013 there were a total of 159 homeless individuals counted in 2013. Of these,
26 percent (41 individuals) were found in unsheltered locations, and 35 percent (55 individuals) were
considered to be chronically homeless.
                                                                  TABLE HE-36
                 HOMELESS NEEDS: TUOLUMNE, CALAVERAS, AND AMADOR COUNTIES
                                                             Individual                                         Persons in Families
                                               2011                 2012              2013               2011            2012                 2013
    Total Homeless                              181                  204               649                217              175                 415
    Total Sheltered                              28                  43                409                109               67                 218
    Total Unsheltered                           161                  161               240                108              108                 197
          Total Homeless –                      Not                 Not                                   Not             Not
                                                                                       159                                                     108
          Amador County                    available           available                            available        available
          Total Sheltered –                     Not                 Not                                   Not             Not
                                                                                       114                                                      71
          Amador County                    available           available                            available        available
          Total Unsheltered                     Not                 Not                                   Not             Not
                                                                                        45                                                      37
          – Amador County                  available           available                            available        available
   Total Chronically                                                                                      Not             Not                  Not
                                                 85                  78                201
   Homeless                                                                                         available        available            available
          Total Chronically
                                                Not                 Not                                   Not             Not                  Not
          Homeless –                                                                    55
                                           available           available                            available        available            available
          Amador County
  Note: Numbers are provided for the Central Sierra Continuum of Care for which Amador is a participating member. Numbers represent homeless needs for the total
  Continuum of Care area.
  Source: Continuum of Care, August 2012 and January 2013 Point in Time Homelessness Counts.
Based on city police department and planning staff knowledge there are no known permanent
residents of Sutter Creek who are homeless and very few transient homeless persons.
Currently the facilities in the combined Continuum of Care region that provide programs or shelters
to provide support for the homeless provide 205 beds (see Table HE-37). Senior Citizens Services-
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                          March 2015
                                                                         A–32

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Community Action is a homeless shelter located in Jackson. The following also provide services for
the homeless population in Amador County:
      Ione Family Learning Center
      The Resource Connection
      Amador County Alcohol and Drug Services
      Amador County Administrators Office
      Senior Citizens Services - Community Action: Amador County Homeless Shelter
                                                            TABLE HE-37
      HOMELESS FACILITIES IN TUOLUMNE, CALAVERAS, AND AMADOR COUNTIES
                                                         Population                                                Current
                    Facility Type                                                 Permanent/Seasonal
                                                            Served                                                  Bed #
        Emergency Shelter                                      102                        Year round                 102
        Transitional Housing                                    84                        Permanent                   84
        Rapid Re-housing                                         6                        Permanent                   6
        Permanent Supportive
                                                                13                        Permanent                   13
        Housing
       Source: Continuum of Care or HUD; www.hudhre.info https://www.onecpd.info/reports/CoC_HIC_State_CA_2012.pdf
3.0 HOUSING RESOURCES AND INCENTIVES
Affordable Housing Projects in Amador County. The County has several designated affordable
apartment complexes (see Table HE-38) receiving funding through the USDA Rural Development
Program, HUD Section 8 or Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC).
March 2015                                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                  A–33

                        APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                                                               TABLE HE-38
                                                ASSISTED MULTI-FAMILY UNITS
                                                  Expiration        Low Income          Total
        Name                 Location                                                             Type     Funding Agency/Program
                                                     Date                Units          Units
 Jose's Place          154 N. Arroyo                                                                           LIHTC, USDA rural
                                                  3/17/2040                44             44     Seniors
 Apartments            Seco, Ione                                                                          development rental assist
 Jackson
                       1029 N. Main                                                               non-         LIHTC, USDA rural
 Cornerstone                                      2/25/2034                62             64
                       Street, Jackson                                                          targeted   development rental assist
 Apartments
 Kennedy               701 New York
 Meadows               Ranch Road,                8/17/2020                55             56  Large Family           LIHTC
 Apartments            Jackson
                       300 New York
 Jackson Hills                                                                                    non-
                       Ranch Road,                7/31/2031                85             86                  HUD Section 8, LIHTC
 Apartments                                                                                     targeted
                       Jackson
                       401 Clinton
 The Meadows                                      6/30/2016                27             30     Seniors       HUD Preservation
                       Road, Jackson
 Meadows II            900 Broadway,                                                              non-      USDA rural development
                                                  9/14/2024                32             34
 Apartments            Jackson                                                                  targeted          rental assist
                       451 Sutter Hills
                                                                                                  non-         LIHTC, USDA rural
 Sutter Hill Place     Road, Sutter                6/1/2036                43             44
                                                                                                targeted   development rental assist
                       Creek
Source: CHPC http://www.chpc.net/preservation/MappingWidget.html, compiled by PMC, April 2014
At-Risk Housing. The Housing Element law in the California Government Code (Section 65583)
requires all jurisdictions to include a study of all low-income housing units which may at some future
time be lost to the affordable inventory by the expiration of affordability restrictions. There are three
general cases that create the opportunity for the conversion of affordable units:
1) Prepayment of HUD mortgages Section 221(d)(3), Section 202, and Section 236.
2) Opt-outs and expirations of project-based Section 8 contracts.
3) Other cases.
A prepayment of HUD mortgages Section 221(d)(3) involves a privately held project with HUD
providing either below-market interest rate loans or market-rate loans with subsidy to the tenants. In
a Section 236 complex, HUD provides assistance to the owner to reduce the costs for tenants by
paying most of the interest on a market-rate mortgage. Additional rental subsidy may be provided to
the tenant. In a Section 202, HUD provides a direct loan to nonprofit organizations for project
development and rent subsidy for low-income tenants. All Section 202 handicapped units (Section
202 H.C.) are designed for physically handicapped, mentally disabled, and chronically mentally ill
residents.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                        March 2015
                                                                      A–34

  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
In a Section 8 contract for new construction or substantial rehabilitation, HUD provides a subsidy
to the owner for the difference between the tenant’s ability to pay and the contract rent. The
likelihood for opt-outs increases as the market rents exceed the contract rents.
Other cases that create the opportunity for the conversion of affordable housing includes the
expiration of low-income use periods of various financing sources, such as LIHTC, bond financing,
density bonuses, California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) and CDBG and HOME funds, and
redevelopment funds.
There are two affordable housing complexes in Amador County at risk of losing affordability
restrictions during the 10 years starting from the beginning of the 5th cycle Housing Element
planning period: the Kennedy Meadows Apartments and The Meadows, with a total of 82
affordable units. Both are located in Jackson. Below is a cost analysis of preserving the “at-risk”
units.
Preservation and Replacement Options
Overview
To maintain the existing affordable housing stock, the City of Jackson can either preserve the
existing assisted units or facilitate the development of new units. Depending on the circumstances of
at-risk projects, different options may be used to preserve or replace the units. Preservation options
typically include (1) transfer of project to nonprofit ownership; (2) provision of rental assistance to
tenants using non-federal funding sources; and (3) purchase of affordability covenants. In terms of
replacement, the most direct option is the development of new assisted multi-family housing units.
These options are described below.
Transfer of Ownership
Transferring ownership of an at-risk project to a nonprofit housing provider is generally one of the
least costly ways to ensure that at-risk units remain affordable for the long term. By transferring
property ownership to a nonprofit organization, low-income restrictions can be secured indefinitely
and the project would become potentially eligible for a greater range of governmental assistance.
Both the at-risk complexes could potentially be acquired by nonprofit agencies to maintain the
affordability of units.
The current market value of the project was estimated using information from multi-family sales
listings in Amador County as of April 2014. The average cost to purchase a multi-family
development was $86,250 per unit. There are 82 units at risk of converting to market rate between
the two complexes within 10 years. Therefore, if all of these were purchased, the estimated cost of
acquiring these would be $7,072,500.
Rental Assistance
Rental subsidies using non-federal (state, local, or other) funding sources can be used to maintain
affordability of the 82 at-risk affordable units. These rent subsidies can be structured to mirror the
federal Section 8 program. Under Section 8, HUD pays the difference between what tenants can pay
March 2015                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                  A–35

                              APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
(defined as 30 percent of household income) and what HUD estimates as the fair market rent on the
unit. In Amador County, the 2014 fair market rent is determined to be $775 for a one-bedroom unit,
$1,048 for a two-bedroom unit, and $1,391 for a three-bedroom unit (The Meadows offers one-,
two-, and three-bedroom units while the Kennedy Meadows offers two- and three-bedroom units).
The feasibility of this alternative is highly dependent on the availability of other funding sources
necessary to make rent subsidies available and the willingness of property owners to accept rental
vouchers if they can be provided. As indicated in Table HE-39, the total cost of subsidizing the
rents for all 82 at-risk units is estimated at $35,016 per month or $420,192 annually.
                                                                       TABLE HE-39
                                           ESTIMATED RENTAL SUBSIDIES REQUIRED
                                          Fair                                       Very Low                Affordable       Monthly               Total
        Unit             Total                         Household
                                       Market                                         Income                    Cost –         per Unit          Monthly
        Size             Units                                Size
                                         Rent1                                    (50% AMI) 2                  Utilities3      Subsidy           Subsidy
        1 br                7            $775                    1                    $25,350                     $559            $216            $1,512
        2 br               67           $1,048                   2                    $28,950                     $624            $424           $28,408
        3 br                8           $1,391                   4                    $36,150                     $754            $637            $5,096
       Total               82                                                                                                                    $35,016
  1. Fair market rent is determined by HUD for different jurisdictions/areas across the United States on an annual basis.
  2. 2014 Household Income limits based on 2014 Income Limits from HCD. In Amador County, the median family income in 2014 was calculated to be $72,300 for a
  family of four.
  3. Affordable cost = 30% of household monthly income minus estimated utility allowance of $100 for a one-bedroom unit, $150 for a two-bedroom unit, and $200 for a
  three-bedroom unit.
  Source: Data compiled by PMC(2014)
Purchase of Affordability Covenants
Another option to preserve the affordability of at-risk projects is to provide an incentive package to
the owners to maintain the projects as affordable housing. Incentives could include writing down
the interest rate on the remaining loan balance and/or supplementing the Section 8 subsidy received
to market levels. The feasibility of this option depends on whether the complex is too highly
leveraged. By providing lump sum financial incentives or ongoing subsidies in the form of rents or
reduced mortgage interest rates to the owner, the City of Jackson can ensure that some or all of the
units remain affordable.
Construction of Replacement Units
The construction of new affordable housing units is a means of replacing the at-risk units should
they be converted to market-rate units. The cost of developing housing depends on a variety of
factors, including density, size of the units (i.e., square footage and number of bedrooms), location,
land costs, and type of construction. Assuming an average construction cost of $132,200 per unit, it
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                 March 2015
                                                                               A–36

  APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
would cost over $10.8 million to construct 82 new assisted units.1 Including land costs, the total
costs to develop replacement units will be significantly higher.
Cost Comparisons
The above analysis attempts to estimate the cost of preserving the at-risk units under various
options. The cost of acquiring The Meadows and Kennedy Meadows Apartments projects and
transferring ownership to another nonprofit organization is high ($2.6 million). In comparison, the
annual costs of providing rental subsidies required to preserve the 56 assisted units are relatively low
($205,176). However, long-term affordability of the units cannot be ensured in this manner. The
option of constructing 82 replacement units is very high ($10.8 million, including land costs) and
constrained by a variety of factors, including land costs and potential community opposition. The
best option to preserve the at-risk units appears to be the purchase of affordability covenants.
Resources for Preserving Assisted Rental Housing
Organizations and Resources
The preservation of affordable rental housing at risk of conversion to market-rate housing can be
assisted by nonprofit organizations with the capacity and interest in acquiring, managing, and
permanently preserving such housing. HCD maintains a list of such interested nonprofit
organizations. Several have expressed an interest in preserving affordable rental housing in Amador
County. These organizations are shown in Table HE-40 below. Following the table is a list of
resources and mechanisms for affordable housing that Amador County jurisdictions may want to
pursue or implement.
                                            TABLE HE-40
         NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS INTERESTED IN ACQUIRING AT-RISK HOUSING
  Christian Church Homes of Northern                 303 Hegenberger Road,           Oakland
  California, Inc.                                   Suite 201
  Community Housing Improvement Program,             1001 Willow Street              Chico
  Inc.
  Mercy Housing Corporation                          3120 Freeboard Drive,           West
                                                     Suite 202                       Sacramento
  Regional Housing Authority of Sutter &             448 Garden Highway              Yuba City
  Nevada Counties
1
  Average construction cost based on costs described in Appendix B: Constraints
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                A–37

                 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
     Resources and Incentives for Affordable Housing. Efforts by the County to assist in the
      development, rehabilitation, and preservation of affordable housing would utilize
      organizational and financial types of resources. The following programs include local, state,
      and federal housing programs that are valuable resources in assisting in the development of
      affordable housing, preserving at-risk housing, and for housing rehabilitation.
     Density Bonus Ordinances: Jurisdictions in Amador County provide for density bonuses
      consistent with state law (most have density bonuses codified in an ordinance). While the
      exact qualifications of the bonus vary, housing density bonuses are offered for lower- and
      very low-income and senior households in accordance with Government Code Sections
      65915 and 65917. Jurisdictions are required to grant a density bonus of at least 25 percent
      above the base zoning density and one additional concession or incentive. The provisions of
      the density bonus apply to all new residential developments in the county.
     HOME Program: The Home Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) was created
      under the Cranston Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act enacted in November 1990.
      HOME funds are awarded annually as formula grants to participating jurisdictions. HUD
      establishes Home Investment Trust Funds for each grantee, providing a line of credit that
      the jurisdiction may draw upon as needed. The program’s flexibility allows states and local
      governments to use HOME funds for grants, direct loans, loan guarantees or other forms of
      credit enhancement, or rental assistance or security deposits.
      The HOME Investment Partnership Act is another HUD program that is designed to
      improve and increase the supply of affordable housing. Local jurisdictions are eligible for at
      least $500,000 under the formula. Local jurisdictions can also apply to the state for a portion
      of the state’s formula allocation. Each of the five jurisdictions applies for state allocation
      funds through to HCD and the grants are awarded on a competitive basis. HOME funds
      may be used for housing rehabilitation, new construction, and acquisition and rehabilitation
      for both single-family and multifamily projects.
     Public Housing Authority (PHA): Amador County does not have a local PHA; the
      nearest PHA is in neighboring El Dorado County. Therefore, the Stanislaus County Housing
      Authority administers the Section 8 program through the Housing Assistance Program for
      Amador County and six surrounding counties.
     Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): HUD awards CDBG funds annually to
      entitlement jurisdictions and states for general housing and community development
      activities, including housing construction, housing rehabilitation, public services, and
      economic development activities. HUD also offers various other programs that can be
      utilized by the cities and nonprofit and for-profit agencies for the preservation of low-
      income housing units such as Section 202 and Section 108 loan guarantees.
     Community Reinvestment Act (CRA): The CRA, enacted by Congress in 1977, is
      intended to encourage depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of the
      communities in which they operate, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods,
      consistent with safe and sound banking operations. The CRA requires that each insured
      depository institution’s record in helping meet the credit needs of its entire community be
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          March 2015
                                              A–38

 APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
      evaluated periodically. That record is taken into account in considering an institution’s
      application for deposit facilities, including mergers and acquisitions.
      The CRA has come to play an increasingly important role in improving access to credit in
      communities, both rural and urban. Under the impetus of the CRA, many banks and thrifts
      opened new branches, provided expanded services, and made substantial commitments to
      increase lending to all segments of society. By evaluating a financial institution’s lending
      practices, any practices that are considered discriminating because of race, sex, or income
      can be removed and thus improve access to loans for all persons in Amador County.
     Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program (LIHTC): In 1986, Congress created the
      federal low-income housing tax credit to encourage private investment in the acquisition,
      rehabilitation, and construction of low-income rental housing.
      Because high housing costs in California make it difficult, even with federal credits, to
      produce affordable rental housing, the California legislature created a state low-income
      housing tax credit program to supplement the federal credit.
      The state credit is essentially identical to the federal credit. State credits are only available to
      projects receiving federal credits. Twenty percent of federal credits are reserved for rural
      areas and 10 percent for nonprofit sponsors. To compete for the credit, rental housing
      developments have to reserve units at affordable rents to households at or below 46 percent
      of AMI. The assisted units must be reserved for the target population for 55 years.
      The federal tax credit provides a subsidy over 10 years toward the cost of producing a unit.
      Developers sell these tax benefits to investors for their present market value to provide
      upfront capital to build the units.
      Credits can be used to fund the hard and soft costs (excluding land costs) of the acquisition,
      rehabilitation, or new construction of rental housing. Projects not receiving other federal
      subsidy receive a federal credit of nine percent per year for 10 years and a state credit of 30
      percent over four years (high cost areas and qualified census tracts get increased federal
      credits). Projects with a federal subsidy receive a four percent federal credit each year for 10
      years and a 13 percent state credit over four years.
     California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA): CHFA offers permanent financing for
      acquisition and rehabilitation to for-profit, nonprofit, and public agency developers seeking
      to preserve at-risk housing units. In addition, CHFA offers low interest predevelopment
      loans to nonprofit sponsors through its acquisition/rehabilitation program.
     Federal Home Loan Bank System: The federal Home Loan Bank System facilitates
      Affordable Housing Programs (AHP), which subsidize the interest rates for affordable
      housing. The San Francisco Federal Home Loan Bank District provides local service within
      California. Interest rate subsidies under the AHP can be used to finance the purchase,
      construction, and/or rehabilitation of rental housing. Very low-income households must
      occupy at least 20 percent of the units for the useful life of the housing or the mortgage
      term.
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                A–39

                APPENDIX A: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
     California Department of Housing and Community Development: HCD conducts the
      Urban Predevelopment Loan Program, which provides funds to pay the initial costs of
      preserving existing affordable housing developments for their existing tenants. Priority is
      given to applications with matching financing from local redevelopment agencies or federal
      programs.
      HCD also conducts the acquisition and rehabilitation component of the Multifamily
      Housing Program to acquire and rehabilitate existing affordable rental housing. Priority is
      given to projects currently subject to regulatory restrictions that may be terminated.
      Assistance is provided through low interest construction and permanent loans. Eligible
      applicants include local government agencies, private nonprofit organizations, and for-profit
      organizations.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                        March 2015
                                            A–40

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
CONSTRAINTS
Various interrelated factors can constrain the ability of the private and public sectors to provide
adequate housing and meet the housing needs for all economic segments of the community. These
factors can be divided into two categories: (1) non-governmental and (2) governmental. Non-
governmental constraints consist of land availability, the environment, vacancy rates, land cost,
construction costs, and availability of financing. Governmental constraints consist of land use
controls, development standards, processing fees, development impact fees, code enforcement, site
improvement costs, development permit and approval processing, and provision for a variety of
housing.
In general, non-governmental constraints are consistent across the cities of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth,
Sutter Creek, and the unincorporated area of Amador County. Therefore, unless otherwise stated,
the non-governmental constraints section applies to all the jurisdictions covered by this analysis.
Governmental constraints are specific to each jurisdiction and therefore are completed in their
entirety for each participating jurisdiction.
JOINT NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
LAND COSTS
The cost of raw, developable land creates a direct impact on the cost for a new home and is
considered a possible constraint. A higher cost of land raises the price of a new home. Therefore,
developers sometimes seek to obtain approvals for the largest number of lots allowable on a parcel
of land. Residential land costs in Amador County as of April 2014 are shown in Table HE-41
Residentially zoned land ranged from just under $4,000 per acre to over $100,000 per acre,
depending on lot location and improvements needed for development. Some parcels include utility
services and roads while others would need to develop this type of infrastructure in order to support
residential development. The average price of land was just over $25,000 per acre.
                                                                    TABLE HE-41
                                           AMADOR COUNTY VACANT LAND COSTS
                Parcel Size (Acres)1                                     Price           Price per Acre
                              277                                     $3,000,000             $10,830
                               69                                      $330,000              $4,783
                               63                                     $1,400,000             $22,222
                               40                                      $150,000              $3,750
                            30.36                                     $3,313,000            $109,124
                            14.65                                      $200,000              $13,652
                            11.05                                      $55,000               $4,977
                             10.6                                      $125,000              $11,792
                             3.65                                      $185,000              $50,685
           Source: www.loopnet.com, April 2014
           Note: 1Each row in this table represents a single parcel
March 2015                                                           2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                        B–1

                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
CONSTRUCTION AND LABOR COSTS
Factors that affect the cost of building a house include the type of construction, materials, site
conditions, finishing details, amenities, and structural configuration. An Internet source of
construction cost data (www.building-cost.net), provided by the Craftsman Book Company,
estimates the cost of a single-story four-cornered home in Amador County to be approximately $136
per square foot. This cost estimate is based on a 1,600-square-foot house of good quality
construction including a two-car garage and central heating and air conditioning. The total
construction costs excluding land costs are estimated at approximately $211,258. Based on analysis
in the Stanislaus County Housing Element and a typical multi-family 900-square-foot apartment
based on analysis provided by Amador County, a typical cost of construction for multi-family is
$133 per square foot resulting in a construction cost of $119,700. Per HCD direction, the Stanislaus
County analysis and data was the most recent and closest in geographic proximity that could be
found.
If labor or material costs increased substantially, the cost of construction in Amador County could
rise to a level that impacts the price of new construction and rehabilitation. Therefore, increased
construction costs have the potential to constrain new housing construction and rehabilitation of
existing housing, but are not a constraint at this time.
AVAILABILITY OF FINANCING
The cost of borrowing money to finance the construction of housing or to purchase a house affects
the amount of affordably priced housing in Amador County. Fluctuating interest rates can eliminate
many potential homebuyers from the housing market or render a housing project that could have
been developed at lower interest rates infeasible. When interest rates decline, sales increase. The
reverse is true when interest rates increase. Over the past decade, there was dramatic growth in
alternative mortgage products, including graduated mortgages and variable rate mortgages. These
types of loans allow homeowners to take advantage of lower initial interest rates and to qualify for
larger home loans. However, variable rate mortgages are not ideal for low- and moderate-income
households that live on tight budgets. In addition, the availability of variable rate mortgages has
declined in the last few years due to greater regulation of housing lending markets. Variable rate
mortgages may allow lower-income households to enter into homeownership, but there is a definite
risk of monthly housing costs rising above the financial means of that household. Therefore, the
fixed interest rate mortgage remains the preferred type of loan, especially during periods of low,
stable interest rates. Table HE-42 illustrates interest rates as of April 2014. The table presents both
the interest rate and annual percentage rate (APR) for different types of home loans. The interest
rate is the percentage of an amount of money which is paid for its use for a specified time, and the
APR is the yearly percentage rate that expresses the total finance charge on a loan over its entire
term. The APR includes the interest rate, fees, points, and mortgage insurance and is therefore a
more complete measure of a loan's cost than the interest rate alone. However, the loan's interest
rate, not its APR, is used to calculate the monthly principal and interest payment.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
                                                  B–2

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                   TABLE HE-42
                                               CONFORMING LOAN INTEREST RATES
                               Term                                                Interest       APR
      30-year fixed                                                                4.375%       4.460%
      15-year fixed                                                                3.625%       3.772%
      5-year adjustable rate                                                       3.250%       3.001%
    Source: www.wellsfargo.com, April 2014
    Notes: Conforming loan is for no more than $417,000. A jumbo loan is greater than $417,000.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Hazards
Flooding
According to the Amador County 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan, portions of Amador County have
always been at risk to flooding because of its high annual percentage of rainfall, the number of
watercourses that traverse the county, and the location of development adjacent to flood-prone
areas. Flooding events generally occur countywide, and have caused significant damage in the
western portion of the county near population centers, especially in the incorporated areas
surrounding the cities of Jackson, Ione, and Sutter Creek. Flooding has occurred, both within the
100-year floodplain and in other localized areas. Many waterways converge in this area of the county
increasing the flood risk. In Plymouth and the surrounding area, flooding is associated with Big
Indian Creek and Little Indian Creek. Figure 1 displays the most flood-prone areas of Amador
County.
The 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan identifies how flooding hazards are documented in Amador
County through a number of efforts, including:
         Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Plain Mapping: FEMA established
          standards for floodplain mapping studies as part of the National Flood Insurance Program
          (NFIP). The NFIP makes flood insurance available to property owners in participating
          communities adopting FEMA-approved local floodplain studies, maps, and regulations.
          Floodplain studies that may be approved by FEMA include federally funded studies; studies
          developed by state, city, and regional public agencies; and technical studies generated by
          private interests as part of property annexation and land development efforts. Such studies
          may include entire stream reaches or limited stream sections depending on the nature and
          scope of a study. These studies lead to Flood Insurance Rate Maps for floodplain
          management, which delineates 100- and 500-year floodplains, floodways, and the locations
          of selected cross sections used in the hydraulic analysis and local floodplain regulations.
March 2015                                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                            B–3

                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Department of Water Resources (DWR) Best Available Maps: The Best Available Maps were
developed pursuant to Senate Bill (SB) 5 which requires DWR to develop preliminary maps for the
100- and 200-year floodplains located within the Sacramento-San Joaquin Valley watershed. These
maps were developed by DWR to better reflect the most accurate information about the flooding
potential in a community and were designed to provide a better understanding of the true risk of
flooding to public safety and property. The new maps, compiled using information from state, local
and federal agencies, have no regulatory status for floodplain development and are for information
only. They do not replace existing FEMA regulatory floodplain maps
The flood maps from these efforts are used to determine parcel by parcel development potential in
Appendix C Land Inventory. For more information on flood hazards in Amador County and its
incorporated cities, see the Amador County 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan.
Faults
The Amador County 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan notes that Amador County is located in less
seismically active areas compared to other more seismically active areas in California. Amador
County itself is traversed by the Foothills fault system, a complex series of northwest-trending faults
that are related to the Sierra Nevada uplift, and whose activity is little understood, running from
about Oroville in the north to east of Fresno in the south. This system contains the closest and most
potentially significant faults in the area, and includes the potentially active or active Bear Mountains
fault, Melones fault, and Cleveland Hills fault, among others. The California Division of Mines and
Geology Open File Report 84-52 (1994) reports that special seismic zoning is not recommended for
the fault system as the individual faults of the system are either poorly defined at the surface or lack
evidence of Holocene (recent) faulting.
The 2013 Hazard Mitigation Plan also notes that western Amador County may experience ground
shaking from distant major to great earthquakes on faults to the west and east. For example, to the
west, both the San Andreas fault (source of the 8.0 estimated Richter magnitude San Francisco
earthquake that caused damage in Sacramento in 1906) and the closer Hayward fault have the
potential for experiencing major to great events (i.e., >6.7). In 2004 the US Geological Survey
estimated that there is a 62 percent probability of at least one 6.7 or greater magnitude earthquake
occurring that could cause widespread damage in the greater San Francisco Bay area before 2032.
Local and state building codes provide minimum standards for buildings to mitigate seismically
induced damage. Specific parcels are analyzed for seismic-related constraints in Appendix C Land
Inventory. For more Amador County seismic hazard information, see the Amador County 2013
Hazard Mitigation Plan.
Adequate Infrastructure
This section provides general and jurisdiction-specific assessments of domestic water and
wastewater capacity. To comply with SB 1087, the participating jurisdictions will immediately
forward this adopted Housing Element to their respective water and wastewater providers so they
can grant priority for service allocations to proposed developments that include units affordable to
lower-income households.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                               March 2015
                                                   B–4

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                        FIGURE 1 FEMA FLOOD ZONES
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                   B–5

                                                 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Domestic Water Service
Nearly all of the domestic water in Amador County is supplied by the Amador Water Agency
(AWA). The AWA has the legal jurisdiction to serve water throughout Amador County and provides
retail water connections (water sold directly to local consumers) and wholesale water connections
(water sold to a third party which distributes purchased water to its own local customers). In 2011,
the AWA prepared the 2010 Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP); the assessment in this
section is taken from the UWMP. The primary source of water is the Mokelumne River watershed
which supplies the AWA’s main water systems: the Amador Water System (AWS) and the Central
Amador Water Project (CAWP). Lake Camanche Village and La Mel Heights are served primarily
through groundwater. There are a total of 7,465 water service connections in the AWA’s service
area, not including wholesale entity customers. The AWA has four general service areas: the Amador
Water System, the Central Amador Water Project System, La Mel Heights, and Lake Camanche
Village.
The AWS was formerly owned and operated by Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) and currently
serves the areas of Jackson, Martell, Sutter Creek, Sutter Hill, Ione, Amador City, Plymouth and
Drytown. The AWA has two water treatment plants at Sutter Hill and Ione, but also serves raw
(untreated) water from the Amador Canal to customers between Lake Tabeaud and Sutter Hill, and
Sutter Hill and Ione.
The CAWP system provides wholesale water to the communities of First Mace Meadows Water
Association, Pine Grove Community Services District (CSD), and Rabb Park CSD. The CAWP
system is also used to provide retail water to Mace Meadows Unit #1 (CSA #2), Sunset Heights,
Jackson Pines, C.Y.A. Pine Grove Camp, Pine Acres, Ranch House, Pioneer, Ridgeway Pines, Silver
Lake Pines, Sierra Highlands, Buckhorn, Red Corral, River View, Pine Park East, Gayla Manor, and
Toma Lane.
The Lake Camanche Village is a major subdivision consisting of several units (subdivisions) in
southwestern Amador County. The AWA supplies both water and wastewater services to this area,
with water supplies coming from groundwater rather than the Mokelumne River (as with the other
two service areas).
The UWMP forecasts year 2020 water supply and demand (2020 is the closest year to the end of this
Housing Element’s planning period in the UWMP), which is presented in Table HE-43. The water
estimates provided below are presented in the UWMP for normal, single-dry, and multiple dry years.
The UWMP shows that at the county level, substantial water exists beyond the demand and
therefore there is no supply constraint to housing development. However, there are specific issues
with water treatment that affect each jurisdiction’s ability to provide water and could potentially
constrain residential development. These issues are identified below.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                         March 2015
                                                B–6

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                              TABLE HE-43
                           AMADOR WATER AGENCY WATER SUPPLY AND DEMAND
                                                                        2020 Water Totals (Acre Feet per Year)
    Supply Totals (AFY)                                                                17,469
    Demand Totals (AFY)                                                                10,498
    Difference (AFY)                                                                    6,971
    Source: Amador Water Agency Urban Water Management Plan 2011
Amador County
The AWA provides treated water directly to customers within its service area, and provides
wholesale treated water to the City of Jackson through the AWS. The sites inventoried in this
Housing Element lie within the service areas of both AWS and the City of Jackson, but AWS is the
wholesale supplier for the City of Jackson, and regardless of the retail provider of water to the sites,
AWS would be the ultimate water source.
Although adequate amounts of raw water are available, the availability of new water service
connections in both the AWA service area and the City of Jackson is restricted by limited capacity at
the Tanner Water Treatment Plant (WTP) in Sutter Creek. According to AWA staff (2014), the
current capacity of the Tanner Treatment Plant is 6.0 million gallons per day (MGD); the current
usage is approximately 5.6 MGD with “will serve” commitments already issued for the remaining
capacity. Based on the “will serve” commitments that the AWA has already made, all of the existing
capacity of the Tanner Treatment Plant has been allocated. AWA staff noted that Community
Facilities Districts (CFDs) will need to be created to fund plant expansions.
City of Ione
The domestic water system for the City of Ione is owned and operated by the AWA and serves the
city and surrounding area from a 2.5 MGD treatment plant. The State of California has reserved
1.33 MGD of treatment plant capacity for its facilities (Mule Creek Prison, Preston School of
Industry, and CALFIRE); the remaining 1.2 MGD is for residential, industrial, public, and
commercial use. This facility is nearing capacity, although recent improvements to the facility and
completion of a new water storage tank have provided near-term capacity improvements.
The AWA is in the process of developing a plan for increasing the availability of domestic water to
the Ione area. A multitude of options are being investigated, including a new regional treatment
facility at Tanner (which would replace the Ione WTP), improvements to the local treatment facility,
or some combination of the two. The AWA is in the beginning stages of an analysis to determine
the interim improvements that can be constructed at the Ione WTP and the associated costs per
equivalent development unit (by specific interim improvement). The AWA is also considering
creation of a community facilities district to pay for construction of the new Tanner WTP.
March 2015                                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                  B–7

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The City will continue to work collaboratively with the AWA to identify both short- and long-term
viable and cost-effective solutions to maintaining potable water availability in the City (Action H-
2.2.3).
City of Jackson
The AWA provides treated water directly to customers within its service area, and provides
wholesale treated water to the City of Jackson through the AWS. As mentioned above, limited
treatment capacity at the Tanner WTP has the potential to constrain development and the AWA is
taking steps to increase capacity and lift those constraints.
City of Plymouth
The City’s primary water supply is the Plymouth Pipeline from AWA in Sutter Creek. This facility
was placed into service in the spring of 2010. The pipeline’s capacity is 1.331 MGD, slightly more
than double the City’s current demand. The City’s wells and treatment plant are being maintained as
a backup source for emergencies and possible peak demands. Significant improvements to the
treatment facility, as well as an amendment to the City’s 2010 Water System Permit, would be
required to make the facility and wells a regular water source. The 2010 permit also removed a state-
imposed moratorium on new water connections that was in place for many years.
The City’s agreement with the AWA requires that properties requiring new connections (or increases
in meter size) first go through the “will serve” process with the AWA. The process includes payment
of capital facility fees and is dependent on the AWA having treatment capacity at the Tanner WTP
in Sutter Creek. This facility is currently at or near capacity but the City does not see this as a
constraint for the 2014–2019 planning period because the regional housing needs allocation
(RHNA) of 16 units has already been taken into account when determining capacity issues.
The City also has a potential water source from the Arroyo Ditch, which originates from the middle
fork of the Cosumnes River and runs approximately 18 miles southwest to Plymouth. The Arroyo
Ditch can deliver water from the river to the City’s water treatment facility. Efforts by the City to
maintain and repair the Arroyo Ditch are being made; however, continual upkeep of the ditch is
problematic. Dense underbrush, private property access, and lack of resources provide obstacles to
adequate maintenance and repair. Piping of the entire ditch to solve this problem is cost-prohibitive.
Thus the ditch has not been considered a reliable water supply for the City, although it could
provide supplemental water for potable use (if treated at an improved facility) or for irrigation use.
City of Sutter Creek
The AWA provides potable and raw water to the City of Sutter Creek via the Tanner WTP; housing
sites in the city have adequate access to water services. New development is required to construct all
internal water distribution system improvements associated with their projects.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
                                                  B–8

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Wastewater Service
The AWA currently owns, operates, and maintains 10 geographically separate wastewater treatment
plants (WWTP) throughout Amador County. Eight of the 10 systems are community leachfield
systems, while the other two systems treat wastewater to a secondary level that is then applied to
land for disposal. In addition to the wastewater systems owned, operated, and maintained by the
AWA, there are numerous other wastewater purveyors within the AWA service area. Table HE-44
displays the wastewater systems relevant to the jurisdictions in this combined Housing Element.
Jurisdiction-specific analysis of wastewater system availability is provided below.
                                                               TABLE HE-44
                                 WASTEWATER SYSTEMS (NOT OPERATED BY AWA)
     Wastewater System
                                               Collection Type            Treatment Type    Disposal Method
                Name
  City of Amador City                      Conventional, gravity               Primary             N/A
  City of Ione                             Conventional, gravity               Tertiary        Reclaimed
  City of Jackson                          Conventional, gravity             Secondary            NPDES
  City of Plymouth                         Conventional, gravity             Secondary            Spray
  City of Sutter Creek                     Conventional, gravity             Secondary        Trickling Filter
  Source: Amador Water Agency Urban Water Management Plan 2011
Amador County
Residential parcels in the unincorporated county lie within the service area of both the City of
Jackson and the AWA. The City of Jackson collects wastewater for treatment at the Jackson
Wastewater Treatment Plan (WWTP). As of 2014 the Jackson WWTP NPDES permits a daily
maximum of 0.71 MG. As of 2014, it’s estimated that the Jackson WWTP has approximately
250,000 gallons per day of remaining capacity, adequate to serve an additional 833 connections.
The AWA collects wastewater from the Martell area for treatment at the Sutter Creek WWTP. The
Sutter Creek WWTP is currently operating at capacity due to elevated pollutant loads; no additional
treatment capacity at the Sutter Creek WWTP is currently available.
Based on preliminary discussions with the AWA, there are several potential paths to providing
wastewater service for this area. One option would be for the AWA to seek a contract with the City
of Jackson (which has existing, available capacity and a conveyance system that is adjacent to the
parcels) for wastewater service for the sites. Another option is expansion of the existing Sutter Creek
WWTP. Although the AWA worked with the City of Sutter Creek to obtain additional wastewater
treatment capacity through expansion of the Sutter Creek WWTP, no permits have been issued for
an increase in wastewater capacity. The AWA is currently evaluating a regional wastewater treatment
plant concept and may become the primary agency for wastewater treatment for the region. The
AWA has prepared a draft regional wastewater study (AWA 2004) that suggests the long-term
regional wastewater treatment solution is the construction of a regional treatment facility in the
March 2015                                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                   B–9

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Martell area. The feasibility and timing of the regional treatment facility is presently uncertain, but
initial expectations are that the plant will be operational in 5-10 years.
In the other parts of the county, areas served by wells and septic systems are suitable for moderate
and above moderate units, so availability of public water and sewer service was not evaluated for
these sites.
Areas without Infrastructure
Parcels in TC, RM, and RSC land use designations would need to be connected to water and
wastewater infrastructure in order to be considered appropriate for high (or higher) density
residential development. For parcels in areas without existing infrastructure, appropriate
infrastructure would need to be put in place to serve new development. The extension of
infrastructure can be very expensive, particularly in isolated areas located far from existing
infrastructure. Furthermore, many areas of the county, including upcountry areas such as Pine
Grove and Buckhorn, are subject to limited capacity for both water and sewer expansion. Expenses
related to extension of infrastructure, and difficulties in obtaining infrastructure at all, represent an
additional constraint to providing affordable housing.
Parcels in RR and AT land use designations (suitable for moderate and above moderate units) could
rely on private wells and septic systems. As described in the governmental constraints section of this
element, land and permit costs in Amador County would permit construction of housing affordable
to moderate-income households on parcels of one acre or more in these areas.
Availability of water and sewer service represents a constraint on the development of housing
affordable to all income levels in the county. The Central Amador Water Project area (which
includes upcountry areas such as Pine Grove, Pioneer, and Buckhorn) is nearing the maximum water
use permitted under existing water rights, and many of the small, local sewer systems in the county
do not permit or greatly restrict new connections based on lack of capacity. Because of these water
and sewer limitations, construction of housing at densities which would permit affordable units is
difficult in large portions of the county. The land inventory for lower-income households includes
those parcels to which water and wastewater service can most likely be provided during the current
planning period (2014-2019). Program H-1.2 defines the actions that the County will take to work
with AWA to provide water and wastewater service to land inventory parcels. Through
implementation of Programs H-1.3 and H-1.4, the County will maintain lists of parcels with
available water and or sewer service, and work with utilities (including AWA and ARSA) to improve
and expand infrastructure capacity in Amador County.
City of Ione
The City provides for stormwater and wastewater collection as well as the treatment system for the
wastewater. A secondary treatment plant processes the wastewater for users in the city. The existing
WWTP has a capacity of 0.41 MGD. As of 2006, the plant was operating at 0.388 MGD and is
currently operating very near capacity. The City also has a tertiary treatment plant that was brought
on line in the early 1990s and is designed to process up to 0.8 MGD of secondary effluent received
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                              March 2015
                                                  B–10

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
from another agency. According to Ione staff, while there is a processing limit to the current
wastewater treatment facility, the biggest constraint to operations is treated effluent disposal. The
City is currently completing a series of improvements that provide for land application of treated
effluent on adjoining land. The City is working through the Central Valley Regional Water Quality
Control Board to complete these improvements. When completed, these improvements will provide
adequate capacity to address the issue. The City is also considering updating its 2009 Wastewater
Master Plan and intends to reach .55 MGD processing and disposal capacity by 2020.
City of Jackson
The City owns and operates the wastewater collection and treatment facilities for services within the
city. The Jackson WWTP is a tertiary system located on the western boundary of the city. Currently,
the WWTP has a remaining discharge capacity of approximately 1,112 dwelling units. The 2013
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit provides how much treated
wastewater can be discharged into Jackson Creek (maximum of 0.71 million gallons per day during
the dry months) and also spells out the significant improvements that will be required to continue
discharging into Jackson Creek. Though the cost is less than treating the effluent and discharging to
land, it will still generate some significant improvements costs to meet the water quality
requirements.
City of Plymouth
In 2009, the City was awarded a grant ($2.85 million) from the State of California using American
Reinvestment and Recovery (ARRA) funds. This grant was for improvements to the sewage
collection system to reduce infiltration and inflow and for improvements to the treatment facility. In
2010 the City completed a sewer upgrade using the grant funds. The project included bursting and
relining a significant amount of the collection system in the core area of the city. Additionally
improvements were made to the sewer treatment facilities including new aeration motors, new
pumps and headworks facilities.
Plymouth operates its wastewater system under the terms of the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board (RWQCB Order (#R5-2011-0092) issued to the City in 2011. A previous cease and
desist order was rescinded in February 2012.
The new order includes a specified WWTP capacity of 185,000 gallons per day (average daily dry
weather flow). In 2013 the City completed a Wastewater Collection System Master Plan (KASL
Consulting Engineers, Inc.) which included an analysis of wastewater flows. The plan included the
following conclusions:
        There are 668 sewer “equivalents” (EDUs) served by the City’s existing sewer collection
         system.
        With an existing Average Dry Weather Flow (ADWF) of 120,000 gallons per day (gpd), and
         Average Wet Weather Flow (AWWF) of 210,000 gpd and a Peak Wet Weather Flow
         (PWWF) of 550,000 gpd, current flow rates per EDU are:
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                 B–11

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
         –   200 gpd / EDU ADWF
         –   325 gpd / EDU AWWF
         –   850 gpd / EDU PWWF
        The existing PWWF can be adequately conveyed to the City WWTP without unacceptable
         surcharge of the existing wastewater collection system. Sewer EDUs estimated for 10-year,
         20-year and General Plan buildout conditions are:
         –   1,560 Sewer EDUs; 10-year Horizon
         –   2,697 Sewer EDUs; 20-year Horizon
         –   4,056 Sewer EDUs; General Plan Buildout
The City has also completed an analysis of costs to expand the wastewater treatment facility to
accommodate additional growth (KASL 2014). Any new development in the city is required to
connect to the City sewer system and will be required to pay impact fees to cover its fair share cost
of improvements. Using the updated costs, the City is in the process of updating its fees.
City of Sutter Creek
The City of Sutter Creek owns and operates a sewage treatment plant. Sutter Creek treats wastewater
from Amador City, Sutter Creek, and County Service Area 4 (in the Martell area). The plant is
permitted to process approximately 480,000 gpd. In 2013 the plant was operating at about 300,000
gpd. Available wastewater treatment capacity is 180,000 gpd. This capacity is adequate to serve
pending tentative maps and infill developments for 166 units, but cannot accept additional projects
without capacity expansion. Sewage is treated to a secondary level by means of a trickling filter. In
addition, a pending project (Gold Rush Ranch and Golf Resort Project) will be increasing the sewer
capacity with construction of a new facility (thereby benefiting neighboring parcels) which would
temporarily eliminate the sewer capacity problems in the area. The Gold Rush Ranch and Golf
Resort development agreement requires modifying the treatment plant from secondary to tertiary
treatment. As of May 2014, the Gold Rush Ranch tentative map has not been processed as a final
map (pending litigation settlement) and no construction has occurred. The project has not yet
funded capacity increases in the sewer system.
The AWA is currently evaluating a regional wastewater treatment plant concept and may become the
primary agency for wastewater treatment for the region, including Sutter Creek. The AWA has
prepared a draft regional wastewater study (AWA 2004) that suggests the long-term regional
wastewater treatment solution is the construction of a regional treatment facility in the Martell area
(southwest portion of the city of Sutter Creek). The feasibility and timing of the regional treatment
facility is presently uncertain, but initial expectations are that the plant will be operational in 5-10
years.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
                                                  B–12

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
New residential developments proposed for annexation into the city are required to provide for
sewer facilities including lift stations and pipes to meet their demands and/or pay an impact fee
based on their demand and use of existing system facilities. New developments are required to
construct all internal sewer distribution system improvements associated with their projects. New
development will be required to fund eventual wastewater treatment facilities expansion since the
WWTP will ultimately have to be expanded.
 2.0 GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
CITY OF IONE
Ione General Plan
The Ione General Plan establishes policies that guide new development including residential
development. These policies, along with zoning regulations, control the amount and distribution of
land allocated for different land uses in the City. Table HE-45 identifies the residential land use
designations established by the 2009 General Plan
                                              TABLE HE-45
            CITY OF IONE GENERAL PLAN RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
   Designation                                           Description
                      The Rural Residential category is designed as a transition category between
 Rural Residential    agricultural activities and residential uses. The Rural Residential designation is
        (RR)          intended to be located along the edge of the city, where urban
                      development meets the rural portions of the region.
                      The Low Density Residential category represents the traditional single-family
                      neighborhood. Development within these areas is limited to detached
   Low Density        single-family homes and accessory residential uses that have low intensity
  Residential (RL)    characteristics, including second residential units and home occupations.
                      Additionally, schools, day care centers, places of religious assembly, and
                      nursing homes may be permitted.
                      The Medium Density Residential category is characterized by small lot single-
                      family detached or attached (e.g., town homes, duplex and triplex units)
 Medium Density
                      homes, and small apartment complexes. Uses that are ancillary to multi-
 Residential (RM)
                      family residential uses include schools, day care centers, places of religious
                      assembly, and nursing homes.
                      High Density Residential is the most urban residential category available. The
   High Density
                      predominant style of development is larger multi-family housing complexes,
 Residential (RH)
                      including apartments and condominiums.
March 2015                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                           City of Ione
                                                 B–13

                                                                APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
    Designation                                                        Description
                                  The Special Planning Area designation represents potential areas of new
                                  growth within Ione. These areas require a more specific level of policy
                                  direction to direct future growth, protect the unique characteristics of each
                                  area, and guide future development. A Special Planning Area includes a
Special Planning                  mixture of residential uses (at varying densities), commercial activities, parks,
     Area (SPA)                   and other uses as described in text and/or graphics within the General Plan.
                                  The exact land plan for the SPA(s) is to be created and refined through the
                                  adoption of a Specific Plan or Planned Development Master Plan.
                                  Development must be approved by the Planning Commission and the City
                                  Council.
                                  The Central Business District is characterized by a vertically and/or
 Central Business                 horizontally integrated mix of retail, office, professional, and service uses that
   District (CBD)                 serve daily shopping needs. Retail uses generally dominate the ground floor;
                                  apartments and condominiums are allowed uses on the second floor.
                                  The Downtown Transition land use designation is intended as a transitional
                                  land use category from existing residential uses to more intensive
                                  commercial uses. The designation respects the existing residential nature of
                                  the area but recognizes that market demands and land owner desires will
                                  drive conversion of the property to commercial office and/or retail. As such,
                                  existing residential uses are allowed to continue in perpetuity, existing homes
      Downtown
                                  may be remodeled, expanded, and/or replaced, and new homes on
   Transition (DT)
                                  vacant lots may be built. Further, properties may be developed or
                                  redeveloped into commercial uses either through the conversion of
                                  residential structures to commercial operation or wholesale redevelopment
                                  of parcels with new commercial structures. The mixing of commercial and
                                  residential uses, either vertically or horizontally, on the same parcel is also
                                  permissible.
Source: City of Ione 2009 General Plan
Table HE-46 provides a summary of allowed residential density for relevant General Plan Land
Use categories.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                          March 2015
City of Ione
                                                             B–14

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                          TABLE HE-46
             CITY OF IONE ALLOWABLE RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BY LAND USE CATEGORY
                                                                                        Minimum Residential    Maximum Residential
                        Land Use Category
                                                                                            Density (du/ac)      Density (du/ac)
 Rural Residential                                                                                0.1                  2.0
 Low Density Residential                                                                          2.1                  7.0
 Medium Density Residential                                                                       7.1                   15
 High Density Residential                                                                         15.1                25.01
 Special Planning Area                                                                             --2                  --2
 Central Business District                                                                        7.1                 25.01
 Downtown Transition                                                                              3.1                25.0 1
 Source: City of Ione 2009 General Plan
 1 Density bonus consistent with state law may be allowed to exceed the 25 unit per acre maximum.
 2Density to be determined during the specific plan planning process.
Ione Zoning
The City of Ione Zoning Code includes six residential zones and the Planned Development Zone to
provide flexibility in terms of land uses and density, shown in Table HE-47. In addition, multi-
family residential development is also allowed by right in many commercial zones in the city.
Residential, commercial, and planned development zoning are intended to regulate the development
of housing by identifying areas of the city appropriate for residential uses and a variety of housing
densities.
                                                                          TABLE HE-47
                          CITY OF IONE ZONES WHERE RESIDENTIAL USES ARE ALLOWED
                     District                                                                      Description
                                                         This district is intended to preserve land for agricultural use and
                                                         operations and to discourage the premature conversion of
                                                         agricultural land to urban uses. The district allows for a range of
                                                         agricultural and compatible uses on large tracks of land, such as
                                                         raising and grazing of livestock, poultry, or other animals;
                                                         growing and harvesting of trees, fruits, vegetables, flowers,
                          Agricultural
        A                                                grains, or other crops; storage, packing or processing of
                                 Zone
                                                         agricultural products produced on the property, without
                                                         changing the nature of the products; sale on the property of
                                                         products produced thereon, provided that such uses are
                                                         carried on by residential use thereof, and are not a nuisance to
                                                         the contiguous properties; and one-family dwellings and one
                                                         guesthouse, with the renting of not more than one room.
March 2015                                                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                          City of Ione
                                                                                  B–15

                                               APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
           District                                         Description
                              This district should be applied to areas that are primarily
               One-Family     residential, consisting of one-family dwellings. This district also
   R-1a
              Dwelling Zone   provides for public and quasi-public uses, such as schools,
                              churches, and nurseries.
                              This district should be applied to areas that are semi-rural but
                              primarily residential in nature, and supportive of small-scale
               One-Family
   R-1b                       animal keeping. Residential dwelling types consist of single-
              Dwelling Zone
                              family dwellings. This district also provides for public and quasi-
                              public uses, such as schools, churches, and nurseries.
                              This district should be applied to areas that are primarily semi-
               One-Family     rural in nature, consisting of single-family dwellings. This district
   R-1c
              Dwelling Zone   also provides for public and quasi-public uses, such as schools,
                              churches, and nurseries.
                              This district should be applied to areas intended for the
                              development of higher density single-family homes (attached or
            Limited Multiple-
                              detached) and medium density homes, such as condominiums,
    R-2      Family Dwelling
                              duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes. This district also provides for
                   Zone
                              public and quasi-public uses, such as schools, churches, and
                              nurseries.
                              This district should be applied to areas intended for the
                              development of higher density single-family homes (attached or
                              detached) and medium density homes, such as condominiums,
             Multiple-Family
    R-3                       duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes, in addition to multiple-family
              Dwelling Zone
                              housing, such as apartment complexes. This district also provides
                              for public and quasi-public uses, such as schools, churches, and
                              nurseries.
                              This district should be applied to areas intended for the
                              development of higher density single-family and medium to
               High Density   higher density homes, such as condominiums, duplexes,
    R-4      Multiple-Family  triplexes, and fourplexes, in addition to multiple-family housing,
              Dwelling Zone   such as apartment complexes. This district also provides for
                              public and quasi-public uses, such as schools, churches, and
                              nurseries.
                              Provides for the development of mobile home parks and/or the
                              placement of mobile homes on individual lots within an
                              approved subdivision of lots to accommodate mobile homes as
              Mobile Home
    MP                        the primary dwelling unit. The MP Zone also allows for the
                Park Zone
                              development of associated support uses, such as community
                              centers, parks, and common areas as part of both mobile home
                              parks and mobile home subdivisions.
                 Planned      The purpose of the PD district is to provide procedures for the
    PD        Development     consideration and regulation of areas suitable for proposed
                   Zone       comprehensive development with detailed development plans
                              and of those areas that require special planning to provide for
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                         March 2015
City of Ione
                                              B–16

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                   District                                          Description
                                      appropriate planned development in harmony with their natural
                                      features and other environmental consideration. (Ord. 216 §2
                                      (part), 1980: Ord. 51 §15D (A), 1958). The contents, requirements,
                                      and adoption and amendment procedures for Planned
                                      Developments are listed in Section 17.10.070 (Planned
                                      Developments).
                                      This district is applied to areas intended as a transitional land use
                                      category from existing residential uses to more intensive
                                      commercial uses. The designation respects the existing
                                      residential nature of the area but recognizes that market
                                      demands and land owner desires will drive conversion of the
                                      property to commercial office and/or retail. As such, existing
                                      residential uses are allowed to continue in perpetuity; existing
                       Commercial-
      C-T                             homes may be remodeled, expanded, and/or replaced; and
                      Transition Zone
                                      new homes on vacant lots may be built. Further, properties may
                                      be developed or redeveloped into commercial uses either
                                      through the conversion of residential structures to commercial
                                      operation or wholesale redevelopment of parcels with new
                                      commercial structures. The mixing of commercial and residential
                                      uses, either vertically or horizontally, on the same parcel is also
                                      permissible.
                                      This district is applied to areas that consist primarily of light
                                      commercial uses and office development. It additionally
                              Light
                                      provides for public uses, clubs, institutions, and other similar uses.
     C-1               Commercial
                                      Two-, three-, and four-family developments and multiple-family
                             Zone
                                      housing is provided for. One-family and two-family residential
                                      development is also conditionally allowed.
                                      This district is applied to the Central Business District area as
                                      defined in the General Plan. It consists primarily of a mix of
                     Central Business
     C-2                              pedestrian-friendly commercial and office development, public
                             Zone
                                      uses, clubs, institutions, and other similar uses. It also provides for
                                      multi-family residential uses.
                                      This district is intended for low to medium-intensity industrial uses
                            Limited   that involve the manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, or
                      Manufacturing   processing of primarily finished materials, which occur entirely
     M-1
                       and Industrial within an enclosed building. Although most residential uses are
                             Zone     prohibited in M-1, some caretaker housing and emergency
                                      shelters are permitted.
                                      This district is intended to accommodate a broad range of
                     Heavy Industrial manufacturing and industrial uses that may occur inside or
     M-2                and Mining    outside of a building or structure. Although most residential uses
                             Zone     are prohibited in M-2, some caretaker housing and emergency
                                      shelters are permitted.
 City of Ione Zoning Code, April 2011
March 2015                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                 City of Ione
                                                        B–17

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Development Standards for Zones Allowing Residential Uses
Ione’s Zoning Code is the City’s primary guide for residential development. The code establishes
standards and zoning that control the type, location, and density of residential development in Ione.
The zoning regulations serve to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
community residents and also implement the goals and policies of the General Plan.
Part of these development controls include specific development standards. Table HE-48 lists the
development standards that are applied to residential development in the city. Setbacks for front,
rear, and side yards are established in the City’s Zoning Code and are listed in the table, as are height
restrictions. The maximum height in all residential zones except the R-4 zone is 35 feet or two and a
half stories; R-4 allows for up to 45 feet or three stories. Development standards for residential units
in commercial zones must comply with the provisions applicable to the type of building proposed
(i.e., one-family dwelling at R-1 standards; two-, three-, or four-family dwellings at R-2 and R-3
standards; all higher densities at R-4 standards).
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
City of Ione
                                                 B–18

        APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                   TABLE HE-48
                  CITY OF IONE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ZONES WHERE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IS ALLOWED
 Development
                      A        R-1a       R-1b   R-1c           R-2             R-3          R-4       MP       C-T   C-1       C-2      M-1     M-2
    Standard
                                                                 Setbacks (minimum)
Front                         25 ft              30 ft                              20 ft                      15 ft  10 ft     0 ft        25 ft
Side                          5 ft1, 2           15 ft2         8 ft2           5 ft2       10 ft2    10 ft     5 ft   0 ft     0 ft         0 ft
Side – Street
Side of Corner                                     12 ft                                      8 ft     n/a      n/a   n/a       n/a         n/a
Lots
Side – Second
Story Portions of                      13 ft4                  13 ft3            --4         15 ft     n/a      n/a   n/a       n/a         n/a
Main Structures
                                                          20 ft or 20% of
                   25 ft or 25% of the depth
                                                           the depth of
Rear                of the lot, whichever is     30 ft                         15 ft         20 ft    10 ft    15 ft   0 ft     0 ft         0 ft
                                                          the lot, which-
                               less
                                                            ever is less
Minimum Lot           10                                         No             No            No
                                   4,000 sf5   20,000 sf5                                           5 acres               No minimum
Size                acres                                    minimum         minimum      minimum
Minimum                             2.1 du/     0.1 du/       3.1 du/         7.1 du/      15.1 du/  7.1 du/  3.1 du/         7.1 du/
                     n/a                                                                                              n/a                n/a      n/a
Density                               acre       acre           acre           acre          acre     acre     acre            acre
Maximum             1 du/           7.0 du/     2.0 du/      15.0 du/        15.0 du/      25.0 du/ 15.0 du/ 25.0 du/ n/a    25.0 du/    n/a      n/a
Density            parcel             acre       acre           acre           acre          acre     acre     acre            acre
      March 2015                                                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                                 City of Ione
                                                                         B–19

                                                                                                                                                                       APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
 Development
                                    A             R-1a            R-1b                 R-1c                         R-2                        R-3                  R-4                 MP                   C-T            C-1            C-2       M-1     M-2
    Standard
                                                                                                               Distance Between Buildings
Between
Buildings for
                                                               6 ft                                                                      10 ft                                         n/a                                                      0 ft
Dwelling
Purposes
Between
Accessory                                                                                            6 ft                                                                              n/a                                                      0 ft
Buildings
Height                                                                                                                                                                                                     45 ft/3            50 ft/4 stories          75 ft/6
                                                                     35 ft/2.5 stories                                                           45 ft/3 stories                       n/a
(maximum)                                                                                                                                                                                                  stories                                     stories
 Notes:
 1.     The combined side yard setbacks shall be not less than 12 feet.
 2.     Within required side yards, at least one side shall provide 4 feet of unobstructed surface so as to allow unobstructed access from front yard to rear yard.
 3.     Where an R-2 District shares a property line with an R-1 District, second-story portions of main structures shall be located no less than 20 feet from such shared property lines. (Ord. 368 §1(part) 2000; Ord. 252(part), 1984: Ord. 51 §6.04,
        1958).
 4.     For development projects involving more than six dwelling units and that exceed either 20 feet in height or are two stories or greater shall be set back from side and rear property lines no less than 50 feet. (Ord. 368 §1(part), 2000).
 5.     In the R-1 zones, where a lot has an area of 12,000 square feet or more and with adequate provisions for ingress and egress, a Conditional Use Permit may be granted for the construction of additional one-family dwellings and allowable accessory
        buildings. However, the minimum site area shall be 6,000 square feet of lot area per each one-family dwelling.
        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                      March 2015
        City of Ione
                                                                                                                                 B–20

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The City’s parking requirements for residential projects vary by the housing type. Table HE-49
provides the parking requirements for residential developments. Single-family residential units are
required to have two garage spaces and two additional spaces per unit. Multiple family residential
units require one parking space per dwelling unit and either one-half or one additional off-street
space. Senior units also require one parking space per dwelling unit and an additional off-street
parking space if the unit is three or more bedrooms. The Zoning Code allows the required off-street
parking spaces to be provided in a garage, under a carport, on an open dust-free surface, or any
combination of these.
                                                 TABLE HE-49
                        CITY OF IONE RESIDENTIAL OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS
                                   Land Use Type               Required Parking Requirements
  Boarding and Rooming Houses                                   1 space / living or seating unit
  Dwelling, Single-Family and Two-Family                       2 garage spaces / dwelling unit
  Dwelling, Multiple-Family
  Studio, one and two bedroom units                                2 spaces / dwelling unit
  Three or more bedroom units                                      2 spaces / dwelling unit
  Senior units, studio, one, and two bedroom units                  1 space/ dwelling unit
  Senior units, three or more bedroom units                        2 spaces / dwelling unit
  Mobile Home Park                                               2 parking spaces/home site
 Source: City of Ione Zoning Code, 2011
Planned Development (PD) District
In addition to the residential zoning districts mentioned above, the City of Ione Zoning Code also
includes the Planned Development (PD) District. The intent of a Planned Development District is
to provide procedures for the consideration and regulation of areas suitable for proposed
comprehensive development with detailed development plans and of those areas that require special
planning to provide for appropriate planned development in harmony with their natural features and
other environmental consideration. Ideal areas of the city for the establishment of new PD zoning
districts include medium and large residential subdivisions and areas identified in the Land Use
Element as Policy Areas.
Because of their comprehensive nature and intent, planned developments provide a process for
establishing unique and “stand-alone” development standards separate from those found in more
“conventional,” citywide zoning districts. In effect, the PD is the zoning for the property, just like
with specific plans.
March 2015                                        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                          City of Ione
                                                    B–21

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
All new planned developments require the establishment of a master plan that includes the
following:
        A list of permitted, conditionally permitted, and prohibited uses.
        Performance and development requirements related to yards, lot area, intensity of
         development on each lot, parking, landscaping, and signs.
        Other design standards appropriate for the specific site and development.
        Legal description of property covered by the master plan.
        Reasons for establishment of a Planned Development Master Plan on the particular
         property.
Additional contents may be required as determined by the City including, but not limited to,
regulations relating to nonconforming lots, uses, structures, and signs; time, phasing, and sequence
of development projects; infrastructure planning; and circulation planning.
How Residential Uses are Allowed
The Housing Element must identify adequate sites that are available to encourage the development
of various housing types for all economic segments of the population through appropriate zoning
and development standards. Some of the housing types include single-family residential housing,
multiple-family residential housing, residential accessory dwelling units, mobile homes, duplexes,
transitional housing, supportive housing, second units, single room occupancy units, and emergency
shelters. Table HE-50 shows the housing types that will be permitted by zoning district.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
City of Ione
                                                 B–22

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                     TABLE HE-50
                       CITY OF IONE HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT
                                                      R-1a
            Land Use/
                                             A        R-1b          R-2        R-3       R-4     MP          C-T           C-1   C-2   M-1    M-2
         Zoning District
                                                      R-1c
Adult Day Care Home                          N           P            P         P          P       N           P             P    N      N     N
Caretaker Housing                            P           P            P         P          P       P            P            P    P      P     P
Dwelling, Multi-family                       N           N            P         P          P       N           P             N   P1      N     N
Dwelling, Second Unit                        P           P            P         P          P       P           P             N    N      N     N
Dwelling, Single-Family                      P           P          P2          P2        N        N           P             N    N      N     N
Dwelling, Two-Family                         N           N            P         P          P       N           P             N   P1      N     N
Dwelling, Three- and
                                             N           N            P         P          P       N           P             N   P1      N     N
Four-Family
Emergency Shelter                            N           N           N          N         C        N           N             N    N      P     P
Employee Housing                             P           N           N          N         N        N           N             N    N      N     N
Family Day Care Home,
                                             C          C            C          C         C        C           C             N    N      N     N
Large
Family Day Care Home,
                                             P           P            P         P          P       P           P             P    P      N     N
Small
Group Residential                            N           N           C          C          P       N            P            N    N      N     N
Guest House                                  P           P            P         N         N        N           N             N    N      N     N
Home Occupations                             P           P            P         P          P       P           P             N    P      N     N
Live-Work Facility                           N           N           C          C         C        N            P            C   P1      N     N
Manufactured Home                            P           P            P         P          P       P           N             N    N      N     N
Mobile Home                                  N           N           N          N         N        P           N             N    N      N     N
Mobile Home Park                             N           N           N          N         N        P           N             N    N      N     N
Residential Care Home                        P           P            P         P          P       P           P             N    P      N     N
Single Room
Occupancy (SRO)                              N           N           N          C         C        N           C             N    P      N     N
Facilities
Supportive Housing                           P           P            P         P          P       P           P             N    P      N     N
Transitional Housing                         P           P            P         P          P       P           P             N    P      N     N
Source: City of Ione Zoning Code, 2010\
P= permitted by right
A=administrative use permit
C = conditional use permit
N = not permitted
Notes:
1Only allowed as mixed-use development as residential in conjunction with and above ground-floor retail, service, or office use.
2Single-family dwellings are permitted provided the lot size does not exceed 4,000 square feet.
March 2015                                                             2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                                     City of Ione
                                                                            B–23

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Ione Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
Dwelling, Second Unit
Second units are considered an attached or detached dwelling unit which provides complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation sited on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit. This definition
includes granny flats. Secondary living units are permitted in all residential districts and in one
commercial district (C-T).
Mobile and Manufactured Homes
Mobile homes and manufactured housing offer an affordable housing option to many low- and
moderate-income households. Approximately 2 percent of the City’s housing stock consists of
mobile homes. The City permits mobile homes only in the Mobile Home (MP) district but permits
manufactured housing in all residential districts.
Farmworker Housing
Farmworker or employee housing is defined by the City as “property used temporarily or seasonally
for the residential use of five or more unrelated persons or families employed to perform agricultural
or industrial labor. The accommodations may consist of any living quarters, dwelling,
boardinghouse, tent, bunkhouse, mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, travel
trailer, or other housing accommodations maintained in one or more buildings, or one or more sites,
and the premises upon which they are situated, including area set aside for parking of mobile homes
or camping of five or more employees by the employer. Concurrently, employee housing may also
involve permanent residency if the housing accommodation is a mobile home, manufactured home,
travel trailer, or recreational vehicle.” State law (Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 of the Health and
Safety Code) requires the City to treat employee housing that serves six or fewer persons as a single-
family structure and permitted in the same manner as other single-family structures of the same type
in the same zone and also to treat employee housing consisting of no more than 12 units or 36 beds
as an agricultural use and permitted in the same manner as other agricultural uses in the same zone
(Section 17021.6) in zones where agricultural uses are permitted. The City’s Zoning Code allows
employee housing in the Agricultural (A) district. Program H-10 is proposed to comply with these
employee housing act requirements.
Residential Care Home
A residential care home is a home that provides 24-hour non-medical care for six or fewer persons
18 years of age or older, or emancipated minors, with chronic, life-threatening illness in need of
personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance or training essential for sustaining the
activities of daily living, or for the protection of the individual. This classification includes group
homes, rest homes, residential care facilities for the elderly, adult residential facilities, wards of the
juvenile court, and other facilities licensed by the State of California. Convalescent homes, nursing
homes, and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of “Medical
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                March 2015
City of Ione
                                                  B–24

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Services, Extended Care.” The City currently allows residential care homes in all residential districts
and in two commercial districts (C-T, C-2).
Emergency Shelters
California Health and Safety Code (Section 50801) defines an emergency shelter as “housing with
minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less
by a homeless person.”
In effect since January 1, 2008, Senate Bill (SB) 2 (Cedillo, 2007) requires the City to allow
emergency shelters without any discretionary action in at least one zone that is appropriate for
permanent emergency shelters (i.e., with commercial uses compatible with residential or light
industrial zones in transition), regardless of its demonstrated need. The goal of SB 2 was to ensure
that local governments are sharing the responsibility of providing opportunities for the development
of emergency shelters. To that end, the legislation also requires that the City demonstrate site
capacity in the zone identified to be appropriate for the development of emergency shelters. Within
the identified zone, only objective development and management standards may be applied, given
they are designed to encourage and facilitate the development of or conversion to an emergency
shelter. Those standards may include:
        The maximum number of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly by the facility.
        Off-street parking based upon demonstrated need, provided that the standards do not
         require more parking for emergency shelters than for other residential or commercial uses
         within the same zone.
        The size and location of exterior and interior on-site waiting and client intake areas.
        The provision of on-site management.
        The proximity to other emergency shelters, provided that emergency shelters are not
         required to be more than 300 feet apart.
        The length of stay.
        Lighting.
        Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
The City continues to allow shelters in Limited Manufacturing and Industrial (M-1) and Heavy
Industrial and Mining (M-2) districts by right. There are currently approximately 56 acres available
on two parcels in the M-2 district and approximately 52 acres on two parcels available in the M-1
district, allowing adequate capacity for this use. In addition, the City allows shelters with a
Conditional Use Permit in the R-3 zone.
March 2015                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                            City of Ione
                                                  B–25

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Transitional and Supportive Housing
Transitional housing is defined in Section 65582(h) of the Health and Safety Code as buildings
configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require
the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program
recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the
beginning of the assistance.
Supportive housing is defined by Section 56682(f) of the Health and Safety Code as housing with no
limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an on-site or
off-site service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or
her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the
community. Target population is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 56682(g) as persons
with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS,
substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided
pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with
Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations,
adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the
foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
SB 2 requires that transitional and supportive housing types be treated as residential uses and subject
only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. Both
transitional and supportive housing types must be explicitly permitted in the municipal code. Both
transitional and supportive housing are explicitly defined in the City’s Zoning Code and both are
allowed by right in all zones that allow residential uses without requiring any additional review.
Extremely Low-Income Households
AB 2634 (Lieber, 2006) requires the quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing
needs of extremely low-income households. Elements must also identify zoning to encourage and
facilitate supportive housing and SRO units.
Extremely low-income households typically comprise persons with special housing needs including
but not limited to persons experiencing homelessness or near-homelessness, persons with substance
abuse problems, and farmworkers. SROs are permitted in the R-3 and R-4 zone with a Conditional
Use Permit. In addition, to encourage and facilitate the development of housing affordable to
extremely low-income households, the City will prioritize funding and offer financial incentives and
regulatory concessions (Program H-2.2).
Ione Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Compliance with provisions of the federal ADA is assessed and enforced by the Building Inspector
in Ione. ADA access is enforced through building permit entitlement and is required for all
commercial development, new construction of multi-family apartments with three or more units in
any one building, and new construction of congregate housing or shelters. Special ADA access
retrofitting is not required for remodeling or renovation of buildings, but only for new construction.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                              March 2015
City of Ione
                                                 B–26

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
In a previous planning period the City adopted a Transition Plan and has been installing/replacing
ADA-compliant curb ramps and making other improvements to public facilities. The City does not
have any specific land use or development standards related to the spacing or concentration of
persons with disabilities, or any special parking requirements, but rather evaluates the need for
reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities on a case-by-case basis. In May 2009 the
City established a reasonable accommodation procedure (Section 17.10.060 of the City’s Zoning
Code) to ensure a fair and efficient process for persons with disabilities to make necessary
accessibility adjustments to their homes.
The purpose of allowing reasonable accommodation(s) is to provide a process for individuals with
disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation(s) for relief from the various land use,
zoning, or rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the City. It is the policy of the City,
pursuant to the federal Fair Housing Act (as amended), to provide people with disabilities
reasonable accommodation(s) in rules, policies, and procedures that may be necessary to ensure
equal access to housing.
The City Planner shall have the authority to consider and take action on requests for reasonable
accommodation(s). When a request for reasonable accommodation(s) is filed with City Planning, it
will be referred to the City Planner for review and consideration as a ministerial action unless
determined otherwise by the City Planner. A request for reasonable accommodation(s) shall be
considered “ministerial” in nature when it is related to a physical improvement that cannot be
constructed to conform to the City’s setbacks or design standards. Typical improvements considered
to be ministerial in nature would include ramps, walls, handrails, or other physical improvements
necessary to accommodate a person’s disability. The City Planner shall issue a written determination
of his or her action within 30 days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may do one
of the following:
        Grant or deny the accommodation request.
        Grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory condition(s).
        Forward the request to the Planning Commission for consideration as a Conditional Use
         Permit and subject to the findings stated in Section 17.10.060.F (Required Findings for
         Reasonable Accommodation(s).
In the event the City Planner determines that the request for reasonable accommodation(s) is non-
ministerial in nature, such request shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission in accordance
with Section 17.10.080 Conditional Use Permit) and shall be subject to the findings stated in Section
17.10.060.F (Required Findings for Reasonable Accommodation(s)).
All written determinations of actions of the City Planner shall give notice of the right to appeal and
the right to request reasonable accommodation(s) on the appeals process (e.g., requesting that City
staff attempt to schedule an appeal hearing as soon as legally and practically possible), if necessary.
The notice of action shall be sent to the applicant by mail.
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                          City of Ione
                                                B–27

                                                 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
If necessary to reach a determination or action on the request for reasonable accommodation(s), the
City Planner may request further information from the applicant consistent with City Planning
specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a request for further information is
made, the 30-day period to issue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant fully and
sufficiently responds to the request.
Appeal of the City Planner or Planning Commission action on the request for reasonable
accommodation(s) shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.060
(Appeals). (Ord. 423, §2, 2009)
Ione Density Bonus
The City’s Zoning Code provides for a density bonus consistent with state law. The City of Ione
offers a housing density bonus (Chapter 17.46 of the City’s Municipal Code) for lower- and very
low-income and senior households in accordance with Government Code Sections 65915 and
65917. Cities are required to grant a density bonus of at least 35 percent above the base zoning
density and one additional concession or incentive. The provisions of the density bonus apply to all
new residential developments in the city.
Ione Building Codes and Code Enforcement
The purpose of the building-related codes is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or
limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction,
quality of materials, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of all buildings and structures
with the City. The City of Ione currently administers codes and code enforcement under the 2013
edition of the California Building Code and ADA requirements. The City adopted this new code in
2014. The City has made several minor local amendments, most notably to exempt tool sheds and
playhouses. These local amendments do not place additional constraints on the development of
housing. Very little proactive code enforcement occurs in the city, mainly due to lack of funding and
staff. Most building and zoning enforcement activities of the City are in response to complaints of
City residents or items found during other inspection activities.
Ione On/Off-site Improvements
All development in the city must comply with the City’s adopted improvement standards.
Improvements to property include the installation of on-site water, sewer, drainage, street lighting,
highways, curbs/gutters/sidewalks/streets, and other associated improvements. The City’s standards
for these improvements, whether eventually dedicated to the City or otherwise, are listed in the
City’s Improvement Standards, adopted by Resolution 1430 on February 4, 2004, and updated in
2007 by Resolution 1600. These standards cover the design and construction of streets, storm
drainage, and sanitary sewers, and standard details for infrastructure such as manholes, inlet boxes,
trenches, stop signs, and curbs. These improvement standards establish minimum standards to be
applied to improvements including those dedicated to the public to be City-maintained and -
operated, private development projects, and improvements in existing rights-of-way and easements.
The standards also work to protect the public, ensuring the adequate design of public facilities. Plans
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
City of Ione
                                               B–28

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
including waterline improvements must also be reviewed and approved by the AWA prior to
approval by the City.
Ione has on- and off-site improvement requirements for new residential development based on the
location and size of the development. Off-site improvements are required where necessary to allow
for the proposed density of the development. Typical off-site improvements include street
construction consisting of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, underground electric, telephone, cable and gas,
sewer and water line extensions, and traffic and safety items (streetlights, striping, signs, guardrails,
and barricades).
Ione Fees
Two aspects of local government have been criticized as placing burdens on the private sector’s
ability to build affordable housing. These are (1) the fees or other exactions required of developers
to obtain project approval, and (2) the time delays caused by the review and approval process. Critics
contend that lengthy review periods increase financial and carrying costs and that fees and exactions
increase expenses. These costs are in part passed onto the prospective homebuyer in the form of
higher purchase prices or rents.
A variety of development impact fees are often assessed on new residential projects that include
City-controlled fees (such as development application fees and building permit fees) and utility
service connection fees (e.g., sewer and water connection fees). The various planning review and
processing fees, development impact fees and utility service connection fees collectively can add
significant costs to housing. The City of Ione has adopted fees for all developments including single-
family and multi-family developments.
Table HE-51 identifies the typical fees that would be collected for the development of single-family
and multi-family projects. Assuming a 1,600-square-foot single-family unit, the typical fees would be
$25,782, and for a multi-family unit, the typical fees would be $23,549.
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                           City of Ione
                                                 B–29

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                TABLE HE-51
                                     CITY OF IONE IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
                                                                           Rate
                          Impact Fee
                                                          Residential                   Commercial
Regional Traffic Impact Fee (adopted
10-1-07 by Amador County                                $3,059.00/unit               $419/1,000 sq. ft.
Transportation Commission)
Local Traffic Impact Fee                                  $3,074/unit                $612/1,000 sq. ft.
                                                     $1,302.00/new unit               $12,760/acre of
Fire Service
                                                    $0.25/sf for additions        building ($0.29/ sq. ft.)
                                                                                      $12,377/acre of
Police Service                                          $1,263.00/unit
                                                                                  building ($0.28/ sq. ft.)
                                                                                      $32,183/acre of
Park & Recreation                                       $3,284.00/unit
                                                                                  building ($0.74/ sq. ft.)
                                                                                      $10,349/acre of
City Administration Fee                                 $1,056.00/unit
                                                                                  building ($0.24/ sq. ft.)
General Plan Service (adopted 8-21-05)                   $0.22/ sq. ft.                 $0.22/ sq. ft.
                                                 School Fees
                                     (Amador County Unified School District)
Residential                                                                $3.36/ sq. ft.
                                            Sewer Connection Fee
Residential                                                           $7,640/equivalent unit
Mobile Home                                                               $7,200/space
Source City of Ione, February 2009
The City’s impact fees are comparable to other jurisdictions in the region. The City’s fees for a
typical 1,600-square-foot single-family dwelling are approximately $25,782. According to
Buildingcost.net, a housing construction cost resource that calculates the total estimated cost of
building a new home (land costs not included), single-family home construction costs in 2014 were
estimated at approximately $132 per square foot for average quality construction, or $211,200 for an
average 1,600-square-foot home. The estimated total development cost, which includes construction
and land costs, of a 1,600-square-foot home with four walls, an attached garage, central heating and
air, and average building materials was $217,508.
The City’s fees for a typical 900-square-foot multi-family dwelling are approximately $23,549. Costs
for a recent multi-family project were not available in any of the County jurisdictions. In order to
estimate multi-family costs, another area Housing Element analysis was used. Based on the
Stanislaus County Housing Element, typical multi-family construction costs are $133 per square
foot, or $119,700 for a 900-square-foot unit. The estimated total development cost of a 900-square-
foot apartment, including construction and land, was $132,200.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                March 2015
City of Ione
                                                   B–30

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
As illustrated in Table HE-52 this typical fee total is approximately 12 percent of the average new
house development cost and 18 percent of the average new multi-family unit development cost.
While these costs will likely be passed on to the ultimate product consumer, thus impacting housing
prices, these requirements are deemed necessary to maintain the quality of life desired by city
residents.
                                                                       TABLE HE-52
           CITY OF IONE TOTAL FEES FOR TYPICAL SINGLE- AND MULTI-FAMILY UNITS
                                                                         Estimated Development   Estimated Proportion of
        Housing Type                             Total Fees              Cost per Unit (land and  Fees to Development
                                                                            construction costs)       Costs per Unit
Single-Family Unit1                                $25,782                      $217,508                   12%
Multi-Family Unit2                                 $23,549                      $132,200                   18%
Source: www.building-cost.net 2014, City of Ione 2014
Notes:
       1.   Typical single-family unit estimated at 1,600 square feet.
       2.   Typical multi-family unit of 900 square feet.
In addition to impact fees, each discretionary approval or entitlement has different submittal
requirements and deposits associated with it, as identified in Table HE-53 below. All deposits
identified for discretionary approvals are deposits that are paid when the application for the
entitlement is submitted; in addition, the City will bill the applicant costs that are calculated on a
time–and-materials basis for review and processing of the application.
March 2015                                                              2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                             City of Ione
                                                                           B–31

                                                                                        APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                            TABLE HE-53
        CITY OF IONE DISCRETIONARY APPROVAL/ENTITLEMENT DEPOSITS AND COSTS
                                                 Discretionary Approval/Entitlement Deposits
   Variance                                                                                                                         $300¹
   Conditional Use Permit                                                                                                           $250¹
   Site Plan Review                                                                                                                 $100¹
   Planned Development (Establishment)                                                                                              $350¹
   Rezone                                                                                                                           $350¹
   General Plan Amendment                                                                                                           $600¹
   Boundary Line Adjustment                                                                                                         $250¹
   Tentative Map (for Parcel or Final Map)                                                                              $300 plus $4.00/lot¹
   Extension of a Tentative Map                                                                                                     $250¹
                                                                         Additional Deposits
   Environmental Review Deposit                                                                                                   $250¹, ²
   Appeals                                                                                                                          $150¹
                                                                               Direct Costs
   City Planner                                                                                                                 $95/hour
   Associate Planner                                                                                                            $75/hour
   Principal Engineer                                                                                                           $90/hour
   Associate Engineer                                                                                                           $90/hour
   City Attorney                                                                                                                $95/hour
   City Clerk                                                                                                                   $15/hour
                                                                                                    As identified in the consultant’s scope of
   Consultant fees for preparation of an EIR
                                                                                                                                    work
   Source: City of Ione, February 2009
   Note:
   1These charges are considered deposits. In addition to these deposits, the City will charge the applicant on a time-and-materials basis to complete the review and processing
   of the application, as specified above in Direct Costs.
   2Environmental review deposit is automatically required for all tentative maps, rezones, and General Plan amendments. It may also be required for other projects at the
   discretion of the City Planner if environmental review beyond an exemption is anticipated.
Ione Development Review and Permit Processing
Site Plan Review
The City of Ione requires all new multi-family and nonresidential development, as well as additions
to such projects where 500 or more gross square feet is being added to existing structures, go
through a Site Plan Review process. The intent of Site Plan Review is to provide a process for
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                March 2015
City of Ione
                                                                                    B–32

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
promoting the orderly and harmonious growth of the city; to encourage development in keeping
with the desired character of the city; and to ensure physical and functional compatibility between
uses. The Site Plan Review permit provides a process for consideration of development proposals to
ensure that the design and layout of commercial, retail, industrial, or institutional uses or multi-
family residential development will constitute suitable development and will not result in a detriment
to the City of Ione or the environment. The applicant is required to submit to the City a site plan,
detailed elevation drawings, landscape plans, drawings of the site, and other plans that may
reasonably be required to ensure compliance with development. These are reviewed by City staff,
who will either accept the application as complete or return it to the application with a request for
additional information within 30 days. The Planning Commission reviews the application and is
responsible for making a decision on the project (approval or denial) based on a set of findings and
considerations. Specifically, the Commission is considering the following:
       Considerations relating to site layout, the orientation and location of buildings, signs, other
        structures, open spaces, landscaping, and other development features in relation to the
        physical characteristics, zoning, and land use of the site and surrounding properties.
       Considerations relating to traffic, safety, and traffic congestion, including the effect of the
        development plan on traffic conditions on abutting streets; the layout of the site with respect
        to locations and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, driveways, and
        walkways; the adequacy of off-street parking facilities to prevent traffic congestion; and the
        circulation patterns within the boundaries of the development.
       Considerations necessary to ensure that the proposed development is consistent with the
        General Plan and all applicable Specific Plans or Planned Development Master Plans,
        including but not limited to the density of residential units.
       Considerations relating to the availability of City services, including but not limited to water,
        sewer, drainage, police and fire; and whether such services are adequate based upon City
        standards. (Ione Municipal Code, Section 17.10.090.F)
During the review process, the Planning Commission may require conditions in order to mitigate
environmental effects, ensure orderly growth of the city, ensure provision and maintenance of
adequate public services and facilities, and carry out the goals and policies of the General Plan and
City codes.
Permit Processing and Development Review
While permit processing and development review are necessary to ensure that development
proceeds in an orderly manner, permit processing fees, the costs of studies, and implementation of
conditions, as well as time consumed, can impact the cost of housing development.
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                           City of Ione
                                                 B–33

                                                APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
In general, development of a single-family home on an appropriately zoned lot requires a building
permit. The application for the permit must be filed with the Building/Engineering and then the
application is sent to City Planning to ensure that the development conforms to the required
standards for that district. The Building/Engineering then issues the permit to the developer. This
process takes approximately 5 to 10 days for a single-family unit. A multi-family development
requires a Site Plan Review which takes approximately two to four months and building permit
review which takes an additional 5 to 25 days. The entire process for a multi-family development
takes about three to six months. The City does not see this as a constant to the development of
housing. For subdivision maps, it is usually a four- to six-month process, which includes Planning
Commission and possibly City Council review and approval. Improvement plan review takes about
three to four weeks and final maps usually take 60 to 90 days. Building permit issuance usually takes
two weeks, depending on the size of the development.
For a residential subdivision, City Planning is responsible for handling the application. The
development application is checked for completeness, which takes less than 30 days. If necessary,
other agencies, such as the California Department of Transportation or the Central Valley Regional
Water Quality Control Board, are contacted in order to allow them the chance to review and
evaluate the proposed development. Environmental review of the project is then conducted. In
most cases, an initial study and negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration is prepared.
The public review period is generally from 20 to 30 days. The project is then brought before the
Planning Commission by City Planning staff. If a rezone or General Plan map amendment is
required, the project is then usually brought before the City Council for approval three to four
weeks later. Typically, the whole process from submittal of the development application to approval
(or denial) of the project takes about six to eight months. However, if an environmental impact
report is required, this may substantially add to the cost and extend the time frame for permit
processing.
Various development review and approval activities, such as General Plan amendments, rezones,
and specific plans, may be subject to CEQA and require the preparation of an environmental
document (i.e., environmental impact report, negative declaration) before a project can be approved.
The requirement to prepare an environmental document can substantially lengthen the development
review process, sometimes taking up to one year to obtain project approval. State environmental law
mandates much of the time required in the environmental review process.
The costs associated with development project review will vary between projects. Ione utilizes an
efficient and comprehensive approach toward development review and permitting that allows for
quick response to developer applications. The City utilizes many practices to expedite application
processing, reduce costs, and clarify the process to developers and homeowners. Increased
development costs resulting from delays in the City’s development review and permitting process
are not considered a constraint on housing development.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          March 2015
City of Ione
                                               B–34

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Table HE-54 identifies the approximate time necessary for review of residential development
                                                  TABLE HE-54
                                     CITY OF IONE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TIMES
      Development Permit/Review Process                                 Time Frame
  Plan Review                                                              5 days
  Zone Change and GP Amendment                                         4 to 8 months
  Environmental Review                                                 45 to 60 days
                                                      20-30 days (Administrative Review); 2 to 4 months
  Architectural Design Review
                                                                  (Comprehensive Review)
  Typical single-family development                                    6 to 8 months
  Typical multi-family development                                     6 to 8 months
Sources: City of Ione, February 2009
Subdivision Standards
Subdivision standards are used in the city to encourage developers to use new concepts and
innovations in the arrangement of building sites within the subdivision. Deviations from traditional
land division approaches are encouraged in order to facilitate the development of land in a manner
that will be appropriate for contemporary living patterns and technological progress.
Whenever land is subdivided for the purpose of leasing, selling, or financing, the regulations of the
California Subdivision Map Act (and Title 16 of the City’s Municipal Code) are applicable. To
subdivide a parcel into two, three, or four parcels, the applicant seeks approval of a Tentative Map
for Parcel Map. Subdividing a parcel into five or more parcels requires approval of a Tentative Map
for Final Map. The subdivision process is used by the City to ensure that subdivisions will meet
community goals through the provision of adequate infrastructure, including roads, drainage,
schools, and parks.
When completing a Parcel Map or Final Map, an applicant first submits a Tentative Map to the City
Planner. Approval of a Tentative Map for Final Map or Parcel Map is the responsibility of the
Planning Commission. After approval of a Tentative Map, the Final Map or Parcel Map must be
approved if it is substantially the same as the approved Tentative Map. The City is able to establish
conditions of approval, and through this, obtain exactions for public facilities, land, or fees.
However, all exactions must be directly related to the project (e.g., there must be a reasonable nexus
between the condition and the project).
Ione Design Review
The City has established a design review process for new development and certain types of
redevelopment/remodeling within the Downtown core. This core is defined by a special Historic
Overlay District and is referred to as the Historic (H) Overlay District. The City is not relying on any
sites within the Historic Overlay District to accommodate its fair share allocation. The design review
March 2015                                         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                             City of Ione
                                                     B–35

                                                     APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
process requires that for the following types of activities on property within the Historic (H) Overlay
District, an Architectural Design Review permit be issued:
        Installation of new features on existing structures/facades.
        Additions to existing structures.
        Placement, alteration, or relocation of signs.
        New development.
        Changes to exterior architectural style.
Exemptions to the permit requirement include repair and maintenance to the site or structure with
like materials, interior alterations, public utility work, and construction, alteration, and maintenance
of buildings used exclusively and solely for residential uses. In other words, the permit requirement
applies to commercial and mixed-use development and is not applicable to single-family or multi-
family residential that is not integrated with a nonresidential use.
The permit process is divided into two tiers, depending upon the complexity of the project. Major
projects (referred to as Comprehensive Architectural Design Review), such as new construction and
wholesale redevelopment of a property, or the wholesale change in the architectural style of a
building, require Planning Commission review and approval. Such a project could be processed in
two to four months, depending on location, compatibility with CEQA, and application
completeness/Permit Streamlining Act requirements.
The second tier is referred to as Administrative Architectural Design Review. This process is aimed
at the installation of new features on existing buildings consistent with the existing architectural style
of the building, as well as the placement, alteration, or relocation of signs. Under this process, the
approval authority is the City Planner, rather than the Planning Commission. No public hearing is
required for administrative review. Rather, a notice of the filing of the application is posted in the
project site for a minimum of 10 days and the notice is mailed to all property owners within 300 feet
of the subject property. Such notice indicates that interested persons must request in writing that a
hearing be held for the project within 10 business days of the notice being posted; otherwise City
Planning will make a decision on the project without a hearing. If a hearing is requested, it is held
before the Planning Commission after public notice of that meeting has been completed consistent
with state law.
Generally, administrative review can be completed in 20–30 days, unless it is elevated to Planning
Commission, in which case it becomes similar to comprehensive review.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                               March 2015
City of Ione
                                                    B–36

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The Architectural Design Review permit requirement is supplemented by a series of design
guidelines and standards that are codified in the City’s Zoning Code (Section 17.28.020, Historic
Overlay (H) District). These provisions provide the information architects, designers, and property
owners need to understand and achieve the City’s expectations for high quality development in the
Downtown.
Ione Inclusionary Housing Program
The City of Ione has an Affordable Housing Program that includes inclusionary requirements. It is
contained in the General Plan. The Affordable Housing Program provides opportunities for
developing housing units affordable to lower-income persons in the community and does not act as
a constraint to the overall development of housing. The goal of this program is to develop a mix of
housing types targeted to a variety of income groups. This program provides flexibility and provides
incentives for developers building in the City of Ione.
The City requires that residential projects of 10 or more units include 5 percent of the units in the
project as affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. Developers of fewer than
10 housing units are exempt from this requirement.
Developers of 10 or more housing units shall provide the following:
       In a rental housing project, 2 percent of the units shall be affordable to very low-income
        households, 2 percent shall be affordable to low-income households, and 1 percent shall be
        affordable to moderate-income households.
       In a for-sale project, 2 percent shall be affordable to low-income households, and 3 percent
        shall be affordable to moderate-income households.
       Affordable units shall be built on-site and must be comparable in infrastructure (including
        wastewater, water, and other utilities), construction quality, and exterior design to the
        market-rate residential units. Affordable units may be smaller in aggregate size and have
        different interior finishes and features than market-rate units, so long as the interior features
        are durable, of good quality, and consistent with contemporary standards for new housing.
        The number of bedrooms should be the same as those in the market-rate units, except that if
        the market-rate units provide more than three bedrooms, the affordable units need not
        provide more than three bedrooms.
       All affordable units must be constructed and occupied concurrently with or prior to the
        construction and occupancy of market-rate units. In phased developments, the affordable
        units must be evenly distributed throughout the development and will be constructed and
        occupied in proportion to the number of units in each phase of the residential development.
       Deed restrictions shall be provided to ensure that rental units developed for very low-, low-,
        and moderate-income persons will remain affordable for 55 years and ownership units
        developed for low- and moderate-income units will remain affordable for 45 years.
March 2015                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                           City of Ione
                                                 B–37

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
       If an owner sells an affordable unit before the end of the 45-year resale restriction term, the
        owner shall repay the City/subsidy balance. The balance is any remaining principal and
        accrued interest after the subsidy has been reduced as defined in the Buyer’s Resale
        Agreement (to be determined at the time of purchase).
       Per the deed restriction of the affordable units, all affordable units resold shall be required to
        be sold to an income-eligible household.
       The City will develop and maintain a waiting list of eligible persons wishing to purchase or
        occupy an affordable housing unit.
Alternatives to these provisions include:
       Payment of an in-lieu fee for ownership or rental units may be acceptable and the amount of
        in-lieu fees shall be established by a nexus study that was completed during the previous
        planning period. The money will then be placed into an affordable housing trust fund. The
        City will develop a set of priorities for the use of housing trust fund monies once the
        housing trust fund is established (Program H-6).
       If the developer is permitted to dedicate land for the development of affordable units in
        satisfaction of part or all of its affordable housing requirement, the agreement shall identify
        the site of the dedicated land and shall provide for the implementation of such dedication in
        a manner deemed appropriate and timely by the City.
Possible incentives may include but are not limited to the following:
       Assistance with accessing and apply for funding (based on availability of federal, state, local
        foundations, and private funds).
       Mortgage-subsidy or down payment assistance programs to assist first-time homebuyers and
        other qualifying households, when such funds are available.
       Expedited/streamlined application processing and development review.
       Modification of development requirements, such as reduced set backs and parking standards
        on a case-by-case basis.
       Density bonuses.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                               March 2015
City of Ione
                                                  B–38

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
CITY OF JACKSON
Jackson General Plan
The Land Use Element of the General Plan directly affects the location, type, and timing of housing
that may be developed in the city. The Land Use Element establishes six residential use
classifications, with the density ranges shown in Table HE-55.
It is important to note that the Land Use Element also allows for residential development to occur
in the commercial designations as well. The density allowed in the commercial designations is based
on the type of residential development. For example, if a site designated Professional Office (PO)
were to be improved with a duplex unit, the Residential Duplex (RD) density would be required.
The Land Use Element of the General Plan also established the Planned Development (pd) Overlay
which is a “combined” land use designation meaning that it will always be combined with one of the
City’s other primary general plan designations. The pd designation is intended to encourage planned
developments with a mixture of land uses including different densities of residential units,
professional office uses, and public and recreational uses. When combined with a residential use, the
overall density of a development may be increased.
                                                                          TABLE HE-55
               CITY OF JACKSON GENERAL PLAN RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
     General Plan Designation                                                 Type of Use                                                Density
     Residential Suburban (RS)                                      Single-family dwelling                                    1 dwelling unit/acre
   Residential Low-Density (RL)                                     Single-family dwelling                                   1 dwelling unit/.5 acre
 Residential Single-Family (RSF)                                    Single-family dwelling                               1 dwelling unit/8,000 sq. ft.
       Residential Duplex (RD)                                     Single-family or duplex
                                                                                                                         1 dwelling unit/4,000 sq. ft.
                                                                                 dwelling
    Residential Medium Density                             Single-family, duplex, triplex, or
                                                                                                                         1 dwelling unit/3,000 sq. ft.
                        (RM)                                                     fourplex
  Residential High Density (RH)                               Single-family, duplex, triplex,
                                                                                                                         1 dwelling unit/2,000 sq. ft.
                                                                     fourplex, multi-family
      Professional Office (PO)                                 Single-family or multi-family                                                  --1
                                                                                 dwelling
     Limited Commercial (LC)                                                          --1                                                     --1
    Historical Commercial (HC)                                                        --1                                                     --1
             Commercial (C)                                                           --1                                                     --1
                  Industrial (I)                                                      --1                                                     --1
Source: City of Jackson Land Use Element 2008
Notes:
1. The City’s Land Use Element does not specify residential uses as allowed in this Land Use Designation. However, the Development Code specifies that residential uses are
allowed in these Land Use Designations. For more information, see the section below.
March 2015                                                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                                             City of Jackson
                                                                                  B–39

                                                APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Jackson Zoning
In 2009, the City adopted a new Title 17 of the Municipal Code replacing the existing zoning and
subdivision ordinances with the Development Code. The zoning designations outlined in the
Development Code are coincident with the Land Use Element Land Use Designations. Thus, the
City has one map depicting the General Plan and zoning designations.
Development Standards for Zones Allowing Residential Uses
The Development Code prescribes minimum standards for residential lot sizes, yards, and lot
coverage. These standards, shown in Table HE-56, contribute to the protections of public health,
safety, and welfare, and the maintenance of the City’s quality of life and have not been an obstacle to
the development of affordable units.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            March 2015
City of Jackson
                                               B–40

       APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                           TABLE HE-56
            CITY OF JACKSON DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ZONES WHERE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IS ALLOWED
   Zoning
                RS     RL      RSF         RD       RM            RH           PO           HC           LC           C              I
   District
Minimum                .5   8,000 sq.   8,000 sq 8,000 sq.    4,000 sq.     8,000 sq.                 8,000 sq.                 8,000 sq.
              1 acre                                                                      None                   8,000 sq. ft.
Lot Size              acre      ft.        ft.       ft.          ft.           ft.                       ft.                       ft.
                                                                            1 unit = 1  1 unit = 1    1 unit = 1  1 unit = 1    1 unit = 1
                                                                            du/8,000    du/8,000      du/8,000    du/8,000      du/8,000
                                                                              sq. ft.     sq. ft.       sq. ft.     sq. ft.       sq. ft.
                                                                           2 units = 1  2 units = 1  2 units = 1  2 units = 1  2 units = 1
                                                                            du/4,000    du/4,000      du/4,000    du/4,000      du/4,000
                        1        1          1         1            1          sq. ft.     sq. ft.       sq. ft.     sq. ft.       sq. ft.
                 1
Density               du/.5 du/8,000    du/4,000 du/3,000     du/2,000
             du/acre                                                       3-4 units =  3-4 units =  3-4 units = 3-4 units =   3-4 units =
                      acre  sq. ft. (4)  sq. ft.   sq. ft.      sq. ft.
                                                                           1 du/3,000  1 du/3,000    1 du/3,000  1 du/3,000    1 du/3,000
                                                                              sq. ft.     sq. ft.       sq. ft.     sq. ft.       sq. ft.
                                                                            5+ units =  5+ units =    5+ units = 5+ units = 1   5+ units =
                                                                           1 du/2,000  1 du/2,000    1 du/2,000   du/2,000     1 du/2,000
                                                                              sq. ft.     sq. ft.       sq. ft.     sq. ft.       sq. ft.
                                                               Minimum setbacks required unless otherwise shown on the Zoning Map,
                                                                  Subdivision Map, or Planned Development. See 17.30.120 (Setback
Setbacks Required                                                Requirements and Exceptions) in the Development Code for setback
                                                                 measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to
                                                                                           required setbacks.
                              10 or       10 or
Front           25     25                           15            10           10            0           10           10           10
                             15(1) (2)    15(1)
Side             5      5        5          5         5            5             5           0             5          0              0
Street Side
                15     15       15         15       15            10             5           0             5          5              5
Corner Lot
Rear            10     10       10         10       10            10           10           10           10           10           10
     March 2015                                                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                    City of Jackson
                                                              B–41

                                                                                                                                                                      APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
   Zoning
                              RS                 RL                 RSF                 RD                     RM                    RH                      PO                      HC                      LC                       C                         I
   District
Between
                               -                   -                   -               6 (2)                 10 (3)                   (3)                       -                      -                       -                       -                        -
Structures
                             2.5                2.5                  2.5                2.5                    2.5                                                                                                            Wall height
Height                    stories             stories             stories           stories                 stories             4 stories             2 stories or            4 stories or            2 stories or                  not                4 stories or
Limit                    and 35                and               and 35            and 35                  and 35             and 50 ft.                    35 ft.                 70 ft.                  35 ft.                greater                    70 ft.
                              ft.              35 ft.                 ft.                ft.                    ft.                                                                                                            than 30 ft.
     Source: City of Jackson Development Code, 2009
     Notes:
     1. RSF and RD front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet for single-story structures and 15 feet for two-story structures. Driveway lengths must be a minimum of 25 feet.
     2. RSF front yard setback shall be as established as above except where lots comprising 40 percent or more of the frontage on one side of the street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a
     variation of not more than 10 feet. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depth, buildings located more than 25 feet from the front property
     line or buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted.
     3. Ten-foot setback between dwelling structures and 6-foot setback between dwellings and accessory buildings.
     4. Per Section 17.07.020( C) (Purposes of Residential Zoning District) the RSF minimum lot size may be reduced to 6,000 square feet.
     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                         March 2015
     City of Jackson
                                                                                                                              B–42

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Table HE-57provides a summary of residential parking standards required by the Development
Code. Program H-15 is proposed to relax garage requirements for duplex and multifamily dwellings.
                                               TABLE HE-57
                             CITY OF JACKSON RESIDENTIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS
                       Residential Uses                         Vehicle Spaces Required
 Group Quarters (including boarding               1 space per each bed, plus 1 space per each 8
 houses, rooming houses, dormitories,             beds for guest parking, 1 space per each
 and organizational houses)                       employee on largest shift.
                                                  2 spaces per each unit with 1 space per unit in a
 Duplex housing units
                                                  fully enclosed garage.
                                                  2 spaces per each mobile home (tandem parking
 Mobile homes (in MH parks)                       allowed in an attached carport), plus 1 guest
                                                  parking space for each 4 units.
                                                  Studio and 1 bedroom units – 1.5 spaces per each
                                                  unit with 1 space per unit in a fully enclosed
                                                  garage. Spaces not required to be in garage for
 Multi-family dwelling, condominiums              affordable housing units.
 and other attached dwellings
                                                  2 bedrooms or more – 2 spaces per each unit, with
                                                  1 space per unit in a fully enclosed garage. Spaces
                                                  not required to be in garage for affordable housing
                                                  units.
 Multi-family dwelling, condominiums
                                                  Guest parking – 25% of total required spaces.
 and other attached dwellings
 Mixed-use developments                           Determined by Conditional Use Permit.
                                                  2 spaces in addition to that required for the single-
 Secondary residential units
                                                  family dwelling.
                                                  1 space per each unit with 0.5 spaces per unit
 Senior housing projects                          covered, plus 1 guest parking space per each 10
                                                  units.
                                                  0.5 space per each residential unit, plus 1 space
 Senior congregate care facilities
                                                  per each 4 units for guests and employees.
                                                  2 spaces with 1 space per unit in a fully enclosed
 Single-family dwelling
                                                  garage.
 Source: City of Jackson Development Code 2009
March 2015                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                         City of Jackson
                                                   B–43

                                                 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
How Residential Uses are Allowed
The Housing Element must identify adequate sites that are available to encourage the development
of various housing types for all economic segments of the population through appropriate zoning
and development standards. Some of the housing types include single-family residential housing,
multiple-family residential housing, residential accessory dwelling units, mobile homes, duplexes,
transitional housing, supportive housing, second units, single room occupancy units, and emergency
shelters. Table HE-58 shows the housing types that will be permitted by Zoning District.
                                             TABLE HE-58
                    CITY OF JACKSON HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT
       Land Use/Zoning District           RS RL  RSF     RD     RM   RH    PO   HC    LC   C    I
Adult Day Care Home                       P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Caretaker Housing                         P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Dwelling, Multi-family                    N  N    N       N      N    P     P    P     P   C    C
Dwelling, Single-Family                   P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Dwelling, Two-Family                      N  N    N       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Dwelling, Three- and Four-
                                          N  N    N       N      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Family
Emergency Shelter                         N  N    N       N      N    P     P    P     P   C    C
Employee/Farmworker Housing               N  N    N       N      N   N      N    N     N   N    N
Family Day Care Home, Large               P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Family Day Care Home, Small               P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Group Residential, 6 persons or
                                          P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
less
Group Residential, 7 persons or
                                          C  C    C      C       C   C      C    C    C    C    C
more
Guest House                               P  N    N       N      N   N      N    N     N   C    C
Home Occupations                          P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   P    P
Manufactured Home                         P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Mobile Home                               P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Mobile Home Park                          C  C    C      C       C   C      C    C    C    C    C
Residential Care Home                     P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Second Unit                               P  P    N       N      N   N      N    N     N   C    C
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
                                          N  N    N       N      N    P     P    P     P   C    C
Facilities
Supportive Housing                        P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Transitional Housing                      P  P    P       P      P    P     P    P     P   C    C
Source: City of Jackson Zoning Code, 2009
P= permitted by right
A=administrative use permit
C = conditional use permit
N = not permitted
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                         March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                B–44

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Jackson Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
Second Units
A second unit is an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons. It includes permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel that the single-family dwelling is situated.
AB 1866, also known as the “second unit law,” amended California Government Code to facilitate
the development of second units. This amendment required localities to allow second units
ministerially without discretionary review or hearings. To be considered a ministerial review, the
process used to approve second units must “apply predictable, objective, fixed, quantifiable and
clear standards.” Applications for second units should not be subject to onerous conditions of
approval or public hearing process or public comment.
Program H-1.3 is proposed to revise the Development Code to allow second units per state law.
Mobile and Manufactured Homes
Manufactured and factory-built housing can be integral parts of the solution for addressing housing
needs. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.3, the siting and permit process for
manufactured housing should be regulated in the same manner as a conventional or stick-built
structure. Specifically, Government Code Section 65852.3(a) requires that with the exception of
architectural requirements, a local government, including charter cities, shall only subject
manufactured homes (mobile homes) to the same development standards to which a conventional
single-family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subject, including but not limited to
building setback standards, side and rear yard requirements, standards for enclosures, access, and
vehicle parking, aesthetic requirements, and minimum square footage requirements. The City allows
mobile homes in all residential zones with comply with citywide architectural regulations.
Farmworker Housing
Farmworker or employee housing is property used temporarily or seasonally for the residential use
unrelated persons or families employed to perform agricultural or industrial labor. The
accommodations may consist of any living quarters, dwelling, boardinghouse, tent, bunkhouse,
mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or other housing
accommodations maintained in one or more buildings, or one or more sites, and the premises upon
which they are situated, including area set aside for parking of mobile homes or camping of five or
more employees by the employer. State law (Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 of the Health and Safety
Code, Employee Housing Act) requires that employee housing for farmworkers and other
employees be allowed ministerially in zones allowing single-family residential structures (Section
17021.5). Section 17021.6 requires that farmworker housing consisting of 36 beds or 12 units or
spaces designed for use by a single family or household be allowed ministerially. No conditional use
permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance shall be required of this employee housing that is
not required of any other agricultural activity in the same zone. Program H-10 is proposed to
comply with the Employee Housing Act.
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                     City of Jackson
                                                B–45

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Emergency Shelters
California Health and Safety Code (Section 50801) defines an emergency shelter as “housing with
minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less
by a homeless person. No individual or households may be denied emergency shelter because of an
inability to pay.”
The City allows emergency shelters without discretionary review in the RH, HC, PO and LC zones.
These zones have sufficient capacity to accommodate an emergency shelter with five parcels zoned
PO with a total area of 76.6 acres, three parcels zoned HC with a total area of .5 acres, 14 parcels
zoned LC with a total area of 83.1 acres and seven parcels zoned RH with a total area of 11.8 acres.
Development Code 17.58.130 provides operating standards for emergency shelters:
         1. The cumulative total number of beds allowed within each emergency shelter shall be no
             more than 12.
         2. An emergency shelter may not be located within 300 feet of another emergency shelter.
         3. There shall be provided one parking space per employee and one parking space for every
             four beds (or fraction thereof).
         4. Services shall be limited to overnight accommodation and meals for residents and
             employees only. Admittance shall be between the hours of 7:00 am and 10:00 pm.
         5. Each shelter shall be operated by a responsible agency or organization that has
             experience in managing and/or providing social services.
         6. An on-site manager shall be present during operating hours.
         7. A written management plan addressing at a minimum staff training, security,
             neighborhood communication, client intake, loitering control, referral services, outdoor
             storage, refuse control, and facility maintenance shall be submitted to and approved by
             the Planning Department prior to operation.
SB 2 notes that emergency shelter parking requirements shall not be more restrictive than the
underlying zoning requirements. Parking requirements in the City of Jackson are based on the land
use type and not specifically on the underlying zone. The most comparable land use type (based on
expected traffic and occupancy patterns) to emergency shelters in the city is “Group Quarters.” As
shown in Table HE-59, emergency shelters require the same amount of parking per employee, but
less parking per bed. Therefore, the City’s emergency shelter requirements are consistent with SB 2.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                  B–46

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                   TABLE HE-59
                                      EMERGENCY SHELTER PARKING REQUIREMENTS
                             Land Use Type                           Vehicle Spaces Required
                                                         There shall be provided one parking space per
 Emergency Shelter                                       employee and one parking space for every
                                                         four beds (or fraction thereof)
 Group Quarters (including boarding houses,              One space per each bed, plus one space per
 rooming houses, dormitories, and                        each eight beds for guest parking, one space
 organizational houses)                                  per each employee on largest shift.
Source: City of Jackson Development Code, 2009
Transitional and Supportive Housing
State law requires that local land use regulations accommodate a range of housing types, as well as
facilities for people in need of emergency shelter and transitional housing. There are a number of
sites in the City of Jackson that would be suitable for more affordable and higher density housing
which are in close proximity to jobs, commerce, public services, transportation, and public facilities.
The City’s Development Code permits group homes (including residential care facilities) in the
Limited Commercial (LC), Historic Commercial (HC), Professional Office (PO), Residential High
Density (RHD), and Residential Medium Density (RMD) zones by right. This includes sites for
emergency shelters, transitional and supportive housing, and SRO units. This means that a variety of
housing types can be provided without requiring a discretionary permit.
Transitional and supportive housing are allowed in all zones that allow residential development in
the same way other residential uses are allowed.
Extremely Low-Income Households
Extremely low-income households have special housing needs because they are unlikely to find
market-rate housing that is affordable at any price. Also, many of the extremely low-income
households will fall within a special needs category (disabled, seniors, large families or female-headed
households) and require supportive housing services. AB 2634 (Lieber, 2006) requires the
quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of extremely low-income
households. Programs are included in this Housing Element to address the needs of extremely low-
income households. The City allows SRO units which are appropriate for extremely low-income
households in the RH, PO, HC and LC zones.
Jackson Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Compliance with provisions of the federal ADA is assessed and enforced by the Building Official in
the City of Jackson. ADA access is enforced through building permit entitlement and is required for
all commercial development, new construction of multi-family apartments with three or more units
in any one building, and new construction of congregate housing or shelters. Special ADA access
retrofitting is not required for remodeling or renovation of buildings, but only for new construction.
March 2015                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                         City of Jackson
                                                      B–47

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
To ensure fair and efficient process for persons with disabilities to make necessary accessibility
adjustments to their homes, the City will amend the Development Code to create a reasonable
accommodation procedure (see Program H-11). Additionally the definition of “family” in the
Development Code has been updated to state “one or more persons living together in a dwelling
unit with common access to and common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the
dwelling unit.”
Siting and Concentration Requirements
The City has analyzed its land use, zoning, and building code provisions and processes to determine
what accommodations and constraints exist to housing production for persons with disabilities.
Individuals in this special needs group may reside in residential units in any zoning district that
allows residential, commercial, or institutional uses. Some individuals may choose to reside in a
residential facility or a group home designed for occupancy by or with supportive services for
persons with disabilities. The Development Code does not differentiate between related and
unrelated persons in the occupancy of residential units. The Development Code allows group homes
of six or fewer persons by right in all zoning districts that permit single-family residences. As with
standard multi-family housing, the City’s Development Code allows by-right licensed residential
group homes for less than six persons (categorized as a quasi-public use) in RHD zone district.
There is no restriction as to minimum distances between residential care facilities.
Permit Approval Process
Group residential facilities accommodating more than six persons are required to go through the
Conditional Use Permit process. The requirement for a conditional use permit for large group
residential homes would be the same process as any other single or multi-family Conditional Use
Permit (see previous discussion on Conditional Use Permit) and is therefore not a constraint. The
Conditional Use Permit process is necessary as the City would still need to be able to make
appropriate findings. A Conditional Use Permit requires a noticed public hearing of the Planning
Commission and is subject to conditions that the Planning Commission may find necessary to
ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. The time frame for a Conditional Use Permit is
approximately one to three months.
Special Accommodations for Persons with Disabilities
The City recognizes that access to a residence can require special accommodations for persons with
physical disabilities that limit their mobility, particularly when the access features are retrofitted to
existing units. To provide exceptions in zoning and land use for housing for persons with
disabilities, the Housing Element includes Program H-11.
Americans with Disabilities Act Requirements
In December 2013, the City adopted the 2013 California Building Code. Chapter 11 of the
California Building Code provides accessibility requirements. This chapter incorporates provisions
from the ADA and specifies that a number of the residential units in new multi-family construction
of three and more apartments or four and more condominiums must be accessible or adaptable.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                  B–48

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Development Standards and Building Codes
The City enforces the development standards and building codes, which are minimum standards for
health and safety and therefore should not be relaxed. Planning staff work with members of the
public to find ways to address their special needs within the provisions of these codes. Specifically,
staff’s review (and recommendations) of projects that are proposed to meet special housing needs
(e.g., seniors, large families, persons with disabilities) also consider zoning and permit procedures, as
well as the appropriateness of applicable site development standards. If needed and determined not
to be detrimental to the public health and safety, permit procedures and standards may be relaxed
(e.g., parking requirements) to facilitate development. Staff typically consults with the property
owner and developer to identify issues during the initial stages of the application process.
Jackson Growth Management
With the proliferation of development applications that the City was receiving in the late 1990s and
early 2000s, the Planning Commission and City Council determined that a growth management
policy would be a helpful tool in ensuring that the timing and amount of new development allowed
is consistent with the available resources and the provisions of the City’s General Plan.
In 2005 the City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, adopted the
Resource Constraints and Priority Allocation Ordinance (Ordinance No. 646). This ordinance set
forth a process by which residential subdivisions (five or more units) must receive a Housing
Equivalent Unit allocation to apply for a Tentative Subdivision Map.
The ordinance requires the Planning Commission and City Council to annually review the resources
and infrastructure of the city, including water availability, sewer capacity, road and intersection levels
of service, school capacity, child care availability, fire and police services, etc. and establish the
number of housing units that should be available without over-burdening those resources.
Additionally, the Planning Commission and City Council are to establish criteria for awarding the
allocations which usually consist of the following:
        Economic benefit.
        Improvements including: road improvements, recreational amenities, sewer treatment plant
         upgrades or new facilities, and school facility upgrades or new facilities.
        Provisions for affordable housing (above what is required by the Affordable Housing
         Ordinance), and workforce housing.
        Projects which provide infill where there is existing development.
        Protection of open space and oak woodlands.
        Contribute to the restoration and revitalization of downtown Jackson.
March 2015                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                       City of Jackson
                                                  B–49

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Once the Housing Equivalent Unit number for the year is established, developers interested in
submitting a Tentative Subdivision Map submit a Notice of Intent to Develop. This notice, which
essentially is a preliminary development plan, briefly describes the proposed project including the
number and type of housing units and the benefits of the project to the community. All Notices of
Intent to Develop are then reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council for potential
allocation. Those developments that offer the most amenities, including affordable housing, are
awarded an allocation. Only those projects which have received an allocation may apply for a
Tentative Subdivision Map. The application then is processed according to local and state laws,
including conformance with CEQA. Since 2012 (adoption of previous Housing Element), the
Housing Equivalent Unit allocation and Notice of Intent to Develop requirements have been
suspended due to a lack of development applications. No constraints associated with growth
management have occurred since the adoption of the previous Housing Element. Applications
received for subdivisions are still required to comply with the design criteria in the Resource
Constraints and Priority Allocation Ordinance and processed per CEQA and the Subdivision Map
Act.
Jackson Density Bonus
The City does not currently have an adopted density bonus. Per Program H-13, the City will develop
and implement a density bonus program consistent with state law.
Jackson Building Codes and Code Enforcement
In December 2013, the City adopted the 2013 California Building Code. The California Building
Standards Commission via the Governor of California adopted the 2013 California Building Code.
These new codes include the California Green Building Codes. No local amendments to these codes
have been adopted.
The purpose of adopting the California Building Code is for regulating and governing the conditions
and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are
safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit
for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures in the City of Jackson.
The California Building Standards Commission adjusts and adopts a new code every three years. The
City of Jackson will continue to adopt the most current codes.
The Building Code is implemented by a full-time Building Official who attempts to apply these
codes as flexibly as possible under state law. The presence of an active code enforcement effort
serves to maintain the conditions of the city’s housing stock and does not constrain the production
or improvement of housing in the city.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                              March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                  B–50

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Jackson On/Off-site Improvements
The City of Jackson requires developers to provide on- and off-site improvements in association
with residential development, (e.g., streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street trees, drainage, water,
sewer, power, and communication utilities). These requirements are comparable to provisions in
neighboring cities.
All standards for public improvements are delineated in the Municipal Code. These standards may
be modified if warranted by individual circumstances, and therefore are not a constraint on
development. The following is a summary of improvement standards for a typical residential
development.
       Parking:
        –   Single-Family Residential – Two spaces per unit with one space in a fully enclosed garage
        –   Multi-family – Studio and one-bedroom units must have 1.5 spaces per each unit; two
            bedrooms or more must have two spaces per each unit. One space per unit in a fully
            enclosed garage. Spaces not required to be in a garage for affordable housing units.
       Streets:
        –   Each parcel within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access by being located on
            an existing city street or a new city street.
        –   Alleys may be proposed as part of residential subdivisions.
        –   Street widths (right-of-way) may be 42 feet to 60 feet wide depending upon street
            classification.
        –   All residential properties shall have a minimum driveway width of 16 feet.
Other site improvements for residential construction may be found in the Development Code and
the City of Jackson Improvement Standards. The City may consider and approve proposed access
and street design solutions that differ from the provisions of the Development Code where deemed
necessary or cost-prohibitive.
Jackson Fees
The size of a housing project, type of development, lot size, and the necessity of planning
entitlements all have an effect on the total amount of development fees charged by the City and the
extent of required on- and off-site improvements.
March 2015                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                     City of Jackson
                                                  B–51

                                                 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The City charges residential development a variety of facility fees in order to pay for the increased
system capacities and services required by that development. Typical fees for single-family residential
total $31,895 per dwelling unit while fees for multi-family (Residential High Density) are $29,160 per
dwelling unit. The City has recently updated the Local and Regional Transportation Impact Fees and
the Park Fees; however, the remaining fees – essential services, water, and sewer fees – are in need
of an update. Keeping these fees current ensure that the existing City of Jackson taxpayers are not
overburdened with increased capital improvement costs.
Fees are also charged for services provided by the Planning, Building, Public Works/Wastewater,
Water, and Engineering Departments during the review, entitlement, and construction phases of a
residential project. The fees are based on staff time and materials costs. The fee schedule was last
updated in 2014. To ensure that the General Fund is not impacted by the review of private
development projects, this study should be performed and its recommendations implemented.
Table HE-60 provides a complete list of facility and review fees.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                B–52

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                            TABLE HE-60
                                           CITY OF JACKSON FACILITY AND REVIEW FEES
                     Fee Type                                        Residential Single Family                                     Residential Multi-Family
                                                                           Per Dwelling Unit                                             Per Dwelling Unit
                                                                               Facility Fees
 Wastewater                                                                          $2,200                                                 $1,700–$2,100
 Water                                                                               $2,060                                                 $1,760–$1,960
 Essential Services                                                                  $2,300                                                 $2,450–$2,600
 Park In-Lieu1                                                                       $8,670                                                        $8,670
 Local Circulation                                                                   $1,318                                                          $938
 Regional Circulation                                                                $3,040                                                        $2,158
 Amador Water Agency
                                                                                     $7,555                                                $7,555–$18,890
 Participation Fee
 Amador County Unified
                                                                          $3.36/square foot                                             $3.36/square foot
 School District Fee
                                                                               Review Fees
 Tentative Map                                                             $500 plus $10/lot                                             $500 plus $10/lot
 Final Parcel Map                                                          $500 plus $20/lot                                             $500 plus $20/lot
 Final Subdivision Map                                                     $500 plus $10/lot                                             $500 plus $10/lot
 Site Development Plan                                                                 $50                                                            $75
 Site Field Inspection                                                             $50/final                                                     $50/final
 Improvement Plans                                                   2% of Construction Cost                                       2% of Construction Cost
 Improvement Inspection                                          1%–4% of Construction Cost                                     1%–4% of Construction Cost
 Negative Declaration                                                  $300 plus Direct Costs                                        $300 plus Direct Costs
 Mitigated Negative                                                    $300 plus Direct Costs                                        $300 plus Direct Costs
 Declaration Deposit
 Environmental Impact Report                                           $500 plus Direct Costs                                        $500 plus Direct Costs
 Deposit
 Rezoning                                                              $250 plus Direct Costs                                        $250 plus Direct Costs
 Use Permit                                                            $250 plus Direct Costs                                        $250 plus Direct Costs
 Variance/Exception                                                    $250 plus Direct Costs                                        $250 plus Direct Costs
 General Plan Amendment                                                $500 plus Direct Costs                                        $500 plus Direct Costs
 Source: City of Jackson 2014
 Note:
 1, Park in-lieu fees are based on 50% for neighborhood and 50% for community park-land and facilities (no provision for regional or county-wide parks). When
 neighborhood facilities are constructed they are maintained by the development at no cost to the public and are of design, function, and quality as to be a full neighborhood
 park, dedicated or made fully available to public use, in-lieu fees may be reduced by the percentage such facilities provide toward meeting full neighborhood public park and use
 requirements, to a maximum of 50% of the total in-lieu fee requirement.
 When development constructs private neighborhood park facilities primarily for use by residents/owners of the development, and such facilities consist of passive and active
 park facilities equivalent to at least 50% of public neighborhood park facility requirements, in-lieu fees may be reduced by up to 25%.
March 2015                                                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                                                       City of Jackson
                                                                                    B–53

                                                                                APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The City’s facility fees are comparable to other jurisdictions in the region. The City’s fees for a
typical 1,600-square-foot single-family dwelling are approximately $31,895. According to
Buildingcost.net, a housing construction cost resource that calculates the total estimated cost of
building a new home (land costs not included), single-family home construction costs in 2014 were
estimated at approximately $132 per square foot for average quality construction, or $211,200 for an
average 1,600-square-foot home. The estimated total development cost, which includes construction
and land costs, of a 1,600-square-foot home with four walls, an attached garage, central heating and
air, and average building materials was $217,508.
The City’s fees for a typical 900-square-foot multi-family dwelling are approximately $29,160. Costs
for a recent multi-family project were not available in any of the County jurisdictions. In order to
estimate multi-family costs, another area Housing Element analysis was used. Based on the
Stanislaus County Housing Element, typical multi-family construction costs are $133 per square
foot, or $119,700 for a 900 square foot unit. The estimated total development cost of a 900 square
foot apartment, including construction and land, was $132,200.
The City’s facility fees are similar to other jurisdictions in the region. As illustrated in Table HE-61,
this typical fee total is approximately 15 percent of the average new house development cost and 22
percent of the average new multi-family unit construction cost. While these costs will likely be
passed on to the ultimate product consumer, thus impacting housing prices, these requirements are
deemed necessary to maintain the quality of life desired by city residents.
                                                                          TABLE HE-61
        CITY OF JACKSON TOTAL FEES FOR TYPICAL SINGLE- AND MULTI-FAMILY UNITS
                                                                           Estimated Development   Estimated Proportion of
           Housing Type                            Total Fees              Cost per Unit (land and  Fees to Development
                                                                              construction costs)       Costs per Unit
 Single-Family Unit1                                 $31,895                      $217,508                   15%
 Multi-Family Unit2                                  $29,160                      $132,200                   22%
 Source: City of Jackson, 2014 and Building-cost.net, 2014.
 Notes:
        1.     Typical single-family unit estimated at 1,600 square feet.
        2.     Typical multi-family unit of 900 square feet.
Jackson Development Review and Permit Processing
The length of time it takes the City to review and approve a housing development application can
add to housing costs. If the developer is buying the land outright, there are monthly interest costs,
and if the developer is working under an option to purchase, there are option costs to hold the land.
In recent years, varying amounts of time were taken to consider and approve housing construction
proposals. Generally, projects that require environmental impact reports and/or are subject to public
controversy have longer review periods. Project redesigns or additional studies may be required by
environmental review. Each change in the project design can have associated architect and
engineering fees, which grow with each revision. Projects that receive a negative declaration of
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                  March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                                               B–54

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
environmental impact are typically approved within six months; projects with environmental impact
reports have required several years.
Processing delays for residential projects can result from incomplete submittals by project
applicants, inadequate responses to staff requests for additional information and exhibits, and failure
to design projects to City standards.
Ministerial projects: Applications for single- and multi-family residential projects which do not
require any planning entitlements are submitted directly to the Building Department for permit
processing. Typically, the review for a single-family residence is reviewed “in-house” and takes
approximately two weeks. Plans for multi-family residences are usually referred to the City’s plan
review consultant and typically take four weeks for plan check and issuance of a permit.
Table HE-62 provides schedule for residential processing times in the City of Jackson.
March 2015                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Jackson
                                               B–55

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                              TABLE HE-62
                              CITY OF JACKSON DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TIMES
               Application Type                    Review Body               Typical Processing Time
 Tentative Parcel Map                          Planning Commission                  2 Months
 Final Parcel Map                                  City Council                     2 Months
 Tentative Subdivision Map                     Planning Commission                4–12 Months
 Final Subdivision Map including
                                                   City Council                    2–4 Months
 Development Agreement
                                            City Council with Planning
 Annexation                                                                        4–6 Months
                                          Commission Recommendation
 Boundary Line Adjustment                          City Council                    4–6 Weeks
 Site Plan Review                                      Staff                       2–4 Weeks
 Conditional Use Permit                        Planning Commission                 1–4 Months
 Variance/Exception                            Planning Commission                 1–2 Months
 Building Permit                                       Staff                       2–4 Weeks
                                           Planning Commission and/or
 Negative Declaration                                                              2–4 Months
                                                   City Council
                                           Planning Commission and/or
 Environmental Impact Report                                                      6–12 Months
                                                   City Council
                                            City Council with Planning
 Rezone/GP Amendment                                                               2–6 Months
                                          Commission Recommendation
 Source: City of Jackson 2012
Jackson Design Review
The City of Jackson has codified procedures for the comprehensive review of development to
implement the requirements of the Historic Commercial (HC) Zoning District and the goals and
policies of the General Plan. All projects that require a land use or building permit or will affect the
exterior appearance of any building or property within the HC Zoning District are subject to
Historic Design Review. In addition, public projects such as sidewalk installation, traffic circle
installation, and other streetscape and pedestrian bicycle improvement projects within the HC
district are subject to Historic Design Review. No building permit will be issued for any project until
the project has been evaluated through the Historic Design Review process, and a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been granted, and the appropriate land use permit has been issued.
Historic Design Review for projects that require the approval of a discretionary permit (e.g.,
Conditional Use Permit, variance, etc.) occurs concurrently with the review of the discretionary
permit application, and the final determination is made by the highest level of review authority
acting on the project application. The City Planner prepares a report for the review authority
outlining the findings and any conditions relating to the Historic Design Review prior to the review
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                  B–56

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
authority’s consideration of the project. The report containing findings and any conditions shall also
be forwarded to the applicant prior to consideration by the review authority.
The Historic Design Review application shall be forwarded to the Design Review Committee for
review. The Design Review Committee shall review the application in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Historic Design Guidelines and forward a recommendation of
approval, conditional approval, or denial to the City Planner. The City Planner may exempt
applications from review by the Design Review Committee if the application is minor in nature or a
quorum of the Design Review Committee cannot be called within a reasonable period of time for
the City Planner to review the land use permit within the time limits imposed by this Development
Code.
In conducting a Historic Design Review for a particular project, the City Planner considers the
location, design, site plan configuration and the overall effect of the proposed project upon
surrounding properties in general. Historic Design Review is conducted by comparing the proposed
project to applicable General Plan policies, adopted development standards, Historic Design
Guidelines, and other applicable ordinances of the City. In reviewing projects subject to Historic
Design Review, the City Planner refers to Chapter 17.20.080 (Historic Corridor (HC) Overlay) in
order to provide guidance to applicants seeking to comply with the requirements of Historic Design
Review.
Jackson Inclusionary Ordinance
The Development Code contains an affordable housing ordinance which provides opportunities for
housing units affordable to lower-income persons in the community and does not act as a constraint
to the overall development of housing. The goal of the ordinance is to develop a mix of housing
types targeted to a variety of income groups. This ordinance provides flexibility along with
incentives for developers building in the City of Jackson. The City acknowledges that the published
appellate case of Palmer/Sixth Street Properties, L.P. v. City of Los Angeles (2nd Dist. 2009) 175
Cal.App.4th 1396 holds that the Costa-Hawkins Act (Civil Code §1954.50 et seq.) precludes local
governments from requiring a developer to set affordable rent levels for private rental housing
unless the developer has agreed to such rental restrictions in exchange for financial assistance or
other consideration from the local government. This affordable housing ordinance shall be fully
operative at such time that the Palmer case is overturned, disapproved, or depublished by a court of
competent jurisdiction, or the state legislature amends state law to authorize local governments to
require the development and restriction of affordable rental units in the manner set forth in this
section and chapter. Except as expressly limited by the Palmer case, the affordable housing
ordinance remains in full force and effect.
The ordinance requires that residential projects of 10 or more units include 10 percent of the units
in the project as affordable extremely low-, very low-, or low-income households as defined by the
Regional Housing Needs Assessment tables. At least one quarter of the inclusionary units (or 2.5
percent of the total development) must be restricted to occupancy by extremely low-income
households. One-quarter of the inclusionary units (or 2.5 percent of the total development) must be
restricted to occupancy by very low-income households. An additional one-half of the inclusionary
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   City of Jackson
                                                B–57

                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
units (or 5 percent of the total development) must be restricted to occupancy by low-income
households. Developments of fewer than 10 housing units are exempt from this requirement.
Inclusionary units must conform to the following standards:
       Inclusionary units must be comparable in infrastructure (including sewer, water, and other
        utilities), construction quality and exterior design to the market-rate residential units.
       All inclusionary units must be constructed and occupied concurrently with or prior to the
        construction and occupancy of market-rate units or development.
       Inclusionary units produced under this section must be legally restricted to occupancy by
        households of the income levels for which the units were designated for a minimum of 55
        years for rental units and 45 years for owner-occupied units.
A developer may propose an alternative means of compliance according to the following provisions:
       Inclusionary units may be constructed off-site if the inclusionary units will be located in an
        area where, based on the availability of affordable housing, the City Manager finds that the
        need for such units is greater than the need in the area of the proposed development.
       The City Manager may accept any combination of on-site construction and off-site
        construction.
The City may provide one or more of the following incentives to a developer who elects to provide
the inclusionary units on-site:
       Modification in development or zoning that will allow for increased density, including but
        not limited to a reduction in setback, square footage, and parking requirements.
       Approval of mixed use zoning.
       A 50% reduction of fees required by City Schedule of Charges for Special Services and Local
        Facilities Participation Charges for the portion of the development devoted to inclusionary
        units.
       Financial assistance in the form of loans or grants to the extent budgeted by the City
        Council.
The affordable housing ordinance does not address meeting the needs of extremely low-income
households which are defined as households with income less than 30 percent of area median
income.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                               March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                  B–58

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
CITY OF SUTTER CREEK
Sutter Creek General Plan
The General Plan Land Use Element contains 12 land use designations. Table HE-63 summarizes
the permitted residential uses in each of these designations, along with the compatible Zoning
Ordinance classification, maximum lot coverage, maximum building density, assumed population
density, and height limitations as described in the General Plan Land Use Element (Tables LU-2 and
LU-5). As shown in the table, the lowest residential density in Sutter Creek is 1 unit/acre and the
highest is 29 units/acre.
                                               TABLE HE-63
     CITY OF SUTTER CREEK GENERAL PLAN RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
    Designation                                             Description
                      The RE designation is applied to lands for residential use, but with large lot sizes
 Residential          in order to promote and maintain the rural character of the area. The RE
 Estates (RE)         designation is also applied to areas characterized by terrain that is less suitable
                      for higher residential densities.
                      The RL designation is applied to lands for residential use where higher densities
 Residential Low-
                      than allowed by the RE designation can be supported while maintaining
 Density (RL)
                      desired rural character.
                      The RSF designation is generally applied to lands with a full range of services
 Residential
                      available and is best suitable for subdivision development. The RSF-designated
 Single-Family
                      lands are generally those regarded for standard lot size single-family
 (RSF)
                      construction.
 Residential          The RM designation is generally applicable to lands where smaller lot sizes
 Medium Density       consistently appear (as in the mobile home park), or where duplex, triplex, or
 (RM)                 fourplex housing development is suitable.
                      The RH designation is generally applied to lands where multi-family housing
                      development is preferred. Land use constraints due to soils, terrain, access,
 Residential High
                      services, aesthetics, open space, or other environmental features as identified
 Density (RH)
                      with project application processing should enter into decisions regarding
                      density.
                      The RP designation is intended for areas where residences and professional
                      offices or very limited, low-intensity commercial activities may be combined
 Residential and      within one building. This land use may be applied in or near the historic
 Professional         downtown area where this combination of uses is somewhat historic or it may
 Office (RP)          be applied to new areas of the city where very limited commercial activity and
                      private entrepreneurs can be encouraged in buildings that also serve as a
                      residence.
                      The C designation is applied to those areas of the city where retail, commercial,
                      and professional business services are preferred. Residential uses of RH densities
                      may also be compatible provided that the multiple family housing design
 Commercial (C)
                      standards of the Land Use Element and other policies, standards, and codes
                      can be met. Application of the C designation is to ensure the economic vitality
                      of the city.
March 2015                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                    City of Sutter Creek
                                                   B–59

                                                                    APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
    Designation                                                           Description
                                  The DTC designation is applied to a specified area of historic downtown Sutter
                                  Creek wherein the range of commercial uses that are allowed and the way in
                                  which these uses are conducted are strictly controlled by the City’s Zoning
                                  Ordinance, to protect the district’s attractive and historic quality. This
 Downtown
                                  designation allows a smaller lot size and a greater building intensity than the
 Commercial
                                  City’s regular commercial district, which is consistent with the history of the
 (DTC)
                                  downtown area. Single-family (studio) apartments and multi-family apartments
                                  are allowed to be conducted as secondary, accessory uses customarily
                                  associated with the downtown commercial district, provided parking and other
                                  concerns are adequately addressed.
                                  The I designation is applied to those lands most suitable for manufacturing or
                                  light industrial activities. The I designation is to promote a varied and stable
                                  local economy. Commercial uses would generally be compatible. Where the I
 Industrial (I)
                                  designation is combined with a Planned Development (PD) designation, light
                                  industry is considered most appropriate and Residential High density uses could
                                  be conditionally allowed.
                                  The PS designation is applied to those lands with a public or quasi-public use.
                                  Maximum population density shall be 1,000 persons per gross acre for facilities
 Public Services
                                  or events involving the periodic assemblage of large numbers of people. Where
 (PS)
                                  such assemblies are not permitted, maximum population density shall not
                                  exceed 16 to 29 units per acre or equivalent (34.24-62.06 persons per acre).
                                  The R designation is applied to lands where recreational facilities are to be
                                  located and protected from conflicting uses. Minimum parcel size shall be 7,000
                                  square feet; maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent; and maximum
                                  population density shall be 1,000 persons per gross acre for facilities or events
 Recreation (R)
                                  involving the periodic assemblage of large numbers of people. Such facilities
                                  and events may be controlled by a conditional use permit. Where such facilities
                                  or events are not permitted, maximum population density shall not exceed 16
                                  to 29 units per acre or equivalent (34.24-62.06 persons per acre).
                                  The M designation identifies areas where potentially valuable mineral reserves
                                  may exist and where carefully controlled mining for these resources is allowed.
                                  The City is required to ensure protection of such mineral reserves by state law.
                                  Use or development of such areas within the city shall be allowed only after
                                  approval by the City of a Conditional Use Permit and/or a mineral resource
 Mining (M)
                                  protection plan that is prepared or reviewed by a California registered qualified
                                  geologist. Land uses allowed in M areas shall be limited to mineral extraction,
                                  processing, prospecting, exploration, and other directly related uses. The City
                                  shall control such activities in the city by use permit and applicable provisions of
                                  the State Surface Mine and Reclamation Act and CEQA.
 Source:: City of Sutter Creek General Plan Land Use Element 2012
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                             March 2015
City of Sutter Creek
                                                                  B–60

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Table HE-64 provides a summary of allowed residential density for relevant General Plan Land
Use categories.
                                                                          TABLE HE-64
  CITY OF SUTTER CREEK ALLOWABLE RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BY LAND USE CATEGORY
                                                                                         Minimum Residential Maximum Residential
                         Land Use Category
                                                                                             Density (du/ac)   Density (du/ac)
  Residential Estates (RE)                                                                          --                1
  Residential Low-Density (RL)                                                                      --                2
  Residential Single-Family (RSF)                                                                   --               6.22
  Residential Medium Density (RM)                                                                   --                15
  Residential High Density (RH)                                                                     16                29
  Residential and Professional Office (RP)                                                          --                8
  Commercial (C)                                                                                    16                29
  Downtown Commercial (DTC)                                                                         16                29
  Industrial (I)                                                                                    16                29
  Public Services (PS)                                                                              16                29
  Recreation (R)                                                                                    --                16
  Mining (M)                                                                                        --                1
  Source: City of Sutter Creek General Plan Land Use Element 2012
  1 Density bonus consistent with state law may be allowed to exceed the 25 unit per acre maximum.
  2Density to be determined during the specific plan planning process.
Sutter Creek Zoning
Development Standards for Zones Allowing Residential Uses
Table HE-65 shows the minimum lot area, maximum lot coverage, setbacks, and height limits for
all zones allowing residential uses in Sutter Creek. Residential uses in the city do not require design
review (architectural review) unless there is an overlay zoning.
March 2015                                                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                              City of Sutter Creek
                                                                                  B–61

                                                                                                     APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                            TABLE HE-65
            CITY OF SUTTER CREEK DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ZONES WHERE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IS ALLOWED
                                A                RE    RL               R-1                     R-2         R-3   R-4  C-2 DTC   MU     I-1
                                                              7,000, although non-
                                                           conforming lots between      3,000, unless zero
 Minimum                                                      5,000–7,000 sq. ft. are   lot-line, in which
 lot area                                                  allowed one dwelling unit,   there must be a
                           40 acres           40,000 2,000                                                 3,000 1,000  --  --   --   7,000
 (square                                                   and lots less than 5,000 sq.  minimum 6 feet
 feet)                                                         ft. are allowed one         between all
                                                               dwelling unit with a         structures
                                                             Conditional Use Permit
 Maximum
 lot                           3%               15%   30%               50%                     75%         75%   75%  85% 95%  85%    90%
 coverage
 Maximum
                               35                35    35                35                      35          35    40   40  40   55     40
 height
                                                                               Setbacks
 Front                         35                35    30                25                      20          15    10    5  10   10     25
 Side                          20                15    10                 5                      5            5    5     5  15    5     10
 Side
 (corner                       35                --    15                12                      10          10    10    5  --    5      --
 lots)
 Rear                          45                25    25                15                      10          10    10   10  10   10     25
Source: City of Sutter Creek Zoning Ordinance 2010
   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                               March 2015
   City of Sutter Creek
                                                                                B–62

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Open Space and Park Requirements
Open space requirements can decrease the affordability of housing by decreasing the amount of land
available on a proposed site for constructing units. The Land Use Element requires that open space
be included within certain new developments as identified in the General Plan in Tables LU-2 and
LU-9. There are requirements for 15 percent usable open space for areas designated Planned
Development (PD) through the PD overlay and 25 percent usable open space for multi-family
residential areas.
The Open Space and Conservation Element identifies usable open space as including required
parklands, common areas, landscaped areas, pedestrian paths, plazas and similar public or private
areas, but not areas devoted to vehicle parking and streets. These open space requirements are
considered the minimum necessary to balance allowable densities with the City's goal to maintain its
character and the state requirement that the City make definite plans to preserve open space
(Government Code Section 66560 and PRC Section 5076).
The Land Use Element also applies the Visually Sensitive Area and the Creekside Greenway overlay
land use designations to parcels that may be developed in the future. Since the element specifies that
allowable densities must not be reduced in implementing these overlay designations, it should have
no negative effect on housing. Since the designation encourages “clustering” housing units in
planned unit developments outside the identified Visually Sensitive Areas of Creekside Greenways,
they may, in fact, help provide more condensed and, therefore, economical housing developments.
Dedication of Parkland Fee
In addition to open space requirements, the City has a requirement for the minimum amount of land
that shall be dedicated for parkland, which is determined using the following formula:
U x P x S = Minimum acreage dedication
Where “U” equals the number of dwelling units in the subdivision as allowed by the zoning
district(s) of the subdivision area, “P” equals the population per dwelling unit by dwelling unit type
(based on the latest US Census data), and “S” equals the parkland standard of five acres per 1,000
people.
Amount of Fee in Lieu of Land Dedication
When a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the
fair market value of the amount of land that would otherwise be required for dedication. The fee is
determined by the following formula, where “P” equals the average number of persons in the
dwelling type (based on the latest US Census data); “S” equals the parkland standard of 5 acres per
1,000 persons; and “V” equals the fair market value of one buildable acre of the subdivided land by
dwelling type:
P x S x V = Park fee per acre by dwelling type
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                               City of Sutter Creek
                                                 B–63

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The City defines a buildable acre as the typical acre within the subdivision, and located in other than
an area on which building is excluded because of flooding, rights-of-way, easements, or other
building restrictions. All fees listed above are base fees and the total fee is the actual administrative
cost to the City. The City Council annually establishes an hourly rate of cost for City staff.
Parking
Since the need for more required parking spaces directly affects land utilization, parking
requirements are one of the development standards that impact the cost of new housing. Parking
requirements for the city are located in Title 11 of the Sutter Creek Municipal Code. Sutter Creek’s
off-street parking standards for residential uses are as follows:
       Single-family dwellings: two spaces per dwelling unit.
       Two-family dwellings and townhouse units: two spaces per dwelling unit.
       Multiple-family dwellings: one and a half spaces for each dwelling unit plus one guest space
        for each five dwelling units.
       Senior housing: One space for each dwelling unit.
       Second unit dwellings: One space for each bedroom.
       Transient occupancy buildings: One space for each guest room plus one space for each five
        guest rooms.
       Congregate care facilities: One space for each two beds.
Parking standards for multi-family housing can increase development costs; however, the City’s
standard of one and a half parking spaces for each multiple-family dwelling is actually less restrictive
than many similar communities.
How Residential Uses are Allowed
Table HE-66 shows permitted residential uses in each of the 12 zoning districts that allow
residential uses in Sutter Creek’s Zoning Ordinance, and whether the uses are permitted by right
(“P”), with a Conditional Use Permit (“C”), or not permitted at all (“N”). In addition to the zones
shown in the table below, there are three overlay zones that also allow residential uses in specific
areas: Historic Residential Combining (HR), Manufactured Housing Combining (MH), and Planned
Development.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                              March 2015
City of Sutter Creek
                                                 B–64

     APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                      TABLE HE-66
                                 CITY OF SUTTER CREEK HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONE
                                                        R-3   R-4 C-1      C-2      DTC                   I-1     I-2
           Housing Type         A   RE    RL  R-1 R-2    1     1  1, 2     1,2,3    1,2,4
                                                                                              MU         1, 2, 5   1,2
Dwelling, One Family1           P    P    P    P   P     N     N   C        C        C         N           C       C
Second Unit Dwelling            P    P    P    P   P     N     N   C        C        C         N           C       C
Dwelling, Half-plex (Zero lot
                                N    N    N    N   P     N     N   C        C        C         N           C       C
line unit)
Dwelling, Duplex                N    N    N    N   P     N     N   C        C        C         N           C       C
Dwelling Triplex, Fourplex,
Condominium, and Bungalow       N    N    N    N   N     P     P   C        P        C         N           P       C
Court6
Dwelling, Multiple Family7,
                                N    N    N    N   N     N     P   C        P        C         N           P       C
Apartment House, Townhouses
Group Dwellings                 N    N    N    N   N     N     P   C        P        C         N           P       C
Large-scale Neighborhood
Housing Projects Having a
                                C    C    C    C   C     C     C   C        C        C         N           C       C
Minimum Gross Area of Five
Acres8
Residential Use above a
                                N    N    N    N   N     N     N   N        N        N         P           N       N
Commercial Use
Residential Care Facility, 6
                                N    N    N    N   N     N     N   N        N        N         N           N       N
persons or less
Residential Care Facility, More
                                N    N    N    N   N     N     N   N        N        N         N           N       N
than 6 persons
Family Day Care Home, Large     N    N    N    N   N     N     N   N        N        N         N           N       N
Family Day Care Home, Small     N    N    N    N   N     N     N   N        N        N         N           N       N
   March 2015                                                        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                City of Sutter Creek
                                                         B–65

                                                                                                                                                                 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                                                                       R-3          R-4             C-1               C-2                    DTC                                       I-1                 I-2
                  Housing Type                                   A          RE          RL        R-1        R-2        1              1             1, 2              1,2,3                  1,2,4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MU                 1, 2, 5               1,2
Home Occupations                                                 C           C           C          C          C        C             C               N                 N                       N                   N                   N                   N
Live/Work Units                                                  N           N           N          N          N        N             N               N                 N                       N                   P                   N                   N
Manufactured Homes                                                P          P           P          P          p        N             N               N                 N                       N                   N                   N                   N
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
                                                                 N           N           N          N          N        N              P              C                 P                       C                   N                    P                  C
Facilities
Supportive Housing                                               N           N           N          N          N        N             N               N                 N                       N                   N                   N                   N
Transitional Housing                                             N           N           N          N          N        N              P              C                 P                       C                   N                    P                  C
Emergency Shelter                                                N           N           N          N          N        N             N               N                 P                       N                   N                   N                   N
Farmworker Housing                                               N           N           N          N          N        N              P              C                 P                       C                   N                    P                  C
Source: City of Sutter Creek Zoning Ordinance.
Notes:
1 Site plan review required for all buildings in R-3, R-4, commercial, and industrial zones (see Chapter 18.050 of the Zoning Ordinance).
2 Chapter 18.60 (Conditional Use Permits) of the Zoning Ordinance permits the following with a Conditional Use Permit: new or remodeled residential structure in a commercial or industrial zone, or existing structure converted to residential uses in a
commercial or industrial zone.
3 Allows by right “multiple-family dwellings as permitted in the R-4 zone.”
4 Allows by right “first and second-story residential units including studio apartments.” However, this table shows “CUP” for all listed residential uses based on note 2, rather than trying to determine what types of units would be considered first- and
second-story residential units.
5 Allows by right “any uses permitted in the C-2 zone.”
6 Bungalow court is defined in Section 18.08.120 of the Zoning Ordinance as “a group of two or more detached one-family or two-family dwellings as rental units located upon a single lot, together with all open spaces as required by this title.”
7 A “multiple family dwelling” is defined in Section 18.08.170 of the Zoning Ordinance as “a building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other.”
8Allowed by Conditional Use Permit in all zones in Section 18.60.010 of the Zoning Ordinance.
     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                    March 2015
     City of Sutter Creek
                                                                                                                        B–66

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Overlay and Combining Zones
The General Plan and Zoning Ordinance include overlay designations and zones. The General Plan
Land Use Element includes the Planned Development designation that is applied to parcels that are
four acres or larger in size and presently undeveloped. This designation is intended to provide for
planned unit developments and more flexible overall site planning. The designation is a combined
land use designation, and the population density and building intensity standards of the base
designation apply. Population densities and building intensities may be clustered within any planned
unit development to provide and preserve open space in another area of the planned unit
development. This designation allows developers to group buildings on smaller lot sizes than would
otherwise be permitted or in denser building clusters or in multi-family dwellings, provided the net
allowable density and intensity does not increase.
The Zoning Ordinance implements the Planned Development land use overlay through the Planned
Development Combining (PD) overlay zone. This designation allows flexibility of standards and
density requirements, and encourages cluster development, mixed use, apartments, and
condominiums.
The Zoning Ordinance also contains the Historic Residential (HR) Combining Zone, which
establishes regulations for areas of historical or cultural significance in the city. These areas require
special considerations to preserve existing residential structures as a community resource. Uses
permitted by right are all of the residential uses allowed in the underlying residential zones with
which the HR zone is combined, and all residential legal non-conforming uses within commercial
and industrial zones with which the HR zone is combined. Development restrictions are imposed in
this overlay zone related to the demolition, removal, relocation, or alteration of any residential
building, structure, or site in the HR combining zone without a permit. Any new residential
construction within the HR combining zone must conform to recognized architectural styles and
forms utilized and constructed within Sutter Creek prior to the year 1920. External additions and
remodels of existing residential buildings need to be in the same style and utilize architecturally
similar materials as the existing residential structure.
The Zoning Ordinance also contains the Manufactured Housing (MH) Combining Zone, which
specifies the criteria for the installation of manufactured homes in the city. Manufactured homes are
permitted within specified residential zones that allow a detached one-family dwelling and meet
certain requirements. Manufactured homes are not permitted within areas designated as "Historic"
or "Historic Corridor" on the General Plan Land Use Maps, or in areas which carry the Historic
Residential (HR) Combining Zone designation.
March 2015                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                  City of Sutter Creek
                                                   B–67

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Sutter Creek Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
Second Unit Dwellings
The City allows second unit dwellings by right in the RE, A, RL, and R-1 zones per state law.
Mobile and Manufactured Homes
Program H-4 directs the City to review the MH Combining Zone in the Zoning Ordinance and
amend it, if necessary, to be consistent with the requirements of state law.
Farmworker Housing
Farmworker housing is permitted in the R-4, C-2, and I-1 zones and as a conditional use in the C-1,
DTC, and I-2 zones. Program H-10 is proposed to amend the Zoning Ordinance to comply fully
with the state Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5 and 17021.6).
Residential Care Facility
Residential care facilities are not defined in the Zoning Ordinance. Program H-10 proposes to
amend the Zoning Ordinance to define and allow residential care facilities per state law.
Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters operated by a governmental agency or nonprofit corporation having all
approvals, licenses, and permits required by state and local law for such operations are allowed by
right in the C-2 zone. This zone has sufficient capacity to accommodate an emergency shelter with
18 parcels zoned C-2 or C-2(PD) for a total of 74.4 acres.
Transitional and Supportive Housing
Transitional housing is allowed by right in the R-4, C-2, and I-1 zones. Program H-8 is proposed to
allow transitional and supportive housing in all zones allowing residential uses in the same way other
residential uses are allowed in those zones.
Extremely Low-Income Households
SRO units are permitted in the R-4, C-2 and I-1 zones.
Sutter Creek Housing for Persons with Disabilities
In accordance with SB 520 (Chapter 671, Statutes of 2001), the City has analyzed the potential and
actual governmental constraints on the development of housing for persons with disabilities (see SB
520 Analysis Tool in Appendix A). Sutter Creek has adopted the California Building Code, including
Title 24 regulations of the code dealing with accessibility for persons with disabilities. The City has
not adopted any additional universal design elements in its building code beyond Title 24
requirements.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
City of Sutter Creek
                                                B–68

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The City does not currently have any special processes for individuals with disabilities to make
requests for reasonable accommodation with respect to zoning, permit processing, or building laws.
Rather, as with all other planning or building applications, accommodations are made through the
variance or Conditional Use Permit process. The analysis further shows that while the City meets the
requirements of the Uniform Building Code/California Building Code, the ADA, and the California
Community Care Facilities Act, there are currently no additional accommodations for persons with
disabilities.
The absence of reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning, permit processing, and
building laws can act as a constraint on the development, maintenance, and improvement of housing
intended for persons with disabilities. The City can address this constraint through development of a
program that further analyzes the City’s existing codes and practices, and establishes procedures or
measures that provide flexibility in the development and/or rehabilitation of housing for disabled
persons.
Sutter Creek Growth Management
Growth management is a tool that local governments use to prevent urban sprawl and preserve
natural resources and agriculture. However, growth management measures in some instances can
increase the cost of affordable housing by limiting the amount of new development. The City of
Sutter Creek has incorporated growth projections and growth management policies into the General
Plan in order to ensure the preservation of the community’s rural character. However, the City does
not have any growth management programs that limit the number of residential units that can be
built.
The City has one policy in the General Plan that references growth management. Policy 2.1 in the
Land Use Element states:
         “Growth management is necessary in order to preserve Sutter Creek's existing quality of life.
         When project applications are being considered for acceptance under the provisions of
         Government Code Section 65943 and the City's permit procedures, General Plan
         consistency should be evaluated. If the project proposal is not consistent, the applicant
         should be advised that the project may be denied if a General Plan amendment is not
         processed and approved first or concurrently. Included in this evaluation should be a
         comparison of the project's proposed population density and building intensity with the
         growth assumptions and policies of this plan.”
As stated on page LU-12 of the Land Use Element:
         “The [growth management] policies do not conflict with efforts to implement the Housing
         Element because the General Plan encourages clustering of higher density development in
         (pd) designated areas which help encourage developers to provide more affordable housing
         and helps to avoid segregation of housing by economic groups. The Housing Element's
         program also includes City participation in efforts to obtain sites and provide infrastructure
         using in-lieu fees from developers who do not provide affordable housing.”
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                City of Sutter Creek
                                                B–69

                                                  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
The assumed population growth rate in the existing General Plan for the city averages 4 percent per
year, which was consistent with the 1993 California Department of Finance (DOF) projections for
Amador County. The assumed rate of growth for dwelling units on existing undeveloped but
buildable lots or permitted multi-family housing units is 4.5 percent per year.
Table LU-7 in the Land Use Element shows that the city had a population of 2,015 in 1994, and is
projected to have a population of 3,358 in 2014. This is an average population growth of 67 persons
per year for the 20-year period, or an average annual growth rate of nearly 3 percent. Table LU-7
also shows that the city contained 925 dwelling units in 1994, and was projected to contain 1,505
dwelling units in 2014. This is an average of 29 new units per year for the 20-year period, or an
average annual growth rate of 2.5 percent. This is an assumed growth rate that is almost twice the
yearly need of approximately 15 housing units for the 7.5-year time period in the Regional Housing
Needs Allocation Plan allocation for Sutter Creek.
Sutter Creek Density Bonus
A density bonus is the allocation of development rights that allows a parcel to accommodate
additional square footage or additional residential units beyond the maximum for which the parcel is
zoned. Under Government Code Section 65915, a housing development that provides a certain
percent of its units for lower-income or moderate-income households or for seniors is entitled to a
density bonus and other concessions (OPR 2003). California law states that local governments must
provide incentives to developers of specified housing developments, and a density bonus can be
used to accomplish this requirement. In return for these requirements, the developer must reserve
these units for this purpose for a certain number of years (OPR 2003).
Requirements for density bonuses are not included in Sutter Creek’s Zoning Ordinance. This has
not been a constraint in the development of affordable housing and provision of density bonuses
thus far. However, since density bonuses are permitted under State of California law, modifying
Sutter Creek’s Zoning Ordinance to include density bonus regulations is included as one of the
Housing Element’s implementation programs per HCD requirements.
Sutter Creek Building Codes and Code Enforcement
Through building codes and other land use requirements, local governments influence the style,
quality, size, and costs of residential development. Building codes and their enforcement can
increase the cost of housing and impact the feasibility of rehabilitating older properties that must be
upgraded to current code standards. In this manner, building codes and their enforcement act as a
constraint on the amount of housing and its affordability.
While the City must, by state law, adopt and implement the requirements of various uniform
construction codes, Sutter Creek attempts to apply these codes as flexibly as possible under state
law. The City currently enforces the 1997 Uniform Building Code and the 2007 California Codes
(the City Council will be adopting the 2013 California Building Code in July 2014), and no local
amendments to these codes have been adopted. Sutter Creek conducts nuisance abatement and
other code enforcement activities on a complaint basis. The City has not had a code enforcement
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
City of Sutter Creek
                                               B–70

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
officer for several years. With the adoption of the 2014–2015 budget, the City will be hiring for the
position of community services specialist. This position will carry the same duties as a code
enforcement officer. The codes enforced by the City of Sutter Creek are similar to the codes
enforced by most other cities in the region, and are necessary to promote the minimum standards of
safety and accessibility to housing. Thus, the codes are not considered to be an undue constraint on
affordable housing development.
Sutter Creek On/Off-site Improvements
Previous subsections in this document discussed the extension of infrastructure, such as roads,
sewers, water, and drainage to accommodate new development. Since Sutter Creek lacks financial
resources with which to help developers provide infrastructure to new developments, it is the
developers’ responsibility to connect to and augment existing systems.
Potentially problematic infrastructure areas include the need to expand the existing wastewater
treatment plant or tie into a regional plant to accommodate expanded residential development.
Other on-site improvements, such as curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, reflect typical urban standards
and are not particularly onerous for new development. These regulations are less stringent than
many communities across California, and as such do not represent an undue constraint on the
development of affordable housing.
Sutter Creek’s General Plan contains a policy (Policy 2.5, Land Use Element) that states the City will
only annex lands which are fiscally sound additions to the City, and which can be adequately served
by municipal facilities (or an acceptable alternative). Prior to the annexation of lands to the City, the
applicant needs to submit a plan demonstrating the feasibility of providing services and facilities to
the area proposed for annexation, that intended development will not have a negative economic
impact on the city or its citizens, and that the project will conform to the goals, policies, and
standards of the General Plan.
The City’s Improvement Standards were adopted as part of the Sutter Creek Municipal Code in
1997. The following is a summary of the improvement standards found in this document.
Streets
The City’s current street standards are located in Title 13 of the Sutter Creek Municipal Code. The
code states that all public streets within the city that provide primary means of access to abutting
property shall have a uniform width of not less than 50 feet. All alleys within the city which provide
secondary means of access to abutting property shall have a uniform width of not less than 30 feet.
All lanes or ways within the city affording pedestrian travel to abutting property shall have a uniform
width of not less than 10 feet.
March 2015                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                 City of Sutter Creek
                                                 B–71

                                                APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
Other
Other site improvements for residential construction include the following items found in Title 17
of the Sutter Creek Municipal Code (“Subdivisions”):
       The locations, names, widths, and approximate grades and curve radii of all ways, roads,
        streets, and highways in the proposed subdivision, or to be offered for dedication.
       The locations, names, and existing widths of all adjoining and contiguous ways, streets, and
        highways.
       The approximate widths, locations, purposes, and restrictions as to use of all existing and
        proposed easements.
       Approximate layout and approximate dimensions of each lot. Lots shall be numbered and
        total acreage of tract shall be shown.
       The dimensions and locations of any existing buildings which are to remain in place on the
        property.
These regulations are less stringent than many communities across California, and, as such, do not
represent an undue constraint on the development of affordable housing.
Sutter Creek Fees
The City of Sutter Creek adopted its current fee schedule in 1999, and updated it in 2006. Table
HE-67 presents the major planning and entitlement related fees.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
City of Sutter Creek
                                               B–72

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                              TABLE HE-67
                           CITY OF SUTTER CREEK PLANNING AND ENTITLEMENT FEES
                                             Planning Review
Plan Check/Inspection Fees
      Total Estimated Cost of Improvements:
              Less than $10,000                                               $800
              $10,000 to $49,999                                             $1,500
              $50,000 to $99,999                                             $6,000
              $100,000 to $399,999                                        $6,000 + 1%
              $400,000 and over                                               2.5%
Conditional Use Permit: $600 Deposit plus staff costs             $600 deposit plus staff costs
Site Plan Permit                                                  $400 deposit plus staff costs
Tentative Map (four lots or less) Minimum two lots                   $400 plus $100 per lot
Tentative Map (five lots or more)                             $500 plus $20 per lot, plus staff costs
Final Map                                                             $800 plus $40 per lot
Architectural Review (Historic District)                                   $50 each
                                         Annexation/Policy Changes
Variance                                                          $160 deposit plus staff costs
                                                               $240 each plus County Surveyor/
Boundary Line Adjustment/Merger
                                                                         Recorder fees
Annexation                                                               $600 per acre
General Plan Amendment                                           $1,200 deposit plus staff costs
                                         Annexation/Policy Changes
Zone Change                                                           $800 plus staff costs
Ordinance Amendment                                              $1,200 deposit plus staff costs
                                                   Other
Special Meeting of City Council or Planning
                                                                      $165 plus staff costs
Commission
Appeals to Staff and Planning Commission                          $150 each, non-refundable
Source: City of Sutter Creek 2006
March 2015                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                City of Sutter Creek
                                                  B–73

                                                   APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
In addition, the fee schedule outlines the impact fees, as presented in Table HE-68.
                                            TABLE HE-68
                              CITY OF SUTTER CREEK IMPACT FEES
                                        Fire Development Fees
 Single-Family Unit                                                 $670 + $25 Admin Fee
 Apartment (per unit)                                               $372 + $25 Admin Fee
 Duplex (Single-family dwelling)                                   $1,340 + $25 Admin Fee
 Commercial, industrial                                            $1,860 + $25 Admin Fee
                                                           25% credit given for installing automatic
 Up to 5,000 sq. ft.
                                                                            sprinklers
 Commercial, industrial above 5,000 sq. ft.                 $0.372 per sq. ft. (see Ordinance, 256)
                                         Traffic Mitigation Fees
 Regional Mitigation Fee (County)                                             $3,040
 General Mitigation Fee for any/all building (AB
                                                         $3,161 (+$365 bypass fee & $100 police fee)
 1600)
                                                                     Single Family – $881
 Police
                                                                      Multi-Family – $575
                                                                    Single Family – $1,729
 Fire
                                                                     Multi-Family – $1,128
                                                                     Single Family – $403
 Historical
                                                                      Multi-Family – $263
                                                                    Single Family – $1,009
 City Hall
                                                                      Multi-Family – $658
                                                                     Single Family – $478
 Corporation Yard
                                                                      Multi-Family – $312
                                         Traffic Mitigation Fees
                                                                     Single Family – $115
 Program Update Fee
                                                                      Multi-Family – $75
                                                                     Single Family – $138
 Administration
                                                                      Multi-Family – $90
                                                         $1,980 + $365 bypass fee zoned R-2 through
 Apartment, duplex, or any development                    R-4 + $100 police, any other commercial or
                                                                  other uses $50 per trip end
                                 Specific Subdivision Mitigation Fees
 Sutter Crest Estates (Gopher Flat)                                    + $1,000 per unit
 Sutter Crest East/Golden Hills (Gopher Flat)                          + $1,000 per unit
 Sutter Glen (Gopher Flat)                                             + $1,000 per unit
 Crestview Estates                                                     + $1,762 per unit
 Mesa De Oro                                                            + $ 360 per unit
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                               March 2015
City of Sutter Creek
                                                 B–74

  APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                                In-Lieu Parking Fees
 Fee for not providing sufficient on-site parking
                                                                                                  $3,000 per space
 for a project
                                                                    Sewer WCRF
 Single-family dwelling                                                                          $5,300 hookup fee
 User fee (Single-family dwelling)                                                     $181.71 per quarter (effective 7/2009)
 Vacant Lot Standby fee                                                                          $90.86 per quarter
 Source: City of Sutter Creek 2014, Amador County Transportation Commission, 2012
Table HE-69 outlines typical residential development fees.
                                                                   TABLE HE-69
                                         TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEES
               Fee Type                                                                     Fee
 Sewer Hook-up Fee                                                                        $5,300
 School Fee                                                                       $3.36 per square foot
 Building Permit                                                 Based on building standards per square foot
 Fire Safety Fee                                                                  $670 + $25 Admin Fee
 Police Fee                                                                 See AB 1600 fees shown above
                                                                                  Single Family – $6,380
 County Traffic Fee
                                                                                  Multi-Family – $4,529.80
 Subdivision Traffic Fee                                                              $1,000 – $2,000
 Source: City of Sutter Creek 2014
The City’s impact fees are similar to other jurisdictions in the region. The City’s fees for a typical
1,600-square-foot single-family dwelling are approximately $26,912. According to Buildingcost.net, a
housing construction cost resource that calculates the total estimated cost of building a new home
(land costs not included), single-family home construction costs in 2014 were estimated at
approximately $132 per square foot for average quality construction, or $211,200 for an average
1,600-square-foot home. The estimated total development cost, which includes construction and
land costs, of a 1,600-square-foot home with four walls, an attached garage, central heating and air,
and average building materials was $217,508.
The City’s impact fees for a typical 900-square-foot multi-family dwelling are approximately $14,400.
Costs for a recent multi-family project were not available in any of the County jurisdictions. In order
to estimate multi-family costs, another area Housing Element analysis was used. Based on the
Stanislaus County Housing Element, typical multi-family construction costs are $133 per square
foot, or $119,700 for a 900-square-foot unit. The estimated total development cost of a 900-square-
foot apartment, including construction and land, was $132,200.
March 2015                                                          2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                            City of Sutter Creek
                                                                          B–75

                                                                          APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
As illustrated in Table HE-70, this typical impact fee total is approximately 12 percent of the
average new house development cost and 11 percent of the average new multi-family unit
development cost. While these costs will likely be passed on to the ultimate product consumer, thus
impacting housing prices, these requirements are deemed necessary to maintain the quality of life
desired by city residents.
                                                                      TABLE HE-70
 CITY OF SUTTER CREEK TOTAL FEES FOR TYPICAL SINGLE- AND MULTI-FAMILY UNITS
                                                                               Estimated
                                                                                              Estimated Proportion of
                                                                           Development Cost
       Housing Type                                  Total Fees                                Fees to Development
                                                                           per Unit (land and
                                                                                                   Costs per Unit
                                                                          construction costs)
 Single-Family Unit1                                   $26,912                  $217,508                12%
 Multi-Family Unit2                                    $14,400                  $132,200                11%
 Source:
 Notes: 1. Typical single-family unit estimated at 1,600 square feet.
       2.     Typical multi-family unit of 900 square feet.
Sutter Creek Development Review and Permit Processing
Developers must negotiate several steps to secure all necessary approvals to build housing on a
given parcel of land. From the standpoint of the City, this process is necessary to ensure that new
development adequately complies with local regulations that are meant to ensure the health, safety,
and welfare of the entire community. From the developer’s standpoint, this process can complicate
and lengthen the development process, increasing the difficulty and cost to develop new housing.
The City’s contract City Planner manages the review and approval process. Table HE-71 shows the
schedule for residential processing times in Sutter Creek.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                             March 2015
City of Sutter Creek
                                                                        B–76

 APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
                                                 TABLE HE-71
                             CITY OF SUTTER CREEK DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TIMES
     Application Type                          Review Body                     Processing Time
Tentative Parcel Map                       Planning Commission                     3 months
Final Parcel Map                                City Council                       2 months
Tentative Subdivision
                                           Planning Commission                   6–12 months
Map
Final Subdivision Map
                                                City Council                      3–6 months
incl. Sub. Agreement
                                    City Council w/Planning Commission
Annexation                                                                       6–12 months
                                             recommendation
Lot Line Adjustment                             City Council                       6 weeks
Site Plan Permit                                    Staff                          2 months
Conditional Use Permit                     Planning Commission                     3 months
Building Permit                                     Staff                         4–6 weeks
Negative Declaration                Planning Commission or City Council            3 months
Mitigated Negative
                                    Planning Commission or City Council            5 months
Declaration
Project EIR                         Planning Commission or City Council           10 months
Source: City of Sutter Creek
The City of Sutter Creek’s Subdivision and Subdivision and Parcel Map Application outlines the
planning application process and duration for the city. The first part of the process includes
application submittal and review for completeness (30 days). Once the application is found to be
sufficient, the second part of the process begins. This part includes review by ERC, review by
affected agencies, and review/recommendation by the technical advisory committee (TAC) (50
days). The project then goes before the City Council for public hearing and adoption (95 days). This
schedule is similar to other jurisdictions in California and does not pose any excessive burden on
development.
Sutter Creek Design Review
Design review requirements can sometimes increase the cost of housing, especially those which
require additional costly features be provided in a multi-family housing development. The Land Use
Element contains three tables that describe design guidelines. Table LU-8 in the Land Use Element
describes design guidelines specific to multi-family residential developments; Table LU-9 in the Land
Use Element describes design guidelines specific to all high density residential and commercial
developments; and Table LU-10 in the Land Use Element describes design guidelines specific to the
Sutter Hill commercial and industrial area. City Code 306 also applies design standards on projects.
Many of these guidelines require that certain amenities and features be included in multi-family
developments, including recreation facilities, buffering from adjacent single-family developments,
and laundry facilities. While these design guidelines could be analyzed as a constraint for affordable
housing development, they also encourage such development since they ensure that such
development would meet basic City standards and would generate less community opposition.
March 2015                                        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                City of Sutter Creek
                                                      B–77

                                      APPENDIX B: CONSTRAINTS
This page intentionally left blank.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element          March 2015
City of Sutter Creek
                                     B–78

  APPENDIX C RESOURCES
REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
The Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to plan for
anticipated growth. The current RHNA quantifies the anticipated need for housing within each
jurisdiction for the five-year period from January 2014 through June 2019. Communities then
determine how they will address this need through the process of updating the Housing Elements of
their General Plans.
The intent of the RHNA is to ensure that local jurisdictions address their fair share of the housing
needs for the entire region. Additionally, a major goal of the RHNA is to ensure that every
community provides an opportunity for a mix of affordable housing to all economic segments of its
population. The RHNA jurisdictional allocations are made to ensure that adequate sites and zoning
are provided to address existing and anticipated housing demands during the planning period and
that market forces are not inhibited in addressing the housing needs for all facets of a particular
community. Table HE-72 provides the RHNA target for the planning period of 2014 to 2019.
                                                                          TABLE HE-72
                                  REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATIONS 2014–2019
                                                             Extremely               Very                                                   Above
                 Jurisdiction                                                                       Low          Moderate                                    Total2
                                                                 Low1                 Low                                                Moderate
                                                                   11                  10            17                19                       43             100
Amador County Total RHNA
                                                                 11%                  10%           17%              19%                       43%           100%
                                                                    0                   1              1                0                         0              2
Amador City
                                                                   0%                  1%            1%               0%                        0%              2%
                                                                    1                   2              3                3                         7             16
Ione
                                                                   1%                  2%            3%               3%                        7%            16%
                                                                    2                   2              3                4                         8             19
Jackson
                                                                   2%                  2%            3%               4%                        8%            19%
                                                                    0                   1              1                1                         1              4
Plymouth
                                                                   0%                  1%            1%               1%                        1%              4%
                                                                    1                   1              2                2                         4             10
Sutter Creek
                                                                   1%                  1%            2%               2%                        4%            10%
                                                                    5                   5              7                9                       23              49
Unincorporated county
                                                                   5%                  5%            7%               9%                       23%            49%
1 Approximately 50% of VL units are assumed to be extremely-low per state law.
2 The allocation of 100 reflects the county's projected minimum need (rounded). This column represents the minimum housing need that the county's RHNA Plan must address
in total.
Source: HCD 2012
March 2015                                                                  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                   C–1

                                                                                    APPENDIX C RESOURCES
A RHNA is mandated by the State of California (Government Code Section 65584) for regions to
address housing issues and needs based on future growth projections for the area. The California
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) allocates to cities, and the
unincorporated portions of counties, their “fair share” or RHNA of the regions’ projected housing
needs. RHNAs are typically prepared by a representative Council of Governments (COG). Amador
County is not currently represented by a COG as the result of the dissolution of the Central Sierra
Planning Council in June 2011. Consequently the regional housing need determination was made
directly by HCD. However, HCD shared its proposed methodology, assumptions, and draft figures
with local government representatives to review and comment before the final RHNA
determination was completed.
SUTTER CREEK 2007-2014 REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
Because the City of Sutter Creek did not adopt a Housing Element during the fourth round (2007-
2014), the City must identify adequate sites to meet the current and previous RHNA allocations.
Sutter Creek’s share of regional housing needs during the previous planning period totaled 189 new
units. Table HE-73 provides the detailed breakdown of units by income category for the previous
planning period. Through this Housing Element, the City is required to demonstrate the availability
of adequate sites to accommodate these unit numbers.
                                                                    TABLE HE-73
                               REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATIONS 2014–2019
                                                   Extremely                 Very                  Above
                Jurisdiction                                                         Low Moderate            Total
                                                        Low1                 Low                  Moderate
                                                          21                   21     30    36       81       189
  Sutter Creek
                                                        11%                  11%     16%   20%      42%      100%
1 Approximately 50% of VL units are assumed to be extremely-low per state law.
Source: Central Sierra Planning Council, 2008
Table HE-74 shows the County’s and cities’ progress toward achieving the fourth round RHNA
through their plans.
As of October 2014, there have been three moderate-income housing units and 23 above-moderate
housing units affordable to above moderate-income households approved or constructed in the four
cities and unincorporated county. The County and cities currently have the vacant land capacity to
accommodate all of their 2014-2019 RHNA need. See Tables HE-75 for a complete list of
available sites to meet the County and cities’ 2014–2019 RHNA and the Sutter Creek 2007-2014
RHNA.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                            March 2015
                                                                                C-2

 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                    TABLE HE-74
                REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION PROGRESS (2014–2019)
                                                            New Units by Affordability Category
      Jurisdiction                 Extremely                                                  Moderate  Above-  Total
                                                              Very Low                  Low
                                        Low                                                            Moderate
  Ione                                    0                         0                     0      0         1      1
  Jackson                                 0                         0                     0      0         0      0
  Plymouth                                0                         0                     0      0         0      0
  Sutter Creek                            0                         0                     0      0        11     11
  Unincorporated
                                          0                         0                     0      3        11     14
  County
  Total                                   0                         0                     0      3        23     26
Source: HCD 2012; Cities of Ione, Plymouth, Sutter Creek, and Jackson and Amador County, 2014
                                                                    TABLE HE-75
                                             REMAINING REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS
                                                            New Units by Affordability Category
      Jurisdiction                 Extremely                                                            Above-  Total
                                                              Very Low                  Low   Moderate
                                        Low                                                            Moderate
  Ione                                    1                         2                     3      3         6     15
  Jackson                                 2                         2                     3      4         8     19
  Plymouth                                1                         0                     1      1         1      4
  Sutter        Creek
                                         21                        21                     30    36        81     189
  (2007-2014)
  Sutter        Creek
                                          1                         1                     2      2         0      6
  (2014-2019)
  Unincorporated
                                          5                         5                     7      6        12     35
  County
Source: HCD 2012; Cities of Ione, Plymouth, Sutter Creek, and Jackson and Amador County, 2014
INVENTORY OF SITES
This section provides the inventory of vacant land that is available in the five jurisdictions for both
multifamily and single-family residential development. Summary tables of the available land are
included in each of the following sections. Table HE-79a and HE-79b provides the number of
acres, zoning, unit potential, and availability of infrastructure for all vacant acreage not earmarked
for pending projects in the unincorporated county and four cities.
March 2015                                                             2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                            C–3

                                                        APPENDIX C RESOURCES
IONE SITES INVENTORY ANALYSIS
This section provides the inventory of vacant land that is available in the City of Ione for both
multifamily and single-family residential development. Table HE-79a and HE-79b provides the
number of acres, zoning, unit potential, and availability of infrastructure for all vacant acreage not
earmarked for a pending project in Ione.
Realistic Capacity
The Zoning Districts and General Plan land use designations are shown for each site and are used to
determine the realistic unit capacity of each site. Realistic capacity was determined by multiplying the
number of acres by the maximum density for the site, and then 80 percent of that result was used as
the final realistic unit number. The 80 percent assumption was derived from sample developments
of what could happen in Ione based upon market conditions and would be consistent with the
General Plan and Zoning District designations.
       Jose’s Place, a 44-unit affordable project, was built on 2.43 acres in the Planned
        Development (PD) zone which has a High Density General Plan Designation. This project
        contained 44 units showing a capacity of 18 units per acre, which is 72 percent of the
        maximum density for this site.
       115 Clay Street was built on .307 acres in the Commercial Transition (CT) zone and
        contained four units, showing a development capacity of 13 units per acre or 87 percent of
        the maximum development capacity.
       306 South Church Street was built on .537 acres in the Light Commercial (C-1) zone and
        contained 20 units, showing a development capacity of 161 percent. This project developed
        at 37 units per acre.
       25 North Ione Street was built on .29 acres in the Central Business (C-2) zone. This project
        contained eight units which showed a capacity of 110 percent. This project was developed at
        27 units per acre.
       421 to 463 Foothill Blvd. was built on 1.196 acres in the Planned Development (PD) zoning
        district. The project had 20 units, showing a capacity of 111 percent. This project was
        developed at 16 units per acre.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                             March 2015
                                                                                          City of Ione
                                                    C-4

  APPENDIX C RESOURCES
Based on an analysis of vacant land zoned for residential development in the city, the city has
sufficient vacant land to accommodate its RHNA allocation (see Table HE-76)
                                                            TABLE HE-76
                                       LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY – CITY OF IONE
                                                    Potential Units by Affordability Category
                                                                                         Above-        Total
                                                  Lower              Moderate
                                                                                        Moderate
 Remaining RHNA                                       6                   3                 6            15
 Summary of Sites                                   196                 126                108          430
 Net Remaining RHNA                                   0                   0                 0             0
 Surplus (Shortfall)                                190                 123                102          415
Source: Amador County Transportation Commission, 2014
JACKSON SITES INVENTORY ANALYSIS
This section provides the inventory of vacant and underutilized land that is available in the City of
Jackson for both multifamily and single-family residential development. Table HE-79a and
HE-79b provides the number of acres, zoning, unit potential, and availability of infrastructure for
all vacant acreage not earmarked for a pending project in Jackson.
Realistic Capacity
The inventoried capacity represents the “realistic capacity” because it is based on past development
proposals, City staff assumptions regarding the site’s characteristics (e.g., physical or service
constraints), and the densities of existing housing developments under each designation/zone. The
number of affordable units by affordability category calculated for each of these sites is derived from
the density and unit type assumptions shown per site (see Table HE-79a and HE-79b for unit
type information) and, if applicable, previous development proposals for the site. All of the sites
listed with “townhouse” or “apartment” unit types are assumed to be potentially affordable to very
low-income households. All of the other unit types shown (duplexes, four-plexes, and bungalow
courts) are assumed to be potentially affordable to low-income households.
The sites shown in Tables HE-79a and HE-79b all have access to infrastructure. Topography,
environmental factors, or other site-specific problems that would be a constraint to development are
addressed per site in Table HE-79a and HE-79b.
To ensure adequate sites are available throughout the planning period to meet the City’s RHNA, the
City will continue to annually update an inventory that details the amount, type, and size of vacant
and underutilized parcels to assist developers in identifying land suitable for residential development
and that also details the number of extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income units
constructed annually. If the inventory indicates a shortage of available sites, the City shall rezone
sufficient sites to accommodate the City’s RHNA
March 2015                                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                 City of Jackson
                                                                  C–5

                                                                         APPENDIX C RESOURCES
Based on an analysis of vacant and underutilized land zoned for residential development in the city,
the city has sufficient vacant and underutilized land to accommodate their RHNA allocation (see
Table HE-77)
                                                             TABLE HE-77
                                   LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY – CITY OF JACKSON
                                                      Potential Units by Affordability Category
                                                                                          Above-           Total
                                                    Lower             Moderate
                                                                                         Moderate
 Remaining RHNA                                        7                   4                 8              19
 Summary of Sites                                     367                142                135             644
 Net Remaining RHNA                                    0                   0                 0               0
 Surplus (Shortfall)                                  360                138                127             625
Source: Amador County Transportation Commission, 2014
SUTTER CREEK SITES INVENTORY ANALYSIS
This section provides the inventory of vacant land that is available in the City of Sutter Creek for
both multifamily and single-family residential development. Table HE-79a and HE-79b provides
the number of acres, zoning, unit potential, and availability of infrastructure for all vacant acreage
not earmarked for a pending project in Sutter Creek.
Realistic Capacity
The number of units by affordability category calculated for each of these sites is derived from the
density and unit type (see Table HE-79a and HE-79b for unit type information) assumptions
shown in the table and, if applicable, development proposals for the sites. All of the sites listed with
“cottage style” or “starter home” unit types are assumed to be potentially affordable to moderate-
income households. All of the sites listed with “townhouse” or “apartment” unit types are assumed
to be potentially affordable to very low-income households. All of the other unit types shown
(duplexes, four-plexes, and second-story flats) are assumed to be potentially affordable to low-
income households.
The sites shown in Table HE-78 all have access to infrastructure and are not constrained by
topography, environmental factors, or other site-specific problems that would limit planned
development. The table includes specific notes on the sites/projects.
Based on an analysis of vacant land zoned for residential development in the city, the city has
sufficient vacant land to accommodate both its RHNA allocation for 2014-2019 and the previous
allocation for 2007-2014 (see Table HE-78).
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                           March 2015
                                                                                                City of Sutter Creek
                                                                    C-6

 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                        TABLE HE-78
                             LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY – CITY OF SUTTER CREEK
                                                       Potential Units by Affordability Category
                                                                                                   Total
                                                     Lower          Moderate        Above-Moderate
 Remaining RHNA (2007-2014)                            72               36                  81      189
 Remaining RHNA (2014-2019)                             4                2                   0       6
 Summary of Sites                                     182               131                210      523
 Net Remaining RHNA                                     0                0                   0       0
 Surplus (Shortfall)                                  106               93                 129      328
Source: Amador County Transportation Commission 2014
ENERGY CONSERVATION
State law (Government Code Section 65583[a][7]) requires housing elements to contain an analysis
of opportunities for residential energy conservation. The energy conservation section of a housing
element must inventory and analyze the opportunities to encourage the incorporation of energy-
saving features, energy-saving materials, and energy-efficient systems, and design for residential
development. Housing element policies and programs should address the environmental significance
and operational benefits of employing energy conservation in the building and retrofitting of
housing.
According to the US Department of Energy, residential energy use accounts for about 21 percent of
all energy use nationwide. Greater energy efficiency in these three residential components would
greatly contribute to an overall reduction in energy use.
Opportunities for residential energy conservation exist at all levels: individual dwelling units,
residential projects, neighborhoods, communities, and regions. Conservation can be achieved
through a variety of approaches, including reducing the use of energy-consuming appliances and
features in a home, physical modification of existing structures or land uses, and reducing the
reliance on automobiles by encouraging more mixed-use and infill development, and providing
pedestrian access to commercial and recreational facilities.
The County’s and cities’ goals and policies related to energy conservation are shaped by several other
state, regional, and local initiatives and programs, including:
      Title 24, California’s building standards for energy efficiency that apply to all new buildings in
       Amador County.
      The state’s climate change strategies focused on reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, as
       required by Assembly Bill (AB) 32, the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006.
March 2015                                                2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                             C–7

                                                      APPENDIX C RESOURCES
    Federal and utility programs and funds promoted through each jurisdiction’s policies and
     administrative offices.
    The general plans of Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, Sutter Creek, and Amador County.
Additional information describing each of these programs is provided in the following sections.
State Energy Efficiency Requirements for New Construction
Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations contains California’s building standards for energy
efficiency. Each city and county must enforce these standards as part of its review of building plans
and issuance of building permits. The standards, prepared by the California Energy Commission
(CEC), were established in 1978 in response to a state legislative mandate to reduce California’s
energy consumption. The standards are updated periodically to consider and incorporate new
energy-efficiency technologies and methods. New 2013 Building Code standards went into effect on
July 1, 2014, with higher efficiency requirements across all building types. According to the CEC
estimates, Californians can expect energy savings of 25 percent for homes, and 14 percent for low-
rise multifamily buildings under the new standards. Under the new standards, homeowners are
expected to save approximately $6,200 over the life of a 30-year mortgage compared to the previous
code standards. The CEC estimates that California’s building efficiency standards (along with those
for energy-efficient appliances) saved more than $66 billion in electricity and natural gas costs from
1978 to 2013.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
The California legislature adopted the California Global Warming Solutions Act in 2006 (AB 32) and
declared that “global warming poses a serious threat to the economic well-being, public health,
natural resources, and the environment of California.” In adopting the act, the legislature found that
human activity is one of the leading contributors to an increase in carbon dioxide, methane, and
other greenhouse gases (GHGs). The state has declared these gases are leading to an increase in
average global temperatures and contributing to changes in climate throughout the world. The
purpose of AB 32 is to reduce GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 (25 percent reduction over
current levels). Executive Order S-03-05 requires further reduction of GHGs to 80 percent below
1990 levels by 2050.
AB 32 is being implemented by the California Air Resources Board (CARB) and local air pollution
control districts guided by a Scoping Plan developed by CARB in 2008, to be updated every five
years. The plan was most recently updated in 2014. The Scoping Plan encourages local jurisdictions
to adopt emissions reductions measures to help the state meet its emissions reductions goals. The
California Air Pollution Control Officers Association (CAPCOA), which represents local air
districts, has released reports describing ways to measure and reduce GHGs at the local level, and
model policies that local jurisdictions can include in their general plans to reduce GHGs and
contribute to achieving the important goals of AB 32. Many of the recommendations are relevant
for residential energy conservation. Among the suggestions are:
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                            March 2015
                                                  C-8

 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
   Promote walkability through a highly connected street system with small blocks.
   Promote mixed-use neighborhood centers and transit-oriented development.
   Reduce the amount of water used for landscaping and encourage the use of recycled water for
    landscaping.
   Promote the use of fuel-efficient heating and cooling equipment and other appliances.
   Encourage green building designs in both new construction and building renovation.
   Encourage building orientations and landscaping that enhance natural lighting and sun exposure.
   Encourage the expansion of neighborhood-level products and services and public transit
    opportunities throughout the area to reduce automobile use.
   Promote energy-efficient design features, including appropriate site orientation, and use of light
    color roofing and building materials.
   Encourage the development of affordable housing throughout the community, as well as
    development of housing for elderly and low- and moderate-income households near public
    transportation services.
   Ensure that a portion of future residential development is affordable to low- and very low-
    income households.
UTILITY PROGRAMS AND FUNDING
The County and cities actively promote energy conservation programs offered through local service
and utility providers.
PG&E serves the electrical and gas needs in the county. PG&E offers energy assistance programs
for lower-income households to help lower-income households conserve energy and control utility
costs. These programs include the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE), the Relief for
Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH), and the Family Electric Rate Assistance
(FERA) programs.
The CARE program provides a 20 percent monthly discount on gas and electric rates to households
with qualified incomes, certain nonprofit organizations, homeless shelters, hospices, and other
qualified nonprofit group living facilities.
The REACH program provides one-time energy assistance to customers who have no other way to
pay their energy bill. The intent of REACH is to assist low-income households, particularly the
elderly, disabled, sick, working poor, and the unemployed, who experience hardships and are unable
to pay for their necessary energy needs.
March 2015                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                C–9

                                                       APPENDIX C RESOURCES
The FERA program provides a rate reduction for large households of three or more people with
low to middle income.
In addition, the California Department of Health and Human Services funds the Home Energy
Assistance Program (HEAP). HEAP provides financial assistance to eligible low-income persons to
offset the costs of heating and/or cooling their housing unit.
PG&E offers a number of energy reduction tips and information available, including home
weatherization, energy-saving tips, and a residential energy guide.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                     March 2015
                                                 C-10
  APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                             TABLES HE-79A LAND INVENTORY
                                                                                                                             Assumed Unit
                                                                                        Max               Realistic               Type
                                        Combining   General Plan                                 Max Unit            Income
Jurisdiction           APN        Zone                           Use Status Acreage  Allowed                Unit             (Jackson and    Existing Use           Notes
                                        Designation  Land Use                                   Capacity*           Category
                                                                                     Density              Capacity            Sutter Creek
                                                                                                                                  only)
Ione                004-290-002     R-4                 RH         Vacant       7    15.1–25.0     175       84        Lower                    Vacant
Ione                004-030-009     PD                  RH         Vacant      9.3   15.1–25.0     232      112        Lower                    Vacant
Lower Income Subtotal                                                         16.3                          196
Ione                011-150-021     PD                  RH         Vacant     6.78   15.1–25.0     169       81         Mod                     Vacant
Ione                004-010-039     R-2                 RL         Vacant     0.52    3.1–15.0      7         6         Mod                     Vacant
Ione                004-010-038     R-2                 RL         Vacant     0.37    3.1–15.0      5         4         Mod                     Vacant
Ione              005-320-038-501   PD                  RM         Vacant     2.64   3.1–15.0      39        25         Mod                     Vacant
Ione                004-262-002    C-1                  DT         Vacant     0.91   3.1–15.0      13                   Mod                     Vacant
                                                                                                             10
Ione                004-262-003    C-1                  DT         Vacant     0.46    3.1–15.0      6                   Mod                     Vacant
Moderate Income Subtotal                                                      11.68                         126
Ione               004-070-0340    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.43     2.1–7.0      3         2         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-070-0330    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.31     2.1–7.0      2         2         AM                      Vacant
Ione              004-070-032-000  R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.31     2.1–7.0      2         2         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-070-0310    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.29     2.1–7.0      2         2         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-080-0050    R-1a                 RL         Vacant      0.4     2.1–7.0      2         2         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-070-0140    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.16     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-041-0410    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.69     2.1–7.0      4         4         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0080    R-1a                 RL         Vacant      0.2     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0120    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.21     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0130    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.33     2.1–7.0      2         2         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0070    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.17     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0060    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.17     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0160    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.31     2.1–7.0      2         2         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0320    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.21     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0310    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.18     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0050    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.17     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0300    R-1a                 RL         Vacant      0.2     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0330    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.18     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0290    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.15     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0340    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.17     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0180    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.21     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
Ione               004-340-0350    R-1a                 RL         Vacant     0.17     2.1–7.0      1         1         AM                      Vacant
March 2015                                                                                                                              2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                           C–11

                                                                                                                                                APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                                                                              Assumed Unit
                                                                                       Max                 Realistic               Type
                                         Combining   General Plan                                 Max Unit            Income
Jurisdiction          APN         Zone                            Use Status Acreage Allowed                 Unit             (Jackson and  Existing Use    Notes
                                         Designation  Land Use                                   Capacity*           Category
                                                                                     Density               Capacity            Sutter Creek
                                                                                                                                   only)
Ione              004-340-0200     R-1a                   RL        Vacant     0.19   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-340-0360     R-1a                   RL        Vacant     0.18   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-340-0250     R-1a                   RL        Vacant     0.21   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-340-0220     R-1a                   RL        Vacant     0.22   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-271-0060     R-1a                   RL        Vacant     0.42   2.1–7.0         2        2         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-160-0040     R-1a                   RL        Vacant     0.15   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-271-0070     R-1a                   RL        Vacant     0.75   2.1–7.0         5        4         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-158-0030     R-1a                   RL        Vacant     0.44   2.1–7.0         3        2         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-062-0010     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.75   2.1–7.0         5        4         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-050-0120     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.28   2.1–7.0         1        2         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-220-0250     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.68   2.1–7.0         4        4         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-220-0170     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.25   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-202-0110     R-1b                   RL        Vacant      0.5   2.1–7.0         3        3         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-220-0200     R-1b                   RL        Vacant      0.4   2.1–7.0         2        2         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-220-0180     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.51   2.1–7.0         3        3         AM                    Vacant
Ione              005-334-0180     R-1b                   RL        Vacant      0.2   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-130-0460     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.21   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-130-0520     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.24   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              005-336-0130     R-1b                   RL        Vacant      0.3   2.1–7.0         2        2         AM                    Vacant
Ione              005-337-0250     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.19   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              005-338-0010     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.19   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              005-337-0200     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.25   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              005-130-0020     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     1.67   2.1–7.0        11        9         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-190-0040     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     4.15   2.1–7.0        29       23         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-247-0060     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.12   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-106-0210     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.28   2.1–7.0         1        2         AM                    Vacant
Ione              004-106-0150     R-1b                   RL        Vacant     0.11   2.1–7.0         1        1         AM                    Vacant
Above-Moderate Income Subtotal                                                 19.46                         108
Ione Totals                                                                    47.44                         430
                 020-390-036-000                                                                                        Lower
Jackson                             LC                    LC        Vacant      7.5    21.78        163       80                apartments     Vacant       by right
                 020-390-035-000
Jackson          020-420-031-000   RHD                   RHD        Vacant       8     21.78        174       50        Lower   apartments     Vacant       by right
Jackson          020-420-001-000    C                      C        Vacant       6     21.78        129       80        Lower   apartments     Vacant
Jackson          020-090-011-000 RSF/RHD               RSF/RHD      Vacant     6.57     5.45         51       12        Lower    four-plex     Vacant
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                        March 2015
                                                                                            C-12

 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                                                                                           Assumed Unit
                                                                                              Max                Realistic                       Type
                                               Combining   General Plan                                 Max Unit                 Income
Jurisdiction           APN              Zone                             Use Status Acreage Allowed                 Unit                   (Jackson and       Existing Use                       Notes
                                               Designation   Land Use                                  Capacity*                Category
                                                                                            Density              Capacity                   Sutter Creek
                                                                                                                                                 only)
                  020-090-012-000                                                     0.76    21.78
Jackson           020-400-048-000         C                       C        Vacant       90    21.78      1,960        50           Lower   senior cottages    Underutilized
                                        R/PD
Jackson                                                     R/PD Overlay   Vacant      117     5.45        637        80           Lower         mixed           Vacant                     owned by City
                  020-070-031-000      Overlay
                                                                                                                                            manufactured
Jackson                                  LC                      LC        Vacant      58     21.78       1263       142     Lower and Mod                       Vacant            unit mix based on prelim plan
                                                                                                                                                homes
                  020-070-043-000
                  044-180-016-000
                                                                                                                 8 very low;
                                        RS/PD                                                                                                SF detached                         15 affordable units will be required
Jackson                                                    RS/PD Overlay   Vacant      150       1         150   7 low; 135   Lower and AM                       Vacant
                  044-180-021-000      Overlay                                                                                                  homes                         because this is an approved subdivision
                                                                                                                     AM
Lower Income Subtotal                                                                235.83                          367
Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                58                           142
Above-Moderate Income Subtotal                                                         150                           135
Jackson
                                                                                     443.83                          644
Totals
                                                                                             Note 1      Note 2    Note 3
                                                                                                                                                                            Constraints: slope and lot configuration.
                                                                                                                                                                            Site has been zoned commercial for 25
Sutter Creek   18-190-007, -019 & 027    C-2                      C        Vacant      3.4      29          98        40          very low    apartments                    years with no development. Updated
                                                                                                                                                                            General Plan will propose RH land use
                                                                                                                                                                            designation with R-4 zoning
                                                                                                                                                                            Mixed use project combined with some
                                                                                                                                                                            neighborhood retail. At the pre-app stage.
                                                                                                                                                 senior
Sutter Creek        18-270-010         C-2(pd)                 C(pd)       Vacant     20.86     29         604        40          very low                                  Site design in preparation. Some form of
                                                                                                                                              apartments
                                                                                                                                                                            City subsidy is likely (reduced participation
                                                                                                                                                                            fees, etc.)
                                                                                                                                                                            Same owner as Sutter Hill Apts. (adjacent)
Sutter Creek        44-020-057           R-4                     RH        Vacant     2.05      29          59        40          very low    apartments
                                                                                                                                                                            Constraints: slope.
                                                                                                                                                                            Site plan and architectural elevations
                                                                                                                                            20 senior 4-plex
               18-040-004 (partial)) &                                                                                                                                      complete. No formal application yet - just
Sutter Creek                           C-2(pd)                    C        Vacant     2.78      29          80        32            low      & 12 2nd story
                18-031-006 (partial)                                                                                                                                        preliminary review. Mitigated Neg Dec in
                                                                                                                                                  flats
                                                                                                                                                                            preparation.
March 2015                                                                                                                                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                  C–13

                                                                                                                                                             APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                                                                                          Assumed Unit
                                                                                                  Max                 Realistic                 Type
                                                 Combining   General Plan                                    Max Unit            Income
Jurisdiction         APN                 Zone                                Use Status Acreage Allowed                 Unit              (Jackson and    Existing Use                       Notes
                                                 Designation   Land Use                                     Capacity*           Category
                                                                                                Density               Capacity             Sutter Creek
                                                                                                                                                only)
                                                                                                                                                2-story
Sutter Creek      18-051-002              C-2                       C          Vacant     0.87      29          25        6        low                                 Pre-proposal submitted.
                                                                                                                                              townhouse
                                                                                                                                                                       Revised site plan in preparation (filed
                                                                                                                                                                       application at the end of 2005; Planning
Sutter Creek  44-020-095 (partial)         R-4                    RH & I       Vacant     3.73      29         108       24        low          duplex                 Commission requested revision to take oak
                                                                                                                                                                       trees into account; same yield = 24 unit)s.
                                                                                                                                                                       Constraints: oak trees.
Lower
Income                                                                                    33.69                         182
Subtotal
                                                                                                                                                                       ~4,500 sq. ft. lots with smaller units (!~1,800
Sutter Creek      18-010-021               R-1                     RSF         Vacant     5.02     6.22         31       30     moderate    cottage style              sq. ft.); clustered and served off of a
                                                                                                                                                                       common access drive.
                                                                                                                                                                       Constraints: slope and riparian setback
             18-112-001, -008, -009        R-3
Sutter Creek                                                  RSF & RL(pd)     Vacant       5      6.22         31       25     moderate    cottage style              (~10 acres total site size; ~5 total acres
             & -010 (partial for all) (proposed)
                                                                                                                                                                       developable)
                                                                                                                                                                       Constraints: slope and mine tailings. If a
                                        R-1 & C-                                                                                                                       project was proposed, the City would
Sutter Creek      18-210-009                                 C & C(pd) & RSF   Vacant     7.77  6.22 & 29      166       60     moderate  senior cottages
                                         2(pd)                                                                                                                         redesignate to higher density. Approx. 1/3
                                                                                                                                                                       of site is currently RSF/R-1& C-2 (pd)
Sutter Creek      18-253-024               R-1                   RSF/R-1       Vacant     0.95     6.22          5        4     moderate    cottage style              Constraints: access.
                                                                                                                                                                       Approved site plan permit issued.
Sutter Creek   18-342-002 & -003       C-2 & R-4                 C & RH        Vacant      1.6      29          46       12     moderate    cottage style              Improvement plans and building permits in
                                                                                                                                                                       preparation
Moderate
Income                                                                                    20.34                         131
Subtotal
                                                                                                                                moderate/  starter homes/
                                                                                                                                                                       10 starter homes on 0.95 acres of site; 46
Sutter Creek      18-020-031            R-1(pd)                  RL(pd)        Vacant     23.73      2          47       56       above     SF detached
                                                                                                                                                                       detached SF homes on rest of site
                                                                                                                                moderate        homes
                                                                                                                                                                       Powder House Estates: 54 townhouse units
             18-140-001 & 18-092-      R-1(pd) &                                                                                  above         luxury                 clustered on ~6.2 acres away from road;
Sutter Creek                                                  RSF(pd) & RSF    Vacant     46.8     6.22        291      107
                      008                  R-1                                                                                  moderate     townhomes                 remainder of site does not have unit type
                                                                                                                                                                       designated
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                                                        March 2015
                                                                                                       C-14
 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                                                                                                                                            Assumed Unit
                                                                                                                                                       Max               Realistic                Type
                                                                                Combining                    General Plan                                       Max Unit            Income
Jurisdiction                          APN                     Zone                                                                Use Status Acreage Allowed               Unit             (Jackson and      Existing Use                  Notes
                                                                               Designation                       Land Use                                      Capacity*           Category
                                                                                                                                                     Density             Capacity            Sutter Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                 only)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Golden Hills Estates: 4 approved single-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           family. The remaining vacant portion of
                                                                                                                                                                                     above                                 the site is estimated to be able to
Sutter Creek                        multiple                    R-1                                                RSF & RL         Vacant      30      6.22      186       47                single-family
                                                                                                                                                                                   moderate                                realistically accommodate        43   units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Approx. 14 acres of site are designated RL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with remainder designated RSF
Above-Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                                                                100.53                       210
Sutter Creek Totals                                                                                                                           154.56                       523
Notes: (1) Without 25% density bonus. Based on combination of general plan land use designation and zoning district.
(2) Maximum development potential is based on acres multiplied by maximum density (without density bonus), and then rounded down.
(3) See individual notes for each site for explanation.
March 2015                                                                                                                                                                                               2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                                                          C–15

                                                                                                                                            APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                   TABLE HE-79B LAND INVENTORY
                                                                                     General
                                                                      Combining                 Use           Infrastructure Environmental
               Jurisdiction                        APN        Zone                  Plan Land         Acreage                                School Park Store  Transit
                                                                      Designation              Status           Available     Constraints
                                                                                       Use
   Ione                                         004-290-002    R-4                     RH     Vacant      7        Yes            None
   Ione                                         004-030-009    PD                      RH     Vacant     9.3       Yes            None
   Lower Income Subtotal                                                                                16.3
   Ione                                         011-150-021    PD                      RH     Vacant    6.78       Yes            None
   Ione                                         004-010-039    R-2                      RL    Vacant    0.52       Yes            None
   Ione                                         004-010-038    R-2                      RL    Vacant    0.37       Yes            None
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                       005-320-038-501  PD                      RM     Vacant    2.64       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
   Ione                                         004-262-002    C-1                      DT    Vacant    0.91       Yes        Steep Slope
   Ione                                         004-262-003    C-1                      DT    Vacant    0.46       Yes            None
   Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                            11.68
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-070-0340   R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.43       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-070-0330   R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.31       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                       004-070-032-000 R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.31       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-070-0310   R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.29       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-080-0050   R-1a                      RL    Vacant     0.4       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-070-0140   R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.16       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
   Ione                                        004-041-0410   R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.69       Yes            None
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-340-0080   R-1a                      RL    Vacant     0.2       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-340-0120   R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.21       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-340-0130   R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.33       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-340-0070   R-1a                      RL    Vacant    0.17       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                  March 2015
                                                                                  C-16
 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                       General
                                          Combining               Use           Infrastructure Environmental
           Jurisdiction     APN      Zone             Plan Land         Acreage                                School   Park    Store    Transit
                                          Designation            Status           Available     Constraints
                                                         Use
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0060 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.17       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0160 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.31       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0320 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.21       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0310 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.18       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0050 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.17       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0300 R-1a                 RL    Vacant     0.2       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0330 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.18       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0290 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.15       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0340 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.17       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0180 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.21       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0350 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.17       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0200 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.19       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0360 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.18       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0250 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.21       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
                                                                                               100 Year flood
   Ione                 004-340-0220 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.22       Yes
                                                                                                    plain
   Ione                 004-271-0060 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.42       Yes        Steep Slope
   Ione                 004-160-0040 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.15       Yes            None
   Ione                 004-271-0070 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.75       Yes        Steep Slope
   Ione                 004-158-0030 R-1a                 RL    Vacant    0.44       Yes        Steep Slope
   Ione                 004-062-0010 R-1b                 RL    Vacant    0.75       Yes            None
March 2015                                                                                           2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                    C–17

                                                                                                                                            APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                                     General
                                                                      Combining                 Use           Infrastructure Environmental
               Jurisdiction                        APN         Zone                 Plan Land         Acreage                                School Park Store  Transit
                                                                      Designation              Status           Available     Constraints
                                                                                       Use
   Ione                                        004-050-0120     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.28       Yes            None
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-220-0250     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.68       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-220-0170     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.25       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-202-0110     R-1b                    RL    Vacant     0.5       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-220-0200     R-1b                    RL    Vacant     0.4       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-220-0180     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.51       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
   Ione                                        005-334-0180     R-1b                    RL    Vacant     0.2       Yes            None
   Ione                                        004-130-0460     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.21       Yes            None
   Ione                                        004-130-0520     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.24       Yes            None
   Ione                                        005-336-0130     R-1b                    RL    Vacant     0.3       Yes            None
   Ione                                        005-337-0250     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.19       Yes            None
   Ione                                        005-338-0010     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.19       Yes            None
   Ione                                        005-337-0200     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.25       Yes            None
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        005-130-0020     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    1.67       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
                                                                                                                             100 Year flood
   Ione                                        004-190-0040     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    4.15       Yes
                                                                                                                                  plain
   Ione                                        004-247-0060     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.12       Yes            None
   Ione                                        004-106-0210     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.28       Yes            None
   Ione                                        004-106-0150     R-1b                    RL    Vacant    0.11       Yes            None
   Above-Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                      19.46
   Ione Totals                                                                                         47.44
                                              020-390-036-000
   Jackson                                                       LC                     LC    Vacant    7.5
                                              020-390-035-000
   Jackson                                    020-420-031-000   RHD                    RHD    Vacant      8                      Slopes
   Jackson                                    020-420-001-000     C                     C     Vacant      6
   Jackson                                    020-090-011-000 RSF/RHD                RSF/RHD  Vacant    6.57                  Slopes and
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                  March 2015
                                                                                  C-18
 APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                                                 General
                                                                                    Combining               Use           Infrastructure Environmental
                Jurisdiction                      APN                       Zone                Plan Land         Acreage                                School   Park    Store    Transit
                                                                                    Designation            Status           Available     Constraints
                                                                                                    Use
                                            020-090-012-000                                                          0.76                   Riparian
   Jackson                                  020-400-048-000                   C                      C    Vacant      90
                                                                            R/PD                   R/PD
   Jackson                                  020-070-031-000                                               Vacant     117
                                                                           Overlay               Overlay
   Jackson                                  020-070-043-000                  LC                     LC    Vacant      58
                                            044-180-016-000
                                                                            RS/PD                 RS/PD
   Jackson                                                                                                Vacant     150
                                            044-180-021-000                Overlay               Overlay
   Lower Income Subtotal                                                                                           235.83
   Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                                           58
   Above-Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                                    150
   Jackson Totals                                                                                                  443.83
   Sutter Creek                          18-190-007, -019 & 027              C-2                     C    Vacant      3.4
   Sutter Creek                                18-270-010                  C-2(pd)                C(pd)   Vacant    20.86
   Sutter Creek                                44-020-057                    R-4                    RH    Vacant     2.05
                                   18-040-004 (partial)) & 18-031-006
   Sutter Creek                                                            C-2(pd)                   C    Vacant     2.78
                                                (partial)
   Sutter Creek                                18-051-002                    C-2                     C    Vacant     0.87
   Sutter Creek                           44-020-095 (partial)               R-4                  RH & I  Vacant     3.73
   Lower Income Subtotal                                                                                            33.69
   Sutter Creek                                18-010-021                    R-1                    RSF   Vacant     5.02
                                  18-112-001, -008, -009 & -010 (partial     R-3                  RSF &
   Sutter Creek                                                                                           Vacant       5
                                                 for all)                (proposed)               RL(pd)
March 2015                                                                                                                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                              C–19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    APPENDIX C RESOURCES
                                                                                                                                                              General
                                                                                                                                               Combining                 Use           Infrastructure Environmental
                              Jurisdiction                                                             APN                              Zone                 Plan Land         Acreage                               School Park Store  Transit
                                                                                                                                               Designation              Status           Available     Constraints
                                                                                                                                                                Use
                                                                                                                                                                C&
                                                                                                                                      R-1 & C-
    Sutter Creek                                                                                  18-210-009                                                  C(pd) &  Vacant     7.77
                                                                                                                                       2(pd)
                                                                                                                                                                RSF
    Sutter Creek                                                                                  18-253-024                             R-1                  RSF/R-1  Vacant     0.95
    Sutter Creek                                                                            18-342-002 & -003                        C-2 & R-4                C & RH   Vacant      1.6
    Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                                                                                                     20.34
    Sutter Creek                                                                                  18-020-031                          R-1(pd)                  RL(pd)  Vacant    23.73
                                                                                                                                     R-1(pd) &                RSF(pd)
    Sutter Creek                                                                     18-140-001 & 18-092-008                                                           Vacant     46.8
                                                                                                                                         R-1                   & RSF
    Sutter Creek                                                                                    multiple                             R-1                  RSF & RL Vacant      30
    Above-Moderate Income Subtotal                                                                                                                                              100.53
    Sutter Creek Totals                                                                                                                                                         154.56
   Notes: (1) Without 25% density bonus. Based on combination of general plan land use designation and zoning district.
   (2) Maximum development potential is based on acres multiplied by maximum density (without density bonus), and then rounded down.
   (3) See individual notes for each site for explanation.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                          March 2015
                                                                                                                                                           C-20
                                                                                                              T:\_GIS\Amador_County\Mxds\Housing_Inventory_2014\Vacant Inventory\Ione.mxd (1/12/2015)
     Legend
              City Limits
     Vacant Parcel Zoning
              C-1 Light Commercial
              R-1a One Family (5.8 du/ac max)
              R-1b One Family (6.7 du/ac max)
              R-2 Limited Multiple Family (14.5 du/ac max)
              R-4 High Density Multiple Family
              PD Planned Development
                                                           Sources: Esri, HERE, DeLorme, USGS, Intermap, increment P Corp., NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI,
                                                           Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri (Thailand), TomTom, MapmyIndia, © OpenStreetMap contributors, and
Source: ESRI.                                              the GIS User Community
                                                                                                                                                                 City of Ione
        0            1,000        2,000
                                                                                                                               Vacant Land Inventory
                      FEET


T:\_GIS\Amador_County\Mxds\Housing_Inventory_2014\Vacant Inventory\Jackson.mxd (1/12/2015)
                                                                                               Legend
                                                                                                        City Limits
                                                                                               Vacant Parcel Zoning
                                                                                                        Residential Suburban
                                                                                                        Residential Single Family
                                                                                                        Residential High Development
                                                                                                        Commercial
                                                                                                        Limited Commercial
                                                                                                        Recreational
                                                                                                        Planned Development Overlay
                                                                                             Source: ESRI.
                                                                                                                                             City of Jackson
                                                                                                       0      1,000    2,000
                                                                                                                                       Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                              FEET

T:\_GIS\Amador_County\Mxds\Housing_Inventory_2014\Vacant Inventory\Sutter Creek.mxd (1/13/2015)
                                                                                                                                  Legend
                                                                                                                                      City Limits
                                                                                                                                  Vacant Land Zoning
                                                                                                                                      R-1 One Family Dwelling
                                                                                                                                      R-3 Limited Multiple Family Dwellings
                                                                                                                                      R-4 Multiple Family Dwellings
                                                                                                                                      R-1/C-2 One Family/Commercial
                                                                                                                                      C-2/R-4 Commercial/Multifamily
                                                                                                                                      C-2 Commercial
                                                                                                                                      Planned Development Overlay
                                                                                                  Source: ESRI.
                                                                                                                                                       City of Sutter Creek
                                                                                                            0     1,000   2,000
                                                                                                                                                    Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                                  FEET

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
CITY OF IONE
                                                                                                                   Continue, Modify
                                    Housing Action                                       Accomplishments
                                                                                                                    or Delete Action
 Action H-1.1.1: Building Code Review. The City will continue to annually review
 the City’s building codes for current compliance and adopt the necessary         Completed on an annual
 revisions so as to further local development objectives.                         basis. The 2013 California
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, Building Inspector, City Planner, and        Building Code was adopted        Continue.
 City Council                                                                     in 2014 consistent with state
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                     law.
 Schedule: Annual evaluation of the adequacy of the City’s building codes
 Action H-1.2.1: Zoning Code Revision and Update. A complete review of the
 Zoning Code is necessary to ensure its compliance with new State zoning          Completed.        The       City
 regulations. The Zoning Code shall be updated to meet new State regulations.     completed a comprehensive
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, City Engineer, Planning        Zoning Code update in
                                                                                                                   Delete.
 Commission, City Council                                                         November 2009 and has
                                                                                  made         some         minor
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                     amendments since.
 Schedule: A complete update by August 2009
 Action H-1.3.1: Development Processing System Review Program. Complex
 processing procedures in permit issuance can be a major obstacle in housing
 development, especially for affordable housing projects that are under tight
 timelines imposed by state and federal funding programs. Minimize processing
 time for development permits, especially those for affordable residential
 projects and those which conform to City development requirements.
                                                                                  Completed      on  an    annual
 The City will continue to monitor the development processing/review                                               Continue.
                                                                                  basis.
 procedures to minimize the time required for review. This reduction in time will
 reduce the cost to developers and may increase the housing production in
 the City. The City will, on an annual basis, review and update as necessary its
 Framework for Planning, Entitlement Review, and Development.                This
 document is a tool for staff, developers, and decision makers in understanding
 how to effectively navigate through the City’s development process.
March 2015                                                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                          City of Ione
                                                                  D-1

                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                      Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                            Accomplishments
                                                                                                                       or Delete Action
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Schedule: Annually
 Action H-2.1.1: Density Bonus Program. Review the City’s density bonus               The City’s density bonus
 program to ensure its consistency with State density bonus law. If any               program (codified in Zoning
 discrepancies are found, the City’s density bonus ordinance will be amended          Code Section 17.46) was
 and updated to State minimum standards.                                              updated to be consistent with
                                                                                      state density bonus law as      Delete.
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager City Planner, Planning Commission, City
                                                                                      part      of     the      2009
 Council
                                                                                      comprehensive Zoning Code
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                         update.
 Schedule: Ongoing
 Action H-2.2.1: Residential Site Development Program. The supply of
 developable land with adequate infrastructure that is zoned for residential use
 can assist the development of housing in the City. The City will annually ensure
 that there is enough vacant and underutilized residential land in the City to        Completed     on   an   annual
 meet its RHNA allocation.                                                            basis.                          Continue.
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Implementation Schedule: Annually
 Action H-2.2.2: Multifamily Zoning Expansion Program. As part of the General         Implementation of this action
 Plan update, to be completed in August 2009, the City identified land                was completed as part of the
 appropriate to rezone to high density zoning districts. The City has identified      General Plan adoption in
 seven acres in the One-family dwelling residential (R-1a) district to be rezoned     2009. All sites identified in
 to the High Density Multiple-family dwelling residential district. The City has also during the General Plan         Delete.
 identified 1.4 acres of land in the Light Commercial (C-1) district to be rezoned    update and described in
 to the Limited Multiple-family dwelling residential (R-2) district. Specific parcels Action H-2.2.2 were rezoned
 have been identified and are shown in Table HE-41 of the Housing Needs               to High Density Multiple-family
 Assessment (Appendix A).                                                             residential      or       Light
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                               March 2015
City of Ione
                                                                      D-2

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                  Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                      Accomplishments
                                                                                                                  or Delete Action
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, City Council and Planning    Commercial.
 Commission.
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Schedule:    August 2009, consecutively with the adoption of the Housing
 Element
 Action H-2.2.3: Wastewater Capacity. The City is committed to ensuring that    Progress has been made
 there is enough wastewater treatment capacity to support its fair share of the towards implementing this
 region's housing needs. The City is working towards updating its Wastewater    action.     The     wastewater
 Master Plan and anticipates adoption of the updated plan by the end of 2009.   upgrades        project    has
 The Master Plan will call for phased improvements to the City's sewer service. changed significantly since
 Contingent upon Regional Water Quality Control Board approval, the City        2009. The current approach
 anticipates initiating construction of sewer treatment improvements within 18  (construction that is being
 months of General Plan adoption. To comply with Government Code Section        completed now) is to provide
 65589.7 the City shall grant a priority for the provision of these services to more disposal space through
 proposed developments that include housing units affordable to lower income    land application. This allows
 households (Cross Reference: Goal PF-5 and related policies and actions)       the City to drain the various
 Responsible Agencies: City Council, City Manager, Wastewater Operator, City    percolation      ponds     and   Modify to reflect
 Engineer, City Planner                                                         complete      the    necessary   current    project
                                                                                maintenance on a regular         status        and
 Funding Source: Wastewater Fund                                                                                 continue.
                                                                                basis.    By completing the
 Schedule: Dependent upon RWQCB approval, construction stating by February      maintenance and moving to
 2011                                                                           land application, the City is
                                                                                able to increase capacity to
                                                                                (1) satisfy existing approved
                                                                                development;       (2)   satisfy
                                                                                development         agreement
                                                                                commitments; and (3) satisfy
                                                                                RHNA                 obligation
                                                                                (approximately 1,000 units).
                                                                                The    City    complies    with
                                                                                Government Code Section
March 2015                                                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                        City of Ione
                                                                 D-3
                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                   Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                       Accomplishments
                                                                                                                   or Delete Action
                                                                                 65589.7 by granting priority for
                                                                                 the provision of wastewater
                                                                                 services    to    lower-income
                                                                                 housing developments.
 Action H-2.2.4: Potable Water Capacity. The City is committed to ensuring       The City continues to work
 that there is enough potable water to support its fair share of the region's    with Amador Water Agency
 housing needs. The City will continue to work collaboratively with the region's to address this issue, but the
 potable water provider, Amador Water Agency, to identify both short and         timing has been pushed out
 long-term viable and cost effective solutions to maintaining potable water      given the change in market
 availability in the City. (Cross Reference: Goal PF-4 and related policies and  conditions. The need is not as   Continue.
 actions)                                                                        urgent.    Sufficient capacity
 Responsible Agencies: City Council, City Manager, City Engineer, City Planner   remains to meeting current
                                                                                 development         obligations,
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                    including RHNA. This action
 Schedule: On-going, target completion of upgrades by 2014                       will be continued.
 Action H-3.1.1: Housing Rehabilitation Program. The City will continue to                                        Modify to remove
 pursue grant opportunities to create a Rental Rehabilitation Program. The                                        reference to the
 City will apply for HOME funding for this program and consider applying for                                      Redevelopment
 CDBG funding for this program. Once the Redevelopment Area has been                                              Agency and Low
 established, the City will consider allocating a portion of the Low and         This action is ongoing. City     and       Moderate
 Moderate Housing Fund for housing rehabilitation.                               staff is researching status of   Housing Fund and
                                                                                 any grants or other funding      continue.
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Council
                                                                                 received.                        This will now be a
 Funding Source: CDBG, HOME, Redevelopment Agency Low and Moderate
                                                                                                                  joint
 Income Housing (RDA Low-Mod funds) Fund
                                                                                                                  Cities/County
 Schedule: 2012, Annually apply for CDBG, PTA grants, HOME applications,                                          Housing Element
 and use RDA Low-Mod funds if a Redevelopment Agency is established.                                              program.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                            March 2015
City of Ione
                                                                 D-4
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                   Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                                   or Delete Action
 Action H-3.2.1: Ione Beautification (Code Enforcement) Program. The City      The     Ione     Beautification
 currently handles violations of its Municipal Code on a demand-driven basis.  Program is ongoing and will
 Staff responds to housing code complaints initiated by Ione tenants. The City be continued. The City has
 plans to sponsor debris hauling and clean-up programs and plans to limit the  received     three     or     four
 number of garage sales permitted during the year.                             complaints since adoption of
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Building Inspector, Police Chief,    the previous Housing Element.
                                                                                                                  Continue.
 City Planner                                                                  They have not been resolved.
                                                                               City staff is researching
 Funding Source: General Fund
                                                                               current rehabilitation needs in
 Schedule: Ongoing as complaints are received; debris hauling and cleanup      the City. Debris hauling and
 program biannually.                                                           the      cleanup       program
                                                                               continue to occur biannually.
 Action H-4.1.1: Affordable Housing Development Program. City staff shall      Coordination      with     Mercy
 continue to coordinate with the appropriate entities, such as Mercy Housing   Housing or other builders of
 of California, once during the planning period or as projects come onboard    affordable housing did not         Continue.
 that could provide housing and services for lower-income households and       occur during the previous          This will now be a
 take the appropriate steps to recommend that the City Council formally        Housing Element planning           joint
 execute an agreement or letter of understanding with these entities.          period due to the slow             Cities/County
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager                                            housing market. The City is        Housing Element
                                                                               available to coordinate if         program.
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                  opportunities arise in the
 Schedule: Once during the planning period or as projects come onboard         future.
 Action H-4.2.1: State and Federal Housing Programs. The City will apply for                                      Continue.
 funding as NOFAs are released for the development of affordable housing       The City applied for and
                                                                               received     funding      for   a  This will now be a
 units. (Cross reference: ED 4.2.1)
                                                                               housing condition survey in        joint
 Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager                                                                   Cities/County
                                                                               2010. The actual survey work
 Funding Source: All available federal, state and local sources                was not pursued.                   Housing Element
 Schedule: Ongoing                                                                                                program.
March 2015                                                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                           City of Ione
                                                                D-5
                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                       Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                          Accomplishments
                                                                                                                       or Delete Action
 Action H-4.3.1: First-Time Homebuyers Down Payment Assistance Program.                                               Continue.
 Continue to use CDBG funding for the First-time Homebuyer Program in the         The City is researching any
                                                                                  first-time          homebuyer       This will now be a
 City.
                                                                                  assistance provided during          joint
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, Mercy Housing California                                                         Cities/County
                                                                                  the previous Housing Element
 Funding Source: CDBG                                                             planning period.                    Housing Element
 Schedule: Ongoing, on an annual basis when funds are available                                                       program.
 Action H-4.4.1: Redevelopment Project Area Creation. The City has initiated
 the creation of a Redevelopment Agency and will work to establish a              Due to the elimination of
 redevelopment project area.                                                      redevelopment agencies by
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Attorney, City Council                  the state in 2011, this action is   Delete.
                                                                                  no longer applicable and will
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                     be deleted.
 Schedule: August 2011-2012
 Action H-4.5.1: Infill Development Program.        Infill development is one
 technique in meeting the housing needs required by expanding populations.
 The City will encourage the use of vacant small individual lots in the central   No constraints have been
 City by reviewing, and amending as appropriate, development standards to         identified that constrain infill
 accommodate housing development.                                                 development and as a result
 The City will encourage the use of infill for the development of housing by      no standards have been
 addressing density requirements, which may constrain the development of          changed.       Reduction       of
                                                                                                                      Continue.
 housing on infill lots, and if necessary remove those constraints. The City will impact       fees    for     infill
 consider reduced impact fees for infill development. (Cross reference: PF 1.3)   development projects did not
                                                                                  occur during the previous
 Responsible Agencies: City Planner, City Manager, Planning Commission, City
                                                                                  Housing Element planning
 Council
                                                                                  period.
 Funding Source: City General Fund
 Schedule: December 2010
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                March 2015
City of Ione
                                                                 D-6
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                  Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                        Accomplishments
                                                                                                                   or Delete Action
 Action H-4.6.1: Affordable Housing Program. To encourage the development          No projects utilized the
 and availability of housing affordable to a broad range of households with        Affordable Housing Program
 varying income levels throughout Ione, the City requires that residential         during the previous Housing
 projects of ten or more units include five percent of the units in the project as Element planning period. A
 affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. Developers         nexus    study    was      not
 of less than ten housing units are exempt from this requirement.                  completed. This action will be
 Developers of ten or more housing units shall provide the following:              continued.
 In a rental housing project of ten or more units two percent of the units shall
 be affordable to very low -income households, two percent shall be
 affordable to low-income households and one percent shall be affordable to
 moderate-income households.
 In a for-sale project of ten or more units two percent shall be affordable to
 low-income households and three percent shall be affordable to moderate-
 income households.
 Affordable units shall be built on site and must be comparable in infrastructure
 (including wastewater, water and other utilities), construction quality, and                                     Continue.
 exterior design to the market-rate residential units. Affordable units may be
 smaller in aggregate size and have different interior finishes and features than
 market-rate units, so long as the interior features are durable, of good quality,
 and consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. The number of
 bedrooms should be the same as those in the market-rate units, except that if
 the market-rate units provide more than three bedrooms, the affordable units
 need not provide more than three bedrooms
 All affordable units must be constructed and occupied concurrently with or
 prior to the construction and occupancy of market-rate units. In phased
 developments, the affordable units must be evenly distributed throughout the
 development and will be constructed and occupied in proportion to the
 number of units in each phase of the residential development
 Deed restrictions shall be provided to assure that rental units developed for
 very low-, low- and moderate-income persons will remain affordable for 55
 years and ownership units developed for low- and moderate-income units will
March 2015                                                                       2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                         City of Ione
                                                                   D-7
                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                     Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                    Accomplishments
                                                                                                     or Delete Action
 remain affordable for 45 years.
 If an owner sells an affordable unit before the end of the 45 year resale
 restriction term, the owner shall repay the City/ subsidy balance. The balance
 is any remaining principal and accrued interest after the subsidy has been
 reduced as defined in the Buyer’s Resale Agreement (to be determined at
 the time of purchase).
 Per the deed restriction of the affordable units, all affordable units resold shall
 be required to be sold to an income-eligible household.
 The City will develop and maintain a waiting list of eligible persons wishing to
 purchase or occupy an affordable housing unit.
 Alternatives
 Payment of an in-lieu fee for ownership or rental units may be acceptable
 and the amount of in-lieu fees shall be established by a nexus study to be
 completed by June of 2010. The money will then be placed into an affordable
 housing trust fund. The City will develop a set of priorities for the use of
 Housing Trust Fund monies once the Housing Trust Fund is established (Action
 H-4.7.1).
 If the developer is permitted to dedicate land for the development of
 affordable units in satisfaction of part or all of its affordable housing
 requirement, the agreement shall identify the site of the dedicated land and
 shall provide for the implementation of such dedication in a manner deemed
 appropriate and timely by the City.
 Incentives
 Possible incentives that may be included but are not limited to the following:
 Assistance with accessing and apply for funding (based on availability of
 federal, state, local foundations, and private funds);
 Mortgage-subsidy or down payment assistance programs to assist first time
 homebuyers and other qualifying households, when such funds are available;
 Expedited/streamlined application processing and development review;
 Modification of development requirements, such as reduced set backs and
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                             March 2015
City of Ione
                                                                   D-8

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                    Continue, Modify
                                    Housing Action                                        Accomplishments
                                                                                                                    or Delete Action
 parking standards on a case-by-case basis; and
 Density Bonuses.
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, and
 City Council.
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Schedule: Implement as residential projects are processed through the
 Planning Department. Nexus study to be completed by June 2010.
 Action H-4.7.1: Affordable Housing Trust Fund. The City will develop an
 Affordable Housing Trust Fund with fund that will be acquired through in-lieu
 fees as a part of the Affordable Housing Program (Action H-4.6.1). Once funds
 start being collected, the City will develop a priority list for the use of these                                 Continue.
 funds.                                                                             The City has not established   This will now be a
 Additionally, the City will apply for matching funds from the Local Housing Trust  an Affordable Housing Trust    joint
 Fund Matching Grant Program though the State Housing and Community                 Fund. This action will be      Cities/County
 Development Department (HCD).                                                      continued.                     Housing Element
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, and                                        program.
 City Council.
 Funding Source: In-lieu fees collected from Action H-4.6.1
 Schedule: Develop a Trust Fund by June 2010.
 Action H-5.1.1: Persons with Disabilities Access.        In May 2009 the City      The update to the definition   Modify to remove
 established a reasonable accommodation procedure (section 17.10.060 of             of family was completed with   the         required
 the City’s Zoning Code) to ensure a fair and efficient process for persons with    adoption of the Zoning Code    amendment          to
 disabilities to make necessary accessibility adjustments to their homes. The       amendments in November         update           the
 City shall ensure that reasonable accommodations to persons with disabilities      2009.     The      reasonable  definition         of
 are provided as required under Senate Bill 520 (Chapter 671 of the                 accommodations          permit family          and
 Government Code).            The City shall annually review its Reasonable         process     was      reviewed  continue.
 Accommodations permit process for consistency with State law. To further           regularly during the previous
 comply with SB 520, the City will update its definition of family to state “One or Housing Element planning
 more persons living together in a dwelling unit, with common access to, and        period and no need for
 common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit.”     amendments was identified
March 2015                                                                        2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                            City of Ione
                                                                     D-9

                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                     Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                           Accomplishments
                                                                                                                      or Delete Action
 Responsible Agencies: City Planner, City Manager                                   and no changes to Section
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                       17.10.060 have been made.
 Schedule: Ongoing, provide an updated definition of family by August 2010.         In addition, no requests for
                                                                                    reasonable accommodation
                                                                                    were received.
 Action H-5.2.1: Large Family Housing Program. Renter households with seven
 or more persons do not have an adequate number of dwelling possibilities in
 the City. The number of large rental housing units is very limited in the City and
 as such large renter households cannot obtain adequate housing.
                                                                                    No requests for incentives for
 The City will continue to provide incentives, such as modifications to             large family housing were
 development standards, and regulatory incentives for the development of            made during the previous         Continue.
 rental housing units with four or more bedrooms.                                   Housing Element planning
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission and          period.
 City Council
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Schedule: Ongoing
 Action H-5.3.1: Identification of Sites for Emergency Shelters and Transitional
 and Supportive Housing.                                                            Emergency       shelters    are
 Emergency Shelters                                                                 allowed by right in the M-1
 California Health and Safety Code (Section 50801) defines an emergency             and      M-2    districts  and
 shelter as “housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that     transitional and supportive
 is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No             housing are allowed in the
 individual or households may be denied emergency shelter because of an             same way residential uses are    Delete
 inability to pay.”                                                                 allowed in all zones in the city
                                                                                    that allow residential uses. No
 The City allows emergency shelters in the Limited Manufacturing (M-1) Zoning
                                                                                    development standards for
 District as a use permitted by right without a conditional use permit or other
                                                                                    emergency shelters have
 discretionary review. The M-1 district is within close proximity to schools, parks
                                                                                    been established.
 and the downtown area which includes the City Market. After the General
 Plan and Zoning Code Updates, the City will have approximately 70 acres
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                              March 2015
City of Ione
                                                                    D-10

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                     Continue, Modify
                                  Housing Action                                             Accomplishments
                                                                                                                      or Delete Action
 available in the Limited Manufacturing Zoning District.
 In addition, the City will evaluate adopting development and managerial
 standards that will be consistent with Government Code Section 65583(a)(4).
 These standards may include such items as:
 Lighting
 On-site management
 Maximum number of beds or persons to be served nightly by the facility
 Off-street parking based on demonstrated need
 Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation
 Transitional and Supportive Housing
 Transitional and supportive housing provides temporary housing often with
 supportive services to formerly homeless persons for a period that is typically
 between six months and two years. The supportive services, such as job
 training, rehabilitation, and counseling, help individuals gain life skills necessary
 for independent living. Both transitional and supportive housing types are
 allowed as permitted uses subject to only the same restrictions on residential
 uses contained in the same type of structure.
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, and
 City Council
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Schedule: Ongoing
 Action H-5.4.1: Extremely Low-Income Households. AB 2634 requires the City to
 identify zoning to encourage and facilitate housing suitable for extremely low-       No incentives or funding were
 income households, which includes supportive housing and single-room                  used for development of
 occupancy units. The City will continue to allow single-room occupancy units          extremely          low-income
                                                                                                                     Continue.
 (SROs) to be permitted in the Multiple-family dwelling (R 3) and High Density         housing units during the
 Multiple-family dwelling (R-4) zoning districts with a conditional use permit.        previous Housing Element
 In addition, to encourage and facilitate the development of housing                   planning period.
 affordable to extremely low-income households, the City will prioritize funding
March 2015                                                                           2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                            City of Ione
                                                                     D-11
                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                      Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                          Accomplishments
                                                                                                                      or Delete Action
 and offer financial incentives and regulatory concessions.
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, City
 Council
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Schedule:      Ongoing, as projects are processed through the Planning
 Department.
 Action H-5.5.1: Senior Housing Program. To encourage the development of            No density bonuses were
 affordable senior projects, the City will offer density bonuses, help interested   obtained for affordable senior
 developers apply for government financing and/or other government                  housing projects during the
 subsidies, assist interested developers in acquiring surplus government land       previous Housing Element
 suitable for multifamily development, expedite permit processing, consider         planning period nor did any
 reducing parking standards and lot sizes, and consider waiving impact fees for     affordable senior projects
                                                                                                                     Continue.
 low-income dwelling units. (Cross reference: ED 1.5, PF 1.3)                       secure government funding
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, City        or land, receive expedited
 Council                                                                            processing, reduced parking
                                                                                    or lot size standards, or waiver
 Funding Source: General Fund
                                                                                    of fees. This action will be
 Schedule: Ongoing                                                                  continued.
 Action H-5.6.1: Female Head of Household Housing Program. Female-headed
 households, with children under 18 years of age, are one of the fastest
 growing special housing needs group in the City. Many times these                                                   Continue.
 households do not have sufficient income to acquire adequate housing.
                                                                                                                     This will now be a
 The City will identify nonprofits, transitional shelter providers, battered spouse                                  joint
 assistance providers, and any other assistance-type providers which may offer      Implementation of this action
                                                                                                                     Cities/County
 services for female heads of households. The City will contact these service       by the City is ongoing.
                                                                                                                     Housing Element
 providers in an attempt to ascertain the specific services and housing needed                                       program.
 for this special needs group. The City will assist in the development of housing
 for this group by considering offering incentives such as fee reduction or
 waivers, funding assistance, if possible, fast-tracking development plans,
 and/or any other assistance deemed feasible by the City. (Cross reference: PF
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                               March 2015
City of Ione
                                                                     D-12
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                     Continue, Modify
                                   Housing Action                                         Accomplishments
                                                                                                                     or Delete Action
 1.3)
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, City
 Council
 Funding Source: General Fund, CDBG, HOME
 Schedule: Annually
 Action H-5.6.2: Child Care Program. In cooperation with private developers,
 the City will evaluate on a case by case basis the feasibility of pairing a child No affordable multi-family
 care center in conjunction with affordable, multifamily housing developments      housing       projects     were
 or nearby to major residential subdivisions.                                      constructed in conjunction
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, City       with or near a child care        Continue
 Council                                                                           center during the previous
                                                                                   Housing Element planning
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                      period.
 Schedule: Ongoing
 Action H-6.1.1: Housing Discrimination and Housing Equal Opportunity.             No discrimination complaints
 Continue to coordinate and refer interested persons to the Amador/Tuolumne        were received by the City
 Community Action Agency. The City will act as an independent third party to       during the previous Housing
 discrimination complaints and shall maintain a file for the purpose of recording  Element planning period. The     Combine         with
 information about any alleged violations of State or federal fair housing         City     will   continue      to Action       H-6.1.2
 requirements. The City will support housing equal opportunity programs by         coordinate        and      refer and continue.
 providing informational fair housing brochures available to the public at City    interested persons to the
 Hall, public library, and other public places as appropriate.                     Amador-Tuolumne                  This will now be a
                                                                                   Community Action Agency          joint
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager                                                                                 Cities/County
                                                                                   and maintain records of
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                                                       Housing Element
                                                                                   potential violations if needed.
 Schedule: Ongoing                                                                 City staff is researching the    program.
                                                                                   availability of providing fair
                                                                                   housing brochures at public
                                                                                   buildings in Ione.
March 2015                                                                       2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                             City of Ione
                                                                  D-13
                 APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                  Continue, Modify
                                 Housing Action                                         Accomplishments
                                                                                                                  or Delete Action
 Action H-6.1.2: Continue Ione’s Fair Housing Practices in All Housing
 Development. The City shall continue to require and enforce of all residential                                  Combine        with
 development, whether it be new or rehabilitated, public or private, fair                                        Action       H-6.1.1
 housing practices as required by State and federal fair housing laws. Any and   No     cases     of    housing  and continue.
 all occurrences of housing discrimination will be recorded and steps will be    discrimination        occurred  This will now be a
 taken to correct the situation.                                                 during the previous Housing     joint
 Responsible Agencies: City Administrator, City Council                          Element planning period.        Cities/County
                                                                                                                 Housing Element
 Funding Source: General Fund
                                                                                                                 program.
 Schedule: Ongoing
 Action H-7.1.1: Implement State Energy Conservation Standards. The Building
 Inspector will continue to be responsible for implementing the State’s energy
 conservation standards (e.g., Title 24 Energy Standards). This includes                                         Continue.
 checking of building plans and other written documentation showing                                              This will now be a
 compliance and the inspection of construction to ensure that the dwelling       Implementation of this action   joint
 units are constructed according to those plans. Applicants for building permits is ongoing. This action will be Cities/County
 must show compliance with the state’s energy conservation requirements at       continued.                      Housing Element
 the time building plans are submitted.                                                                          program.
 Responsible Agencies: Building Inspector
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Schedule: Ongoing
 Action H-7.1.2: Ensure Consistency with Green Building Standards. The City will                                 Continue.
                                                                                 Implementation of this action
 annually ensure that local building codes are consistent with state mandated                                    This will now be a
                                                                                 is ongoing. The 2013 California
 or recommended green building standards. (Cross reference: CO 6.3)                                              joint
                                                                                 Building Code was adopted
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner                                                                Cities/County
                                                                                 in 2014 consistent with state
                                                                                                                 Housing Element
 Funding Source: General Fund                                                    law. This action will be
                                                                                                                 program.
 Schedule: Annually                                                              continued.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                           March 2015
City of Ione
                                                                 D-14

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                              Continue, Modify
                                Housing Action                                         Accomplishments
                                                                                                               or Delete Action
 Action H-7.1.3: Promote Energy Conservation. The City will continue to partner The City continues to promote Continue.
 with PG&E to promote energy saving programs such as, the California            energy     savings   programs
 Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE), the Relief for Energy Assistance through    through gas and electricity
 Community Help (REACH) and the Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA).         bills. This action will be
 (Cross reference: CO 6.4)                                                      continued.
 Responsible Agencies: City Manager, City Planner
 Funding Source: General Fund
 Schedule: Ongoing
March 2015                                                                    2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                     City of Ione
                                                                D-15
                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
CITY OF JACKSON
                                                                                                               Continue, Modify
                 Housing Program                                       Accomplishments
                                                                                                               or Delete Program
 Program 1.1.1: Maintain the General Plan
 Land Use commercial designations and               The Professional Office (PO), Historic Commercial
 zoning classifications to allow for residential    (HC), and Limited Commercial (LC) zoning/General
 uses.      Allowing for mixed use creates          Plan designations all expressly allow for mixed
 housing opportunities that meets the needs         residential and commercial uses. Residential uses are
 of a variety of economic segments of the           also allowed for in the Commercial (C) zone with a    Delete.
 community.                                         Conditional Use Permit. The City allows residential
 Responsible Agencies:               City Planner,  development per their Development Code. This is
 Planning Commission, and City Council              done as a matter of course in the City and this
 Time Frame: Ongoing                                program will be deleted.
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 1.1.2:          Utilize the Resources
 Constraints       and       Priority    Allocation
 ordinance to encourage in-fill housing
 development prior to annexing properties
 within the Sphere of Influence.               The
 allocation ordinance requires the Planning         The Resources Constraints and Priority Allocation
 Commission and City Council to consider            ordinance was suspended in 2012, 2013, and 2014
 infill projects prior to projects in the Sphere    due to a lack of any type of residential development. Modify    to    reflect  the
 of Influence and also promotes higher              The Planning Commission and City Council will         ongoing suspension      and
 density development, and therefore more            continue to monitor the need for growth control and   continue.
 affordable, which is closer to retail and          reinstate the ordinance when deemed necessary.
 service centers.                                   This program will be modified and continued.
 Responsible Agencies:               City Planner,
 Planning Commission, and City Council
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                               March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                                     D-16
 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                     Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                               Accomplishments
                                                                                                    or Delete Program
 Program 1.1.3: The City’s Development
 Code includes provisions for planned
 developments, which serve to maximize the
 use of the land. The City will continue to
 use this zoning tool where applicable and  The Planned Development (PD) overlay has been
 appropriate, and implemented as a          maintained. No planned developments were
 continuous program by the City Planning                                                        Continue.
                                            created or implemented during the previous
 Commission and Council.                    planning period.
 Responsible Agencies:       City Planner,
 Planning Commission, and City Council
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 1.1.4: The City will continue to
 utilize development agreements as they
 formally    document      work    to   be
 accomplished, timing and/or sequencing,
 and require bonding to guarantee task
 completion. These agreements serve to      Due to the lack of housing developments during the
 ensure “fair-share” funding of off-site    previous planning period, there has been no need to
 improvements and thus minimize additional                                                      Continue.
                                            utilize development agreements. This program will
 construction costs from being passed onto  be continued.
 the housing consumer.
 Responsible Agencies: City Planner, City
 Engineer, and City Council
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: Application Fees
March 2015                                                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                            City of Jackson
                                                            D-17

                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                             Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                             or Delete Program
 Program 1.1.5: The City will continue to
 annually review the City’s building codes
 for current compliance and adopt the            In December 2013 the City Council adopted the
 necessary revisions so as to further local      2013 California Building Code . The city amended the
 development objectives.                                                                               Incorporate Program 5.1.2
                                                 code by adding a 20-pound snow load and requiring
                                                                                                       into this program and
 Responsible Agencies: Building Inspector,       Class “A” roofing. The City reviews the codes every
                                                                                                       continue.
 City Planner, and City Council                  three years as mandated by the state. This program
 Time Frame:       Annual evaluation of the      will be continued.
 adequacy of the City’s building codes
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 1.1.6:         In compliance with
 Government Code Section 65400, the City
 shall annually review the General Plan and
                                                 The City has not had the resources to complete
 report on the implementation of its
                                                 annual reviews during the previous planning period.
 programs to the City Council, the California                                                          Continue.
                                                 The City plans to complete annual reviews as
 Office of Planning and Research, and the                                                              This will now be a joint
                                                 resources allow in the future. This program will be
 California Department of Housing and                                                                  Cities/County        Housing
                                                 continued.
 Community Development.                                                                                Element program.
 Responsible Agencies: Building Inspector,
 City Planner, and City Manager
 Time Frame: Annually
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 1.2.1: The City is committed to         The Resources Constraints and Priority Allocation
 ensuring that there is enough potable water     ordinance was suspended in 2012, 2013, and 2014
 to support its fair share of the City’s housing due to a lack of any type of residential development
 needs (including the Sphere of Influence).      during the previous planning period.
                                                                                                       Continue.
 The     City    will   continue      to   work  The City maintains a contract with the Amador Water
 collaboratively with the region’s potable       Agency (AWA) which essentially allows for first come,
 water provider, the Amador Water Agency,        first served service.     Additionally, the City has
 to identify both short- and long-term           continued to work with the AWA on its future water
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                            March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                                  D-18

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                            Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                           or Delete Program
 viability and cost effective solutions to      availability planning. This program will be continued.
 maintaining potable water availability in
 the City. Additionally, the City will continue
 to review water resources through
 implementation of the City’s Resource
 Constraints     and      Priority   Allocation
 Ordinance that is intended to ensure that
 there is adequate water supply for new
 housing development in the City of Jackson
 with preference given to affordable
 housing projects.
 Responsible Agencies: City Engineer, City
 Planner,     City    Manager,         Planning
 Commission, and City Council
 Time Frame: Annual review of the City’s
 resources
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 1.2.2: The City is committed to
 ensuring that there is enough wastewater       The Resources Constraints and Priority Allocation
 treatment capacity to support its housing      ordinance was suspended in 2012, 2013, and 2014
 needs. Annual implementation of the City’s     due to a lack of any type of residential development
 Resource Constraints and Priority Allocation   during the previous planning period.
 Ordinance is intended to ensure that there     The City has a commitment (via two Tentative
 is adequate wastewater treatment for new       Subdivision Maps) for approximately 110 new single-
 housing development in the City of Jackson                                                            Continue.
                                                family residential homes.      The City continues to
 with preference given to affordable            monitor sewer availability on an annual basis. The
 housing projects.                              water treatment plant is permitted to process .71
 Responsibility: City Engineer, City Planner,   mgd average dry weather flow. The City is currently
 City Manager, Planning Commission, and         utilizing .405 mgd average dry weather flow. This
 City Council                                   program will be continued.
March 2015                                                                       2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                   City of Jackson
                                                                  D-19

                 APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                          Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                 Accomplishments
                                                                                                         or Delete Program
 Time Frame: Annual review of the City’s
 resources
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 1.3.1: The City will continue to
 implement the Resource Constraints and
 Priority Allocation Ordinance to include
 child care centers in or around new         No child care centers have been created in or
 development.                                around new development due to a lack of any type
                                                                                                     Continue.
 Responsibility:     City Planner,  Planning of residential development during the previous
 Commission, and City Council                planning period. This program will be continued.
 Time Frame: Annually
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 2.1.1: The City shall maintain an
 inventory of sites suitable for affordable
 housing projects and provide this inventory
 to funding agencies. This inventory does
 have properties zoned for mixed use. To
 ensure sufficient residential capacity is
 maintained       within   this   zone    to The City has maintained the inventory of sites suitable
 accommodate the identified need, the        for affordable housing projects. No sites in the mixed-
 City will develop and implement a formal    use areas were developed and resulted in a              Continue.
 ongoing (project-by-project) evaluation     reduction of residential capacity during the previous
 procedure pursuant to Government Code       planning period. This program will be continued.
 Section 56863.      Should an approval of
 commercial development result in a
 reduction of capacity within mixed use
 zones below the residential capacity
 needed to accommodate the remaining
 need for lower-income households, the City
 will identify and zone sufficient sites to
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                        March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                              D-20

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                            Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                    Accomplishments
                                                                                                            or Delete Program
 accommodate the shortfall on land zoned
 exclusively for residential multifamily use
 allowing at least 20 dwelling units per acre.
 Responsibility: City Planner
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 2.1.2: The City shall continue to
 coordinate with appropriate entities, such
 as Mercy Housing of California and
 Connerly & Associates, once during the
 planning period or as projects are             Connerly & Associates has dissolved.       The City
 contemplated        which    could    provide  Council is now working with California Engineering
 housing and services for lower-income          Company on its HOME Investment Partnership
 households. Appropriate steps will be taken                                                          Modify program to remove
                                                Program. A formal agreement has not been              reference to Connerly &
 to recommend that the City Council             established; however, the City will continue to
 formally execute an agreement or letter of                                                           Associates and continue.
                                                communicate with the California Engineering
 understanding with these entities to pursue    Company and other appropriate entitles regarding      This will now be a joint
 funding for the provision of housing and       services for low-income households.                   Cities/County        Housing
 services for lower-income households.                                                                Element program.
                                                Funding for the provision of housing and services for
 Responsibility:     City  Planner   and   City low-income households has not been pursued during
 Manager                                        the previous planning period. This program will be
 Time Frame: Annually with the release of       modified and continued.
 the California Department of Housing and
 Community Development’s Notice of
 Funding Availability (NOFA)
 Funding: General Fund
March 2015                                                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                    City of Jackson
                                                                  D-21

                 APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                             Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                             or Delete Program
 Program 2.1.3: The City will amend Section
 17.32    (Affordable      Housing)    of    the
 Development Code to require a portion of
 new development to provide for housing
 opportunities for Extremely Low-Income
 Households.         Amendments        to    the
 Affordable Housing Ordinance could
 include the following:                          In February 2014, the City Council amended Section
                                                 17.32 of the Development Code to require portions
    Permit streamline provisions;
                                                 of new development to provide for housing              Delete.
    Flexible development standards;             opportunities for extremely low-income households.
    Fee reductions for ELI developers; and
    Policies to prioritize funding for projects
     that benefit ELI households.
 Responsibility:     City   Planner   and   City
 Manager
 Time Frame: 2013
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 2.1.4: The City will continue to
 implement the Section 17.32 (Affordable
 Housing) of the Development Code. This
 ordinance requires subdivisions of ten or
 more parcels to provide ten percent             This program has not been implemented, although
 inclusionary affordable housing.                the City does allow density bonuses. This program will Continue.
 Responsibility:     City Planner,     Planning  be continued.
 Commission, and City Council
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                            March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                                  D-22

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                              Continue, Modify
                 Housing Program                                      Accomplishments
                                                                                                             or Delete Program
 Program 2.1.5: The City will annually review
 its fees for development permits in order
 that they represent a fair charge for review
 and processing of applications. Review of         The City Council recently updated the local traffic
 charges implemented by the City Manager           impact fee which went into effect July 1, 2014. Other
 on an “as needed” basis.                                                                                Continue.
                                                   development fees will continue to be reviewed as
 Responsibility:      City Manager and City        needed.
 Council
 Time Frame: Annually
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 2.1.6: To assist the development of
 housing for lower income households on
 larger sites, the City will facilitate land
 divisions, lot line adjustments, and specific
 plans resulting in parcel sizes that facilitate
 multifamily developments affordable to
 lower income households. The City will work
 with property owners and non-profit
 developers to target and market the               Due to the downturn in the economy, there have
 availability of sites with the best potential for been no new housing developments during the
 development. In addition, the City will offer     planning period. Incentives are available to          Continue.
 incentives for        the development          of developers that develop inclusionary units per
 affordable       housing     including;  permit   Section 17.32 of the Development Code.
 streamlining, ministerial review of lot line
 adjustments, deferral of subdivision fees,
 technical assistance to acquire funding,
 and      modification        of    development
 requirements consistent with the Planned
 Development Overlay program.
March 2015                                                                       2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                     City of Jackson
                                                                    D-23

                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                Continue, Modify
                 Housing Program                                    Accomplishments
                                                                                                                or Delete Program
 Responsibility: City Planner, City Engineer,
 Planning Commission, and City Council
 Time Frame: On-Going
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 2.2.1: The City will continue to
 actively annually pursue Community                                                                       Incorporate Program 4.1.1
 Development Block Grants for housing            No CDBG funds were awarded to the City of Jackson        into this program and
 rehabilitation.                                 for housing rehabilitation during the plan period. This  continue.
 Responsibility:      City Planner,  Planning    program will be continued.                               This will now be a joint
 Commission, and City Council                                                                             Cities/County        Housing
 Time Frame: Annually                                                                                     Element program.
 Funding: CDBG Funding
 Program 2.3.1: The City will continue to        The City has maintained the Historic Commercial,
 provide for mixed use zoning where              Professional Office, and Limited Commercial zones
 residential is above commercial uses.           which all allow for mixed residential and commercial
 Responsibility:      City Planner,  Planning    uses. The City allows residential development in
 Commission, and City Council                    mixed use zones per its Development Code. This is        Delete.
 Time Frame: Ongoing                             done as a matter of course in the City and this
 Funding: CDBG Funding                           program will be deleted.
 Program 3.1.1: The City shall ensure that                                                                Modify to remove the
 reasonable accommodations to persons                                                                     requirement to update the
 with disabilities are provided as required      Section 17.220 has been updated with a new
                                                                                                          definition of family and
 under Senate Bill 520 (Chapter 671 of the       definition of “family” that complies with state law. The
                                                                                                          include additional detail
 Government Code) by adopting an                 City has not adopted a reasonable accommodation
                                                                                                          about requirements for a
 efficient process for persons with disabilities process for persons with disabilities. This program will
                                                                                                          reasonable
 to      make       necessary      accessibility be modified and continued.
                                                                                                          accommodation         process
 adjustments to their homes. Additionally                                                                 and continue.
 the    definition    of   “family”   in    the
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                               March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                                  D-24

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                        Accomplishments
                                                                                                                or Delete Program
 Development Code will be updated to
 state “One or more persons living together
 in a dwelling unit, with common access to,
 and common use of all living, kitchen, and
 eating areas within the dwelling unit.”
 Responsibility: City Engineer, City Planner,
 Building Inspector, Planning Commission,
 and City Council
 Time Frame: 2013
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 3.2.1: The City shall continue to
 enforce     Section      17.120.060      of    the The City did not receive any claims of discrimination
 Development             Code           prohibiting during the plan period.
 discrimination against emergency shelters          The City allows emergency shelters in the RH zone     Continue.
 and transitional housing.                          and transitional and supportive housing in all        This will now be a joint
 Responsibility:      Building Inspector, City      residential zones. A program is included in the       Cities/County        Housing
 Planner, City Manager, and City Council            Housing Element update to allow transitional and      Element program.
                                                    supportive housing in all other zones that allow
 Time Frame: Ongoing
                                                    residential uses per Senate Bill 2.
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 3.2.2: The City shall continue to
 work      with      the      Amador-Tuolumne
                                                    The City is currently working with the Amador-
 Community Action Agency (A-TCAA) to
                                                    Tuolumne Community Action Agency (ATCAA) on a         Continue.
 find suitable sites for transitional, supportive,
                                                    transitional housing project located on Clinton Road.
 and female heads of households housing.                                                                  This will now be a joint
                                                    The City will continue to meet regularly and support
 The City shall host an annual meeting with                                                               Cities/County        Housing
                                                    ATCAA in their efforts to provide transitional,
 A-TCAA to insure that opportunities for                                                                  Element program.
                                                    supportive and female heads of household housing.
 transitional and special needs housing are
                                                    This program will be continued.
 implemented to the greatest extent
 possible.
March 2015                                                                            2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                        City of Jackson
                                                                      D-25

                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                             Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                             or Delete Program
 Responsibility:     Building Inspector,  City
 Planner, and City Manager
 Time Frame:          Ongoing    with  annual
 meetings
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 3.3.1:        The City will provide
 incentives, such as modifications to
 development standards, and regulatory
 incentives for the development of housing
 units with four or more bedrooms.             No incentives were developed during the planning
                                                                                                       Continue.
 Responsibility:    City   Planner  and   City period. This program will be continued.
 Manager
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 4.1.1: The City will continue to
 apply for HOME and CDBG funding to
 rehabilitate residences for lower-income
 home owners and renters. HOME funds will      In August 2013 the City contracted with California
 be applied for when qualified projects are    Engineering Company, Inc. to provide consulting         Combine      with    Program
 submitted to the City. CDBG funds will be     services for the city’s HOME Investment Partnership     2.2.1, modify to address
 applied for annually. Homeowners will be      Program. Since 2007 two HOME grants have been           current staff resources, and
 notified of CDBG funds via advertising in the awarded. The City has not applied for CDBG funds in     continue.
 local newspaper. Additionally, the Senior     the past six years. The City will apply for CDBG in the This will now be a joint
 Building Official will personally notify      future when staffing resources allow. This program will Cities/County         Housing
 homeowners with properties that are in        be modified and continued.                              Element program.
 disrepair and could benefit from the
 program.
 Responsibility: City Planner, City Manager,
 and City Council
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                            March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                                D-26

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                        Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                        or Delete Program
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 4.2.1: The City’s Development
 Code contains design standards; however,
 these standards do not apply to single-
 family residences. The City shall amend the    In August 2010 the City Council adopted
 Development Code to include design             architectural regulations that apply citywide and
 standards for all residential development.     include development standards for residential     Delete.
 Responsibility: City Planner, Architectural    development. This program has been completed
 Regulations        Committee,        Planning  and will be deleted.
 Commission, and City Council
 Time Frame: Completed August 2010
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 5.1.1: The Building Inspector will
 continue      to     be     responsible    for
 implementing        the     State’s    energy
 conservation standards (Title 24 Energy
 Standards). This includes review of building
 plans     and      written     documentation                                                     Continue.
                                                Permit applications require submittal of Title 24
 demonstrating       compliance      and   the  calculations in compliance with current state     This will now be a joint
 inspection of construction to ensure that      standards. This program will be continued.        Cities/County        Housing
 the    dwelling     units are constructed                                                        Element program.
 according to those plans.
 Responsibility: Building Inspector
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: Building Permit Fees
March 2015                                                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                City of Jackson
                                                                 D-27

                 APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                               Continue, Modify
                Housing Program                                 Accomplishments
                                                                                                               or Delete Program
 Program 5.1.2: The City will annually ensure
 that local building codes are consistent
 with state mandated or recommended                                                                      Combine with Program 1.1.5
                                              The 2013 California Building Code adopted by the           and delete.
 green building standards.                    City Council in December 2013 included green
 Responsibility:    Building Inspector,  City building regulations. This program will be combined        This will now be a joint
 Manager, and City Council                    with Program 1.1.5 and deleted.                            Cities/County         Housing
                                                                                                         Element program.
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 5.1.3: The City will continue to
 partner with Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E)   The City has worked with the Sierra Business Council
 to promote energy saving programs by         (via funding from PG&E) in the preparation of a GHG        Modify      to     specifically
 notifying home builders of the design tools  community action plan. The City already completed          mention energy savings
 offered by PG&E and by posting a link on     a community-wide GHG inventory which was made              related to greenhouse gas
 the City’s website to notify ratepayers of   available on the City’s website. When the action           emissions and continue.
 the variety of programs.                     plan is complete a link will be placed on the City’s       This will now be a joint
 Responsibility: Building Inspector and City  website. As a result of these studies the City will likely Cities/County         Housing
 Manager                                      need to make some policy changes to its General            Element program.
 Time Frame: Ongoing                          Plan.
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 5.1.4: The City shall continue to
 implement the Resource Constraints and
 Priority Allocation Ordinance to ensure      The Resources Constraints and Priority Allocation
 housing developments offer amenities         ordinance was suspended in 2012, 2013, and 2014
 which promote conservation of the City’s     due to a lack of any type of residential development       This    program      will  be
 natural resources and the reduction of       during the planning period. This program will be           combined with Program
 energy use.                                  continued.                                                 1.2.2 and continued.
 Responsibility:     City Planner,  Planning
 Commission, and City Council
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                              March 2015
City of Jackson
                                                               D-28

 APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                           Continue, Modify
               Housing Program                                    Accomplishments
                                                                                                           or Delete Program
 Time Frame: Annually
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 6.1.1: The City shall continue to
 refer concerns or complaints regarding
 discrimination to the Fair Housing Authority
 for Amador County (Amador-Tuolumne
 Community Action Agency). The City will
 act as an independent third party to
 discrimination    complaints     and     shall                                                      Combine with Program 6.1.2
 maintain a file for the purpose of recording                                                        and continue.
 information about any alleged violations of    The City has not received any discrimination
                                                complaints. This program will be continued.          This will now be a joint
 State or federal fair housing requirements.
                                                                                                     Cities/County        Housing
 The City will support housing equal
                                                                                                     Element program.
 opportunity     programs      by    providing
 information available to the public.
 Responsibility:     Building Inspector,   City
 Planner, and City Manager
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
 Program 6.1.2: The City shall frequently
 update information on the City’s Website
 regarding Fair Housing laws and the            This program has not yet been implemented. The City
 process for reporting discrimination.          has not posted information regarding equal
                                                                                                     Delete.
 Responsibility: City Manager                   opportunity for housing on its website. This program
                                                will be combined with Program 6.1.1 and deleted.
 Time Frame: Ongoing
 Funding: General Fund
March 2015                                                                     2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                   City of Jackson
                                                                 D-29

                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
 CITY OF SUTTER CREEK
                                                                                                                           Continue, Modify
                    Housing Program                               Status                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                                          or Delete Program
Goal 1: To provide the City’s regional fair share of new housing for all economic segments of the community.
Program 1-1: The City shall create and maintain a                             The Housing Element includes a
citywide inventory of potential infill sites. The sites shall                 citywide inventory of potential infill
consist of vacant and/or underutilized residentially-                         sites. The inventory list contained in the
zoned lots within the city limits. The City shall make this                   Housing Element is available at the
information available to the public by posting the                            Community Development Department
inventory on the City’s website and providing the                             offices and at Sutter Creek City Hall
inventory at the Community Development Department                             counter, and is posted on the City’s
                                                                                                                         Combine with
counter.                                                                      website,      www.cityofsuttercreek.org.
                                                                                                                         Program 1-2 and
                                                                              The inventory is updated at the time
Responsibility: Community Development Department                                                                         continue.
                                                                              the Housing Element is updated.
Funding: General Fund                                         On- going                                                  This will now be a
                                                                              Between updates of the Housing
                                                                                                                         joint Cities/County
Time Frame: FY 2007                                                           Element, City staff will maintain a
                                                                                                                         Housing Element
                                                                              database of the housing inventory
Quantified Objective: N/A                                                                                                program.
                                                                              with modifications entered each time
                                                                              a building permit or use permit is
                                                                              approved. The Planning staff will post
                                                                              the database on the City website and
                                                                              make available at the City Hall and
                                                                              Community Development counters.
                                                                              This program will be continued.
 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                  March 2015
 City of Sutter Creek
                                                                     D-30

  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                   Continue, Modify
                     Housing Program                        Status                Accomplishments
                                                                                                                  or Delete Program
                                                                      This    program     has     not     been
Program 1-2 The City shall prepare an inventory of
                                                                      implemented. Starting in 2014, City
vacant and/or underutilized commercial, industrial,                                                              Combine with
                                                                      staff will maintain a database of
and public sites that could be potentially redesignated                                                          Program 1-1 and
                                                                      vacant and underutilized land with
for residential use.                                                                                             continue.
                                                                      modifications entered each time a
Responsible      Agencies:  Community      Development  Not addressed building permit or use permit is           This will now be a
Department                                                            approved. Staff will post the database     joint Cities/County
Funding: General Fund                                                 on the City website and make               Housing Element
Time Frame: As needed                                                 available at City Hall and the             program.
                                                                      Community Development counters.
Quantified Objective: N/A
                                                                      This program will be continued.
Program 1-3: The City shall amend the Zoning
Ordinance to provide minimum densities for the R-3
and R-4 zoning districts. The density ranges will be
consecutive and not have overlap or gaps in the                       The City’s Zoning Ordinance was
density range among the various districts allowing                    updated in 2010 and this program was
                                                        Complete                                                 Delete.
residential development.                                              implemented. This program will be
Funding: General Fund                                                 deleted.
Time Frame: 2009
Quantified Objective: Amend R-3 and R-4 districts
Program 1-4: The City shall review its water and sewer                The Amador Water Agency (AWA)
hook-up fees for residential second unit dwellings and                (http://www.amadorwater.org)           is
determine whether or not the rates can be lowered in                                                             Modify to clarify
                                                                      responsible for setting water hook-up      City’s role in
an effort to reduce financial disincentives to the      On-going      fees within the City of Sutter Creek.
development of residential second unit dwellings.                                                                advising on water
                                                                      The City does not have the                 rates and continue.
Responsible      Agencies:  Community      Development                responsibility  for    establishing   or
Department                                                            enforcing water hook-up fees and thus
 March 2015                                                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                              City of Sutter Creek
                                                               D-31

                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                              Continue, Modify
                   Housing Program                         Status             Accomplishments
                                                                                                              or Delete Program
Funding: General Fund                                              does not have the ability to amend or
Time Frame: FY 2007                                                reduce water rates. The City reviews
                                                                   the water rates and provides input on
Quantified Objective: N/A
                                                                   establishing reasonable rates.
                                                                   The City is responsible for establishing
                                                                   sewer hook-up fees.             The City
                                                                   reviewed and updated its sewer rates
                                                                   in 2009. The rates for residential second
                                                                   unit dwellings remained the same
                                                                   based on the City’s evaluation. This
                                                                   program will be modified and
                                                                   continued.
Program 1-5 The City should promote the development                The    City’s    General      Plan    and
of second unit dwellings by publicizing information in             regulations are posted on the City’s
the general application packet and posting                         website     (www.cityofsuttercreek.org)
information on the City's website. The City should                 providing applicants with information
provide information regarding permit requirements,                 on second dwelling units. The City
changes in State law, and benefits of second unit                  provides links on the City website to
dwellings to property owners and the community.                    the    “housing     and      employment
                                                                                                             This will be
                                                                   information” on the County website.
Responsible    Agencies:   Community     Development   On-going                                              combined with
Department                                                         Due to the changing nature of state       Program 1.6.
                                                                   law, grant funding, and the economy,
Funding: General Fund
                                                                   the Planning staff does not maintain a
Time Frame: FY 2007                                                packet of information that would
                                                                   quickly become outdated but works
Quantified Objective:    10   low  income    units, 10
                                                                   with each applicant to inform them of
moderate income units
                                                                   the options available for second unit
                                                                   dwellings. This program will be
 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                     March 2015
 City of Sutter Creek
                                                              D-32

  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                    Continue, Modify
                     Housing Program                          Status              Accomplishments
                                                                                                                   or Delete Program
                                                                      continued. No second units were
                                                                      approved       during     the    previous
                                                                      planning period. The City anticipates
                                                                      some second units will be approved or
                                                                      built during the 2014–2019 planning
                                                                      period due to pending approval of a
                                                                      development       which     will   require
                                                                      inclusion of second units.
Program 1-6 The City shall provide a bibliography of                  City staff researches current available     Modify to reflect
technical assistance resources for second unit dwelling               resources for second unit dwellings to      the City’s current
applicants. The bibliography shall include prototype                  provide to applicants at the time an        approach to
plan sets, instructional video tapes, Internet resources,             inquiry or application is made. The City    providing
and “how to” manuals.                                                 provides links on the City website to       information on
Responsible     Agencies:    Community     Development    Available   the     “housing    and     employment      second units and
Department                                                            information” on the County website.         continue.
Funding: General Fund                                                 This program will be modified and
                                                                                                                  This program will be
                                                                      continued.
Time Frame: FY 2007                                                                                               combined with
Quantified Objective: N/A                                                                                         Program 1.5.
Program 1-7 The City shall review the application                     City     staff   reviews     application-
processing procedures periodically to determine their                 processing procedures annually. In
effectiveness and recommend any necessary                             2012, checklists were developed to
amendments to the Planning Commission.                                assist applicants in meeting the City’s
Responsible Agencies: Community            Development    On-going    requirements.           The      Planning   Continue.
Department, Planning Commission                                       Commission reviewed and agreed to
Funding: General Fund                                                 the use of the recommended
                                                                      checklist.      Recommendations for
Time Frame: Review annually                                           additional modifications by the City
 March 2015                                                                 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                               City of Sutter Creek
                                                                 D-33

                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                Continue, Modify
                   Housing Program                          Status                 Accomplishments
                                                                                                                or Delete Program
Quantified Objective: N/A                                              staff were not made in 2013 or 2014.
                                                                       This program will be continued.
Program 1-8 The City shall continue to periodically                    The     City    has     reviewed    the
review the City's development fees so that they                        development fees periodically. In 2013
represent a fair charge for review and processing of                   the City established fee review as part
permit applications.                                                   of the annual budgeting process.
Responsible Agencies: Community           Development                  Development fees have not been
                                                        On-going                                               Continue.
Department, City Council                                               modified since 1999. The staff is
                                                                       recommending adjustments to fees in
Funding: General Fund
                                                                       2014 to reflect actual costs of
Time Frame: Review every six months                                    processing permits. This program will
Quantified Objective: N/A                                              be continued.
Program 1-9 The City shall amend the Zoning
Ordinance map so that it is consistent with the General
Plan Land Use Diagram.
                                                                       The City’s Zoning Ordinance map was
Responsible     Agencies:Community        Development                  updated in 2010 and is now consistent
Department, City Council, Planning Commission           Complete                                               Delete.
                                                                       with the General Plan Land Use
Funding: General Fund                                                  Diagram. This program will be deleted.
Time Frame: FY 2007
Quantified Objective: N/A
Goal 2: To encourage construction and maintenance of affordable housing in the city.
Program 2-1 The City shall continue to encourage                       This program is implemented on a
developer constructed affordable housing in the large,                 case-by-case       basis    for  major  Combine         with
presently undeveloped portions of the City's planning   On-going       subdivisions. The most recent example   Program 2-2 and
area through use of the Planned Development (PD)                       of implementation of this program was   continue.
land use and zoning designation. The City shall also                   the approval of the Gold Rush Ranch
encourage clustering of units on small lots to reduce                  and Golf Resort Project Specific Plan
 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                       March 2015
 City of Sutter Creek
                                                               D-34

   APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                         Continue, Modify
                    Housing Program                   Status              Accomplishments
                                                                                                        or Delete Program
the cost of lots, housing construction, improvements,         (GRRSP) in 2010.         Public housing
site preparation, and infrastructure.                         benefits provided by the GRRSP are
Responsibility: Community Development Department              highlighted in Chapter 3 of the
                                                              Specific Plan including:
Funding: General Fund
                                                                 Establishment of an affordable
Time Frame: Ongoing
                                                                  housing trust fund for the funding
Quantified Objective: N/A                                         of        affordable        housing,
                                                                  administered by the City.
                                                                 Development of a model home
                                                                  demonstration project for water-
                                                                  conserving      landscapes      and
                                                                  appliances, and energy efficiency.
                                                              Chapter 4 of the Specific Plan,
                                                              Development Concept and Land Use
                                                              Plan includes:
                                                                 Use of the Specific Plan land use
                                                                  designation to include clustering
                                                                  and small lots.
                                                                 Requiring a minimum of 64 second
                                                                  dwelling units.
                                                                 Requiring Attached Residential
                                                                  zoning at 8 to 15 dwelling units per
                                                                  acre located near the County
                                                                  Transit Center.
                                                                 Requiring mixed-use at 15 to 20
                                                                  dwelling units per acre located
                                                                  near the County Transit Center.
                                                                 Requiring 70 homes affordable by
 March 2015                                                         2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                     City of Sutter Creek
                                                         D-35

                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                              Continue, Modify
                     Housing Program                          Status              Accomplishments
                                                                                                              or Delete Program
                                                                           design with the restricted price
                                                                           adjusted annually.
                                                                          Mitigation measure to require
                                                                           compliance with identified low
                                                                           and moderate income affordable
                                                                           housing needs.
                                                                      This program will be continued.
Program 2-2 The City shall require that developers
providing affordable housing units or lots in planned
developments show how the lots or units will be made                  This program is implemented on a
affordable to low- and very low-income households,                    case-by-case       basis    for  major
and maintained as such, prior to approval of a                        subdivisions. The most recent example
                                                                                                             Combine into
development plan or tentative map for the project.                    of implementation of this program is
                                                          On-going                                           Program 2-1 and
Responsible    Agencies:      Community    Development                the approval of the GRRSP in 2010 as
                                                                                                             delete.
Department                                                            discussed under Program 2-1. This
                                                                      program will be combined into the
Funding: General Fund
                                                                      previous program and deleted.
Time Frame: Ongoing
Quantified Objective: N/A
Program 2-3 The City shall adopt a density bonus
                                                                      This program is implemented on a
ordinance pursuant to State Government Code
                                                                      case-by-case       basis    for  major
Section 65915. The City shall follow State Government
                                                                      subdivisions. The most recent example
Code Section 65915, which requires local governments
                                                                      of implementation of this program is
to grant a density bonus of at least 25 percent and an    On-going                                           Continue.
                                                                      approval of the GRRSP. The City has
additional incentive or financially equivalent incentive,
                                                                      not     codified   a     density bonus
to a developer agreeing to construct at least:
                                                                      ordinance. This program will be
•    20 percent of the units for low income households;               continued.
•    10 percent of the units for very low income
  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                    March 2015
  City of Sutter Creek
                                                                 D-36

   APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                               Continue, Modify
                    Housing Program                          Status             Accomplishments
                                                                                                              or Delete Program
    households;
•   10 percent to any condo project that reserves at
    least 20 percent of its units for moderate income
    residents; or
•   50 percent of the units for senior citizens.
Responsible      Agencies:   Community       Development
Department
Funding: General Fund
Time Frame: FY 2007
Quantified Objective: N/A
Program 2-4 The City shall review its fees imposed on                This program is implemented on a
new development and identify those fees that could be                case-by-case     basis    for    major
waived or reduced for new low- and moderate-income                   subdivisions. The fees for the Gold
housing developments.        The City shall adopt an                 Rush Ranch and Golf Resort Project
ordinance to waive or reduce any such fees based on                  Specific   Plan   were    waived     in
City staff’s recommendations.                                        recognition of benefits to the City
Responsible Agencies: Community Development                          committed to by the Development
Department, City Council, Planning Commission                        Agreement, including new low- and
                                                         On-going                                             Continue.
                                                                     moderate-income      housing.       An
Funding: General Fund
                                                                     ordinance has not been adopted to
Time Frame: FY 2007                                                  reduce fees in recognition of the
Quantified Objective: N/A                                            changing      economy,        changing
                                                                     regulations, and the desire to
                                                                     negotiate maximum benefits to the
                                                                     City during project review. This
                                                                     program will be continued.
  March 2015                                                              2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                           City of Sutter Creek
                                                                D-37

                    APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                      Continue, Modify
                     Housing Program                             Status                Accomplishments
                                                                                                                     or Delete Program
Program 2-5 The City shall review its subdivision, zoning,
                                                                           The City Building Code provides
and building codes for unnecessary and costly
                                                                           opportunities for waiving requirements
requirements which could be waived for low-income
                                                                           for low-income housing. This measure
housing. The City shall ensure that any proposed
                                                                           is implemented on a case-by-case
modifications will not create safety hazards, increase
                                                                           basis for major projects. The most
liability, or develop inconsistencies in City regulations or
                                                                           recent example was the approval of
State law. The City shall amend its codes as necessary.      On-going                                               Continue.
                                                                           the GRRSP as described in the
Responsible Agencies: Community Development                                Development Agreement. The City has
Department, City Council, Planning Commission                              reviewed its subdivision, zoning, and
Funding: General Fund                                                      building codes and has continued to
Time Frame: FY 2007                                                        find the requirements are necessary.
                                                                           This program will be continued.
Quantified Objective: N/A
Program 2-6 The City shall continue to pursue all
available funding sources for affordable housing
including annual applications for Federal CDBG and
HOME funds. The City should consider using a portion
of these funds to acquire a site for low-cost housing.
The City should contact non-profit and for-profit low-                     The City has not actively pursued        This will now be a
cost housing developers in an effort to secure                             available funding for affordable         joint Cities/County
development and subsequent management of low-                              housing due to limitations on staff      Housing Element
                                                             Not addressed
cost housing on the acquired site.               Non-profit                availability to conduct the search. This program.
developers/agencies which should be contacted                              program will be modified and
include the California Rural Housing Corporation in                        continued.
Sacramento and the Amador-Tuolumne Community
Action Agency.
Responsible Agencies: Community Development
Department, City Council, Planning Commission
  2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                            March 2015
  City of Sutter Creek
                                                                    D-38
   APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                      Continue, Modify
                     Housing Program                          Status                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                                      or Delete Program
Funding: General Fund
Time Frame: FY 2007
Quantified Objective: 20 very low-income units, 10 low-
income units, and 10 moderate-income units
Program 2-7 To ensure that manufactured houses are                         The Zoning Ordinance allows
allowed in all residential zones except the Historic                       manufactured housing within the
Residential Combining Zone, the City shall review the                      Manufactured Housing Combining
Manufactured Housing Combining Zone in the Zoning                          Zone, Section 18.30 of the Zoning         Delete.
Ordinance and amend it, if necessary, to be consistent                     Code. The City implements the most        Manufactured
with the requirements of State law.                      Complete and      recent California Building Code that      Housing is an
Responsible Agencies: Community Development              on-going          implements the required state             allowed use in the
Department, City Council, Planning Commission                              regulations. The City reviewed Section    Zoning Code.
Funding: General Fund                                                      18.30 and determined it is consistent
Time Frame: FY 2007                                                        with state law.
Quantified Objective: N/A
Goal 3: To provide a range of housing services for households with special needs within Sutter Creek.
Program 3-1 The City shall review and amend its                            The City has implemented this
Municipal Code to provide individuals with disabilities                    program through adoption of City
reasonable accommodation in rules, policies,                               Code Section 18.58 “Accommodation         Modify to fully
practices, and procedures that may be necessary to                         of Persons with Disabilities.” However,   address Senate Bill
ensure equal access to housing.                                            this section does not meet all of the     520 and continue
                                                         Partially
Responsible Agencies: Community            Development                     requirements of Senate Bill 520 and this  and combine with
                                                         complete
Department, City Council                                                   program will be modified and              Program 3-2.
                                                                           continued       to    address     those
Funding: General Fund
                                                                           requirements.
Time Frame: FY 2007
Quantified Objective: N/A
 March 2015                                                                      2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                  City of Sutter Creek
                                                                  D-39

                  APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                              Continue, Modify
                    Housing Program                         Status              Accomplishments
                                                                                                             or Delete Program
Program 3-2 The City shall create a public information               This program was not implemented
brochure on reasonable accommodation for disabled                    during the previous planning period
persons and provide that information on the City's                   and will be continued.
website.
                                                                                                            Combine into
Responsible Agencies: Community         Development    Not addressed                                        Program 3-1 and
Department, City Council                                                                                    continue.
Funding: General Fund
Time Frame: FY 2007
Quantified Objective: N/A
Program 3-3 The City shall review the General Plan                   The City’s Zoning Ordinance was
Land Use Element and Zoning Ordinance and identify                   updated to allow transitional housing  Modify to remove
appropriate land use designations/zones in which to                  and emergency shelters in 2008.        emergency shelter
allow emergency and transitional housing for the                     Ordinance 330 was created to allow     portion of program
homeless in the city.                                                these types of uses in the R4 and C2   and revise to fully
Responsible Agencies: Community Development            Partially     zones. Emergency shelters are allowed  address          the
Department, City Council, Planning Commission          complete      by right in the C2 zone. Transitional  transitional    and
                                                                     housing is allowed by right in the R4  supportive housing
Funding: General Fund
                                                                     zone. The City has not adopted         requirements      of
Time Frame: FY 2007                                                  development         standards      for Senate Bill 2 and
Quantified Objective: N/A                                            emergency shelters. Standards for the  continue.
                                                                     C2 zone apply to emergency shelters.
 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                     March 2015
 City of Sutter Creek
                                                                D-40

  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                     Continue, Modify
                   Housing Program                              Status              Accomplishments
                                                                                                                    or Delete Program
Goal 4: To improve the existing supply of housing.
Program 4-1 The City shall survey the condition of
housing stock within the city, including identification of
occupied substandard housing.
                                                                                                                   This will now be a
Responsible    Agencies:   Building    Department,     City             The Housing Element includes the
                                                                                                                   joint Cities/County
Council                                                     Complete    results of the housing stock condition
                                                                                                                   Housing Element
                                                                        survey most recently updated in 2010.
Funding: General Fund                                                                                              program.
Time Frame: FY 2007
Quantified Objective: N/A
Program 4-2 The City shall utilize survey results obtained
through Program 4-1 and pursue available funding                        The City has not developed              a
sources to develop a rehabilitation program in the city,                rehabilitation program.
including: 1) the CDBG program, 2) the California Self-
                                                                        The City requires that buildings meet      Modify to remove
Help Housing program, and 3) the California Housing
                                                                        code at the time of ownership change       reference to
Rehabilitation program. The City shall keep in contact
                                                                        or at the time a building permit is        Central Sierra
with Department of Housing and Community
                                                                        requested. The City implemented a          Planning Council
Development and Central Sierra Planning Council for
                                                                        Community Development Block Grant          and continue.
changes which will improve the City's chances of            On-going
                                                                        (CDBG) for age-restricted and low-
obtaining funding, including the availability of new                                                               This will now be a
                                                                        income occupants in 2008 and 2009.
programs.                                                                                                          joint Cities/County
                                                                        City staff reviews funding for potential   Housing      Element
Responsible Agencies: Community             Development
                                                                        programs on an annual basis to             program.
Department, City Council
                                                                        determine if the programs are
Funding: General Fund                                                   available and if the City has the ability
Time Frame: Annually                                                    to implement the program.
Quantified Objective: N/A
 March 2015                                                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                City of Sutter Creek
                                                                   D-41
                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                              Continue, Modify
                     Housing Program                                Status                   Accomplishments
                                                                                                                             or Delete Program
                                                                                 The     City    Planning    Department
                                                                                 coordinates the rehabilitation and
                                                                                 adaptive      reuse     of    historically
Program 4-3 The City shall assist, as appropriate, in the
                                                                                 significant structures as appropriate.
rehabilitation and adaptive reuse of historically-
                                                                                 No historically significant residential
significant structures. This shall include assisting private
                                                                                 structures have been processed since
property owners of historically-significant structures in
                                                                                 the last update of the Housing
applying for and utilizing State and Federal assistance
                                                                                 Element.      The Hotel Sutter is a
programs as appropriate.
                                                                On-going         commercially historically significant      Continue.
Responsible     Agencies:     Community      Development                         structure processed in the last year.
Department                                                                       Private funding was used to implement
Funding: State and Federal funds                                                 the improvements. The Sutter Creek
Time Frame: Ongoing                                                              Community Benefit Foundation is
                                                                                 currently     working      on    making
Quantified Objective: N/A
                                                                                 improvements to the Old Sutter Creek
                                                                                 Grammar School. This program will be
                                                                                 continued
Goal 5: To provide decent housing and quality living environment for all Sutter Creek residents, regardless of age, race, religion, sex,
marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, disability, or economic level.
Programs 5-1 The City shall obtain information on fair
housing laws from the Department of Housing and                                  Fair housing information is available at   Modify to reflect
Community Development and have copies of the                                     the Planning Department and links to       available resources
information available for the public on the City’s                               the fair housing laws are on the City’s    and continue.
website, at City Hall, and the local library. In addition,      Available        website. There is no library within the    This will now be a
the City Clerk shall add a statement to City utility bills                       City limits. This program will be          joint Cities/County
which indicates that information on fair housing laws is                         modified to reflect current City           Housing Element
available to the public without charge at City Hall and                          resources and continued.                   program.
in the library.
 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                                     March 2015
 City of Sutter Creek
                                                                       D-42

  APPENDIX D: REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                     Continue, Modify
                   Housing Program                            Status              Accomplishments
                                                                                                                    or Delete Program
Responsible Agencies:        Community
Development Department, City Clerk
Funding: General Fund
Time Frame: FY 2007
Quantified Objective: N/A
Programs 5-2 The City shall continue to refer housing
complaints to the Amador-Tuolumne Community
Action Agency, the fair housing authority for Amador                                                               Continue.
                                                                        The Planning staff refers housing
County.
                                                                        complaints to the Amador-Tuolumne          This will now be a
Responsible   Agencies:    Community     Development    On-going        Community Action Agency when               joint Cities/County
Department                                                              appropriate. This program will be          Housing Element
Funding: General Fund                                                   continued.                                 program.
Time Frame: FY 2007
Quantified Objective: N/A
Goal 6: To encourage energy efficiency in all new and existing housing.
Program 6-1 The City should work with local utility                     The City collaborates with Pacific Gas
companies to implement energy awareness programs.                       and Electric (PG&E) on installing
Responsible Agencies: Community Development                             energy-efficient lighting. In 2012 the
Department (lead), Private Utility Companies                            City and PG&E selected new standard        Continue.
                                                                        energy-efficient lights to be used in the  This will now be a
Funding: General Fund                                   On-going and    city.                                      joint Cities/County
Time Frame: FY 2007                                     available
                                                                        The City provides a link to the PG&E       Housing Element
Quantified Objective: N/A                                               energy-efficiency website from the         program.
                                                                        City’s website.
                                                                        The City provides residents with the
                                                                        local PG&E representative’s contact
 March 2015                                                                   2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                                                                                City of Sutter Creek
                                                                 D-43

                   APPENDIX D:REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                        Continue, Modify
                    Housing Program                               Status                Accomplishments
                                                                                                                        or Delete Program
                                                                              information when an inquiry is made
                                                                              regarding energy efficiency.         This
                                                                              program will be continued.
Goal 7: To provide for a variety of housing types, sizes, price ranges, and densities compatible with the existing character and integrity
of residential neighborhoods.
Programs not identified.
 2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                                                               March 2015
 City of Sutter Creek
                                                                     D-44
 APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
INTRODUCTION
Senate Bill (SB) 244 (Wolk) was approved by Governor Brown in October 2011 and requires cities
and counties to address the infrastructure needs of disadvantaged unincorporated communities
(DUC) in city and county general plans, Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) Municipal
Service Reviews (MSR), and annexation decisions.
Government Code Section 65302.10(a) requires that before the due date for adoption of the next
housing element after January 1, 2012, the general plan land use element must be updated to identify
and describe each DUC (fringe community, legacy community, and/or island community) that exists
within unincorporated areas of the county or in spheres of influence (SOI) of each city; analyze for
each identified community the water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, and structural fire protection
needs; and identify financial funding alternatives for the extension of services to any identified
communities. SB 244 defines a DUC as a place that meets the following criteria:
       Contains 10 or more dwelling units in “close proximity” to one another where 12 or more
        registered voters reside (for the purpose of this analysis, “close proximity” is defined as a
        density greater than 1 unit per acre).
       Is either within a city sphere of influence (SOI) (also known as a fringe community), is an
        island within a city boundary (also known as an island community), or is geographically
        isolated and has existed for at least 50 years (also known as a legacy community). Figure 2
        graphically depicts these types of communities. Only legacy communities potentially occur in
        the unincorporated area of Amador County.
       Has a median household income that is 80 percent or less than the statewide median
        household income. (According to the US Census Bureau, American Community Survey
        (ACS), the median household income for California between 2008 and 2012 was $61,400;
        therefore, communities with an area median income of $49,120 or lower qualify.)
March 2015                                   2014–2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                  E-1

                                            APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
                   FIGURE 2: TYPES OF COMMUNITIES THAT MAY BE DUCS
Source: OPR 2013
ANALYSIS OF JACKSON, IONE, AND SUTTER CREEK DISADVANTAGED
UNINCORPORATED COMMUNITIES
An analysis to identify DUCs within the SOIs of the cities of Jackson, Ione, and Sutter Creek was
conducted in July 2014 in order to address the requirements of SB 244. In conducting the analysis,
resources utilized included the SB 244 Technical Advisory (OPR 2013), the Amador County 2014
Municipal Service Reviews (MSR), the city limit boundary maps of the five cities in Amador County
using geographic information systems (GIS), water management plans, and other documentation
from local jurisdictions, agencies, and special districts. Unless otherwise stated, service review
information is drawn from the 2014 MSR.
Qualifications for DUCs vary slightly for unincorporated communities within city SOIs and those
outside SOIs, as discussed in the section above in the second bullet. Analysis to identify DUCs
within the SOIs of the cities of Ione, Jackson, and Sutter Creek was conducted based on the
requirements for each. A dozen unincorporated communities were identified using Census
Designated Place (CDP) information and were considered for inclusion as communities to analyze
as DUCs. Most were eliminated because they did not meet the qualifications, based on census
income data, mapping information, County staff knowledge, and plat records. Three communities
met all of the criteria except that they were not geographically isolated legacy communities meaning
they occur on major thoroughfares and are not hard to reach or out of the way.
2014–2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                          March 2015
                                                  E-2

   APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
  The criteria used to determine whether communities are DUCs are shown in Table HE-80
                TABLE HE-80 DUC IDENTIFICATION MATRIX FOR AMADOR COUNTY
                                                                                               Dwelling
                                                                             Legacy                      All Criteria
                                       80% of CA Median Income                               Units Close
                                                                           Community                        Met?
                                                                                              Proximity
                                        CDP Median
                                                            Qualifies?      Qualifies?        Qualifies?
Unincorporated                              Income
                      Jurisdiction
   Community
                                                                            Geographi
                                                                               cally                     Qualifies?
                                                                                             Density >1
                                                   ≤$49,120                  Isolated
                                                                                              unit/acre
                                                                             and Age
                                                                              ≥50 yrs
                        Amador
Buena Vista                                $49,167             NO                NO                 —        NO
                        County
Camanche                Amador
                                           $55,078             NO                NO                 —        NO
North Shore             County
                        Amador
Drytown                                    $21,094             YES               NO                YES       NO
                        County
                        Amador
Fiddletown                                 $65,603             NO                NO                 —        NO
                        County
                        Amador
Kirkwood                                   $38,015             YES               NO                 —        NO
                        County
                        Amador
Martell                                    $13,649             YES               NO                YES       NO
                        County
                        Amador
Pine Grove                                 $46,957             YES               NO                 —        NO
                        County
                        Amador
Pioneer                                    $36,146             YES               NO                 —        NO
                        County
                        Amador
River Pines                                $40,269             YES               NO                YES       NO
                        County
                        Amador
Volcano                                    $89,637             NO                NO                 —        NO
                        County
  Sources: 2008–2012 ACS, US Census; County Plat Maps; GIS Mapping, 2014; Amador County Planning, 2014
  March 2015                                        2014–2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                           E-3

                                            APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
After the initial review, it was determined that the following communities do not have any DUCs in
the sphere of influence.
IONE
No concentrations of residences exist within the City of Ione’s Sphere of Influence outside of the
city limits. Therefore, no potential DUCs were identified.
JACKSON
No concentrations of residences exist within the City of Jackson’s Sphere of Influence outside of the
city limits. Therefore, no potential DUCs were identified.
SUTTER CREEK
No concentration of more than 15 residences together exist within the City of Sutter Creek’s Sphere
of Influence outside of the city limits. Since a threshold of 15 residences was used as the unit
threshold for the DUC analysis, no potential DUCs were identified.
CONCLUSION
Based on information contained in this analysis, no DUCs exist in unincorporated Amador County
or in any of the SOIs of the four cities and the expansion of services will not be necessary in any of
the potential DUC areas.
2014-2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element                                           March 2015
                                                  B-4

 APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
LIST OF REFERENCES AND AGENCIES CONSULTED
Amador County. 2010. Amador County Existing General Plan Land Use Classifications.
Amador County LAFCo (Local Agency Formation Commission). 2014. Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 6 Jackson City Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 9 Amador Fire Protection District Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 11 Amador Water Agency Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 12 Drytown County Water District Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 25 River Pines Public Utility District Municipal Service Review.
———. 2014. Chapter 32 County Service Areas Municipal Service Review.
Calfee, Christopher. 2012. Senior Counsel, Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. November
        20.
DWR (California Department of Water Resources). 2014. Disadvantaged Communities (DAC)
        Mapping Tool.
McHargue, Jim. 2014. Director of Solid Waste/Safety Programs, Amador County. Personal
        correspondence. July 30.
OPR (California Governor’s Office of Planning and Research). 2013. Technical Advisory. Senate Bill
        244: Land Use, General Plans, and Disadvantaged Communities.
US Census Bureau. 2008–2012 American Community Survey.
March 2015                                   2014–2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element
                                                  E-5

                                    APPENDIX E: SB 244 ANALYSIS
This page intentionally left blank.
2014–2019 Amador County Joint Housing Element            March 2015
                                      E-6

           CITY OF JACKSON
      CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                Amendments
                November 2008
               Original Prepared By:
           Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
                 in association with
            CSW Planning Associates
                under contract with
AMADOR COUNTY TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
      Amendments by ACTC and City Staff
                Under Direction of
      City of Jackson Planning Commission
           Adopted November 10, 2008
       City Council Resolution No. 2008-44
                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                Page
I.   INTRODUCTION............................................................................................... 1
II.  GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES ....................... 4
III. EXISTING CIRCULATION SYSTEM............................................................ 24
IV.  FUTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT ................................................................... 34
V.   EVALUATION OF IMPROVEMENT OPTIONS........................................... 40
VI.  PREFERRED CIRCULATION PLAN .......................................................... 41
                                     LIST OF FIGURES
1    Jackson Study Area ........................................................................................... 25
2    Existing Traffic Volumes .................................................................................. 29
3    Existing Daily Levels of Service....................................................................... 30
4    Year 2025 – Daily Traffic Volumes.................................................................. 36
5    Year 2025 – Daily Levels of Service ................................................................ 37
6    Improvement Options........................................................................................ 42
7    Long Range Planning Options .......................................................................... 44

                                LIST OF TABLES
1 Level of Service Description ............................................................................. 27
2 Level of Service Criteria ................................................................................... 28
3 Status of Improvement Options Following Traffic Evaluation......................... 34
4 Summary of Roadway Deficiencies .................................................................. 35
                                    I. INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
In 1999 the City of Jackson prepared a General Plan Circulation Element Update as
part of a package of long-range transportation planning documents for each
jurisdiction within Amador County. The 1999 Circulation Element was developed
by the Amador County Transportation Commission (ACTC) in coordination with
the City of Jackson Planning Commission. The 1999 Circulation Element was
consistent with the 1996/97 Regional Transportation Plan (RTP). In 2004 the RTP
was updated to address the years 2000 to 2025. In 2005 the ACTC and the Jackson
Planning Commission coordinated efforts once again to bring the City of Jackson
Circulation Element up to date. The Amador County traffic model has been
updated to include the City’s population and land use growth projections for the
years 2000-2025 within the context of updated land use projections for the
remainder of Amador County.
PURPOSE
The purpose of the City of Jackson Circulation Element is to develop a
comprehensive circulation plan for all travel modes within the Jackson area and to
provide a strategy for financing preferred transportation improvements. The
element is designed to address all requirements of the State of California General
Plan Guidelines, except the circulation of energy, water, sewage, storm drainage and
communications.
STUDY AREA
The City of Jackson is the County seat for Amador County and has a current (2008
CA Dept. of Finance) population of 4,320. Jackson is located in the southwestern
portion of Amador County at the crossroads of State Routes 49 and 88. The Jackson
study area encompasses the Jackson City limits and outlying areas that the City
identified as its planning area for the General Plan.
STUDY PROCESS
The 2008 City of Jackson Circulation Element Update is considered an amendment
to the 1999 Circulation Element. The 1999 Element was the result of an extensive
planning process. The 2005 amendment and further changes in 2008 are considered
updates to the document that was approved and adopted in 1999.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 1

The 1999 Circulation Element was developed in four major steps. Each step is
summarized and updated herein. The steps include:
     1.   Growth projections
     2.   Circulation system deficiencies and improvement options
     3.   Analyses of improvement options
     4.   Preferred circulation plan
LEGAL REQUIREMENTS
Government Code Section 65302(b) requires that the general plan (for a city or
county) shall include a circulation element consisting of the general location and
extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes,
terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land
use element of the plan. The circulation element has been a requirement of state
planning law since 1955 and it typically serves as an infrastructure plan for existing
and proposed facilities needed to support the safe and effective circulation of
people, goods, energy, water, sewage, storm drainage, and communications.
The State of California General Plan Guidelines dated 1990 identify four mandatory
issues that must be included in a circulation element, which include major
thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and
facilities.
Major thoroughfares and transportation routes are similar in that they both include
roadways of local, regional, state and national significance. Transportation routes
also include the routes associated with all forms of travel such as transit service,
bikeways, and goods movement. Loading or unloading points on these routes are
typically considered terminals because they identify where a route begins, ends or
allows transfers between travel modes.
The issue of other local public utilities and facilities relates to the transport and
circulation of energy, water, sewage, storm drainage and communications. This
update of the City of Jackson Circulation Element focuses on the movement of
people and goods and does not include public utility information.
LAND USE CONSISTENCY
Circulation elements must be consistent and correlated with the land use element of
the general plan (Government Code Sections 65300.5 and 65302 (b)). In fact, the
amount, type and location of land uses proposed in the land use plan drives the
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 2
need for improvements to the circulation system. Therefore, not only should the
two elements be consistent and correlated, the land use plan should serve as an
input to the circulation element as the principal means by which estimates of locally
generated travel demand are made.
For the purposes of this update, the City of Jackson undertook an extensive process
for estimating and allocating future growth. The process involved the development
of growth assumptions generally consistent with the California Department of
Finance and Employment Development Department growth rates for population
and employment. It also included the specific allocation of future land uses to areas
of the City based on the Draft Land Use Element currently being prepared by the
City. The allocated land use was input into the traffic model, which was also
developed as part of the regional planning effort, to generate estimates of travel
demand that could be analyzed to identify deficiencies for improvement.
ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT
This report contains the updated City of Jackson Circulation Element including a
summary of the background technical analysis for the development of the preferred
circulation plan. This report is organized into the following chapters:
          •   Chapter II - Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Implementation Measures
          •   Chapter III - Existing Circulation System
          •   Chapter IV - Future Needs Assessment
          •   Chapter V - Evaluation of Improvement Options
          •   Chapter VI - Preferred Circulation Plan
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 3

                      II. GOALS, OBJECTIVES, POLICIES, AND
                               IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
This chapter provides the City of Jackson with specific policy direction toward
achieving an effective circulation system. The aim of the Element’s goals, objectives,
policies and implementation measures is to improve the efficiency of the City’s
transportation and circulation network and provide for the movement of people,
goods, and energy with a minimum of negative external effects. These negative
effects could include safety hazards, congestion, and noise.
The Circulation Element’s provisions are mandated by State law to be correlated
with, and support, the goals and policies of the Land Use Element. Toward this
end, the following goals, objectives and policies are consistent with the State
requirements which are detailed in Government Code Section 65302(b).
Note: Each policy stated below is to be implemented through specific measures—policies are
listed in the left-hand column with corresponding implementation measures in the right-
hand column. A detailed explanation of each numbered implementation measure is included
at the end of this chapter.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT CIRCULATION
Goal 1                   To enhance accessibility and mobility within the Central
                         Business District (CBD) in order to promote its economic vitality
                         and historic value.
OBJECTIVE 1.A            To assist business owners and merchants in developing solutions to
                         circulation, access and parking deficiencies and creating the best possible
                         circulation, access and parking configurations in the CBD, including the
                         most feasible financing mechanisms for each component.
POLICIES                                                  IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 1.A.1 The City shall alleviate parking and         1.   Downtown Parking Plan
congestion problems in the CBD.                           2.   Jackson City Code
                                                          3.   ARTS Public Transit Service
Policy 1.A.2 The City shall facilitate visitor access     1. Downtown Parking Plan
to the CBD.                                               2. Jackson City Code
                                                          16. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
                                                               Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
                                                               Bicycle Design Guidelines and
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 4

                                                              Recommended Standards
Policy 1.A.3 The City shall work with business            1.  Downtown Parking Plan
owners and merchants to provide improvements              4.  Land Use Element
to parking and circulation within the CBD.
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION
Goal 2                   To promote effective transport of goods and safe and efficient
                         movement of all segments of the population.
OBJECTIVE 2.A            To minimize traffic and congestion in the City of Jackson.
POLICIES                                                  IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 2.A.1        The City shall maintain an average    5.  Interagency Coordination
daily LOS “C” on all roadways, with an upper              8.  Circulation Element Update
threshold of LOS “D” to be permitted along State          9.  Capital Improvement Program (CIP)
Routes 49 and 88. This policy is consistent with the      26. Interim Criteria for Statements of
2004 Amador County Regional Transportation                    Overriding Considerations
Plan and recognizes that much of the traffic on           27. Smart Growth Guidelines and
Highway 49 and 88 is a result of development                   Performance Measures
outside the boundaries of the City of Jackson (see
following note). Projects may exceed the desired
threshold if one of the following findings can be
made:
     1. The project is providing a public benefit
          which offsets the project’s traffic impacts.
     2. The project will fund and construct traffic
          improvements which will offset the
          majority of the project’s traffic impacts.
     3. The size and nature of the project is such
          that the percent increase in traffic on
          Highway 49 and 88 during peak traffic
          time periods is deemed minimal.
     4. The        project       provides     significant
          contributions to infill, mixed use, and non-
          automobile features or facilities.
The following are examples of projects that may be
permitted:
     a. Minor lot splits or housing developments
          involving five or less units and which are
          consistent with the City’s General Plan.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 5

     b. Affordable housing projects that help
          achieve housing element goals and
          objectives.
     c. Non-commercial public services, buildings,
          and facilities.
     d. Infill, mixed use, or transit oriented
          developments that provide for significant
          reductions to automobile use by their
          residents, occupants, or visitors.
Note: It is important to recognize that the increase
in traffic on City roadways is not commensurate
with growth within the City. For example, for the
seven year period between 2000 and 2007 there
was 8.2% growth in City population. For the same
time period there was a 36% increase in the peak
average daily trips at the Main Street/Highway 49
intersection.
Policy 2.A.2         The City shall require that new     25. City of Jackson Traffic Impact Study
development projects having the potential to create          Guidelines
significant impacts to traffic be required to prepare
a traffic impact study that conforms to Caltrans
and ACTC guidelines as customized and adopted
by the City of Jackson.             “Significant traffic
impacts” are to be determined by said guidelines.
Traffic impact studies shall include recommended
mitigation measures intended to help maintain the
City’s adopted LOS Policy 2.A.1 under cumulative
2025 conditions consistent with state laws
concerning “nexus” and “rough proportionality.”
Such traffic impact studies shall also address the
project’s impacts and proposed mitigation
measures as they directly relate to all other policies
in the 2008 City of Jackson Circulation Element.
Policy 2.A.3         The City shall require that new     6. Road Design Standards
development’s internal circulation plans include         7. Development Review
provisions for pedestrians, bicycles, automobiles,       16. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
parking, and bus facilities as well as Neighborhood          Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
Electric Vehicles (NEVs) consistent with separately          Bicycle Design Guidelines and
adopted alternative transportation plans and/or              Recommended Standards
guidelines.                                              23. Amador County Transit Development
                                                             Plan and Transit Design Guidelines
                                                             Manual
                                                         24. City of Jackson and/or Regional NEV Plan
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 6

Policy 2.A.4        The City shall require that rights-     6.  Road Design Standards
of-way be sufficient to ensure adequate area for            7.  Development Review
future expansion to accommodate long-range
planning options shown in Figure 13.
Policy 2.A.5        All road facilities shall be            7. Development Review
constructed or upgraded to acceptable safety                9. Capital Improvement Program (CIP)
standards where practical and economically                  10. Caltrans Signal Warrant Studies
feasible.
Policy 2.A.6        Shuttle service shall be utilized       3.  ARTS Public Transit Service
wherever feasible during special events/activities
to effectively minimize circulation conflicts.
Policy 2.A.7          New development plans which           6. Road Design Standards
generate a direct need for new off-site roadways,           7. Development Review
road       widening       or     upgrade       intersection 12. Local Traffic Mitigation Fee Program.
improvements, traffic controls or other similar
improvements shall be required to construct the
needed improvements to City standards as part of
project approval.
Policy 2.A.8              New developments shall be         11. Regional Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
required to mitigate costs for the off-site indirect        12. Local Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
impacts or cumulative impacts generated by the              29. Jackson Area CMX and Sub-Regional
new traffic they add to the existing circulation                Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
system.
Policy 2.A.9 New development circulation plans              7.  Development Review
shall be in conformance with General Plan’s goals
and policies, the Circulation Element map, City
codes and adopted standards.
OBJECTIVE 2.B                Maintain adequate parking in the City of Jackson.
POLICIES                                                    IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 2.B.1       Adequate         off-street     parking  1.  Downtown Parking Plan
facilities or other suitable provisions shall be            2.  Jackson City Code
provided for each building and land use in the              6.  Road Design Standards
City.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 7

OBJECTIVE 2.C            To ensure that the costs of upgrading the circulation system in response
                         to growth in the City and surrounding areas do not become a financial
                         burden to existing residents and service providers.
POLICIES                                                   IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 2.C.1        The City shall require that new        6.  Road Design Standards
developments design, construct, dedicate, and/or           7.  Development Review
finance their fair share of off-site transportation        11. Regional Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
improvements and facilities needed to manage               12. Local Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
additional traffic generated by the development.
Policy 2.C.2         The City shall cooperate with         28. Martell Area CMX and Sub-Regional
Amador County, ACTC and Caltrans to develop a                  Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
program to collect fees for transportation                 29. Jackson Area CMX and Sub-Regional
improvements necessitated by projects occurring                Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
within the City which affect regional roadways.
Individual development projects shall contribute
their fair share of the cost of the improvements
commensurate with the project’s impact.
Policy 2.C.3        The City shall continue to solicit     19. Environmental Review
ARTS and Amador County School District for their
comments on any development projects which
may have an impact on the service area and
ridership.
Policy 2.C.4        Developers      adjacent  to   the     11. Regional Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
highways shall be required to provide dedications          12. Local Traffic Mitigation Fee Program
of right-of-way needed for future widening and to
pay their fair share portion of the cost of widening.
Policy 2.C.5        Developers shall be encouraged to      6.  Road Design Standards
preserve right-of-way to accommodate the long-             7.  Development Review
range planning options shown on Figure 7.
Policy 2.C.6        The City shall pursue additional       13. State and Federal Legislation
funding when existing revenues are not adequate            14. Transportation Funding
to provide necessary transportation improvements.
Policy 2.C.7 New development shall provide for             15. Assessment Districts
long-term maintenance of their internal circulation
facilities.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 8

GOODS MOVEMENT
Goal 3                   To maintain a balanced freight transportation system to provide
                         for the safe and efficient movement of goods.
OBJECTIVE 3.A            To continue efforts in the expansion and use of truck delivery services
                         without creating circulation problems.
POLICIES                                                  IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 3.A.1        The City shall restrict truck         2.  Jackson City Code
delivery activities from taking place during peak
hours by encouraging businesses to do the
majority of their shipping and receiving before or
after normal business hours.
Policy 3.A.2        The City shall direct through-truck   2.  Jackson City Code
traffic to specific major roads in order to maintain
public safety and local quality of life.
Policy 3.A.3        The City shall direct local truck     2.  Jackson City Code
traffic to specific roads in order to maintain public
safety and local quality of life.
SCENIC CORRIDORS
Goal 4                   To preserve and enhance the character of scenic and historic
                         routes through the community.
OBJECTIVE 4.A            To preserve, enhance, and protect from degradation by new development
                         scenic and historic.
POLICIES                                                  IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 4.A.1        Views along designated scenic         4.  Land Use Element
routes shall not be degraded.
Policy 4.A.2        New development along scenic or       4.  Land Use Element
historic routes shall be required to incorporate
visual aesthetics into the design of transportation
facilities.
Policy 4.A.3        The City shall establish a            19. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
continuous         hike-and-bike     system     linking       Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 9
scenic/historic areas of Jackson.                               Bicycle Design Guidelines and
                                                                Recommended Standards
TRANSIT
Goal 5                   Provide effective and efficient public transportation and reduce
                         automobile dependency.
OBJECTIVE 5.A            To participate in the planning and implementation of transit services that
                         are timely, cost-effective and responsive to the area’s growth patterns and
                         existing and future transit demand.
POLICIES                                                    IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 5.A.1        The      City    shall    encourage     7. Development Review
alternatives to single-occupant vehicle trips and           9. Capital Improvement Program
make alternatives available to the extent deemed            23. Amador County Transit Development
practical and economical.                                       Plan and Transit Design Guidelines
                                                                Manual
                                                            24. City of Jackson and/or Regional NEV Plan
Policy 5.A.2        The City shall require new               8. Development Review
development to construct or contribute financially          23. Amador County Transit Development
for transit facilities, as deemed necessary, for                Plan and Transit Design Guidelines
purposes of public convenience and fuel                         Manual
conservation, and to ensure transportation for the          24. City of Jackson and/or Regional NEV Plan
elderly and disabled.
Policy 5.A.3        The City shall promote ridesharing      5. Interagency Coordination
and the use of park-and-ride facilities.                    17. Rideshare Information
Policy 5.A.4 The City shall actively promote the            3.  ARTS Public Transit Service
use of transit during special community events.
Policy 5.A.5        The City shall encourage the            7.  Development Review
design of public and private outdoor seating to
double as bus stop seating, where appropriate.
NON-MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION
Goal 6                   To provide a safe, comprehensive and integrated circulation
                         system for non-motorized transportation.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 10

OBJECTIVE 6.A                To make bicycle and pedestrian travel an integral part of the City's
                             circulation system.
POLICIES                                                  IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 6.A.1        The City shall construct sidewalks    5.  Interagency Coordination
or pedestrian walkways along Highways 49 and              9.  Capital Improvement Program
88.                                                       13. State and Federal Legislation
                                                          16. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
                                                              Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
                                                              Bicycle Design Guidelines and
                                                              Recommended Standards
Policy 6.A.2        The City shall continue to require    7.  Development Review
new development to construct sidewalks or
meandering walkways along all street perimeters.
Policy 6.A.3        The City shall promote use of         4. Land Use Element
walking routes, walkways and hiking trails.               16. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
                                                              Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
                                                              Bicycle Design Guidelines and
                                                              Recommended Standards
Policy 6.A.4        The      City    shall   encourage    4.  Land Use Element
businesses to shelter sidewalks through the use of        7.  Development Review
awnings and increased outdoor seating.
Policy 6.A.5        The City shall encourage walking      5. Interagency Coordination
tours throughout the City through the use of              16. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
signage designating points of interest.                       Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
                                                              Bicycle Design Guidelines and
                                                              Recommended Standards
OBJECTIVE 6.B            To encourage bicycle usage as an energy-efficient, recreational mode of
                         transportation.
POLICIES                                                IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 6.B.1       The City shall eliminate barriers to   16. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
bicycle traffic within selected areas.                        Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
                                                              Bicycle Design Guidelines and
                                                              Recommended Standards
Policy 6.B.2       Bicycle lanes shall be constructed     6.  Road Design Standards
along new or reconstructed arterial and collector         9.  Capital Improvement Program
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 11
routes in, or adjacent to, the City wherever            16. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
possible.                                                   Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
                                                            Bicycle Design Guidelines and
                                                            Recommended Standards
Policy 6.B.3       The City shall require new           6.  Road Design Standards
development to construct bicycle routes and/or          7.  Development Review
provide secure facilities (i.e. bike racks), where
feasible.
Policy 6.B.4       The City shall encourage existing    7. Design Review
businesses and employers to provide bicycle             16. Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle
storage and lockers in order to promote bicycle             Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
commuter travel.                                            Bicycle Design Guidelines and
                                                            Recommended Standards
Policy 6.B.5 The City shall promote bicycle safety      20. Bicycle Safety Awareness Program
awareness and the responsibilities of cyclists.
Policy 6.B.6       The City shall continue to           3.  ARTS Public Transit Service
encourage the coordination of bicycle use with
mass transit by equipping all buses with bicycle
racks.
AIR TRANSPORTATION
Goal 7                   To protect Westover Field as a valuable asset to the region.
OBJECTIVE 7.A            To eliminate land use conflicts that threaten Westover Field through
                         relocation or protection from encroachment by non-compatible
                         development.
POLICIES                                                IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 7.A.1        All       development    projects   7. Development Review
proposed within the Westover Field airport              18. Airport Land Use Plan
overflight zone or specific safety zones shall be in    19. Environmental Review
compliance with the Airport Land Use Plan.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 12
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 1
                             DOWNTOWN PARKING PLAN. Amend and update as
                             necessary the Downtown Parking Plan. Continue to identify
                             further parking and circulation improvements, including
                             parking areas for CBD workers so as not to impede shopper and
                             visitor parking.
                                     Responsibility:     Planning Department
                                     Time frame:         Ongoing
                                     Funding:            General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 2
                             JACKSON CITY CODE.               Strictly enforce all applicable
                             ordinances contained in the City Code which will assist in
                             implementing the Circulation Element. Review and revise
                             ordinances where needed to facilitate implementation. The
                             Parking Ordinance would implement the Element by facilitating
                             visitor parking and by directing CBD workers to refrain from
                             parking in vital Main Street parking spaces.           Specifying
                             restrictions regarding the delivery hours of trucks, etc. would
                             further improve circulation. Truck routing would be aided by
                             Chapter 10.20 of the City Code, which includes statutory
                             provisions regarding the authority of the City to prohibit the
                             use of certain streets and bridges by any commercial vehicle or
                             by any vehicle exceeding a maximum specific weight in
                             accordance with California Vehicle Code (CVC) Section 35701
                             (Note: Section 10.20.010 of this chapter designates a truck route
                             for weight-restricted vehicles).
                                     Responsibility:     City staff, City Council
                                     Time frame:         Ongoing
                                     Funding:            General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 3
                              AMADOR REGIONAL TRANSIT SYSTEM (ARTS) PUBLIC
                              TRANSIT SERVICE.          Continue to expand the use of the
                              Amador Regional Transit System (ARTS) public transit service
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 13
                             to the Central Business District, including ARTS special events
                             shuttle service during significant Main Street activities.
                                    Responsibility:      City staff, ARTS
                                    Time frame:          Ongoing
                                    Funding:             Local Transportation Funds; Federal
                                                         Transit Administration grant funds,
                                                         farebox, and local service
                                                         clubs/donations (special events)
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 4
                             LAND USE ELEMENT. Evaluate all development proposals
                             in accordance with the designated land uses and Design
                             Standards specified in the City’s Land Use Element of the
                             General Plan.
                                    Responsibility:      City staff, Planning Commission,
                                                         City Council
                                    Time frame:          Ongoing
                                    Funding:             General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 5
                             INTERAGENCY COORDINATION. Utilize the City’s
                             planning      project    referral    process     and       Caltrans
                             Intergovernmental Review (IGR) process to provide Amador
                             County, the ACTC, Caltrans, ARTS, and other transportation
                             agencies with ample time to review and participate in the City’s
                             transportation and land use planning processes and products as
                             well as all major land use development projects with the
                             potential to generate significant impacts on the transportation
                             system.
                                    Responsibility:    City staff
                                    Time frame:        Ongoing
                                    Funding:           General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 6
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 14

                             ROAD DESIGN STANDARDS. Continue to refine and
                             improve the design standards for the City’s roadway system.
                             Standards shall serve as evaluation criteria to determine
                             whether development impacts on streets constrained by width,
                             historic value, steepness or other factors exceed acceptable
                             limits. The design standards shall reflect functional
                             classifications and include the following elements:
                              •  Right-of-way requirements which meet State and federal
                                 standards;
                              •  Roadway cross-sections including landscaping and
                                 bikeways;
                              •  Signalization and access control;
                              •  Land use compatibility, building orientation;
                                 street/driveway access; and
                              •  Vehicle and pedestrian safety.
                                     Responsibility:      Public Works Department
                                     Time frame:          FY 2008-09
                                     Funding:             General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 7
                              DEVELOPMENT REVIEW. Refer all development proposals
                              to City staff to identify needed improvements for each project.
                              Standards included in, but not limited to, the Land Use
                              Element, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance and Road
                              Design Standards will be used as evaluation criteria.
                                     Responsibility:      City staff, Planning Commission,
                                                          City Council
                                     Time frame:          Ongoing
                                     Funding:             Application fees
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 8
                             CIRCULATION ELEMENT UPDATE. Update the Circulation
                              Element every five (5) years in conjunction with the update of
                              the City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP).
                                     Responsibility:      Planning Department, City Council
                                     Time frame:          FY 2008, every five years thereafter
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 15

                                    Funding:             General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 9
                             CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.                       Develop and
                             implement a local Capital Improvement Program (CIP),
                             outlining project priorities, timing, costs and methods of
                             financing, for the development and construction of local and
                             regional streets. Update the CIP every (5) five years or
                             concurrently with the approval of any significant modification
                             of the City’s land use designations. Include in the CIP the street
                             and intersection improvements within designated time frames
                             in accordance with the Circulation Element’s Figure 6 (for the
                             20-year plan) and Figure 7 (for long-range planning options).
                                    Responsibility:      City staff, City Council
                                    Time frame:          FY 2008, every five years thereafter
                                    Funding:             General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 10
                             CALTRANS SIGNAL WARRANT STUDIES. Request
                             Caltrans to complete preparation of signal warrant studies for
                             un-signalized intersections on Highways 49 and 88 through the
                             City.
                                    Responsibility:      City staff, Caltrans
                                    Time frame:          FY 2009 and ongoing
                                    Funding:             STIP funds, Local Transportation
                                                         Funds, and Mitigation Fees
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 11
                             REGIONAL TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM.
                             Continue to work with Amador County Transportation
                             Commission (ACTC) to amend as necessary and implement the
                             Regional Traffic Mitigation Fee program that requires new
                             development to pay fees for its fair share of improvements to
                             the regional transportation system.
                                    Responsibility:      City staff, City Council, ACTC
                                    Time frame:          FY 2008, ongoing thereafter
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 16

                                    Funding:             Developer Fees
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 12
                             LOCAL TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM. Continue
                             to amend as necessary and implement the Local Traffic
                             Mitigation Fee Program which requires new development to
                             pay fees for its fair share of improvements to the City’s local
                             transportation system.
                                    Responsibility:      City staff, City Council
                                    Time frame:          FY 2008, ongoing thereafter
                                    Funding:             Developer Fees
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 13
                             STATE AND FEDERAL LEGISLATION. Continue to work
                             with ACTC to pursue changes in State and federal laws,
                             regulations, and guidelines to eliminate the restriction on the
                             use of funds, as additional flexibility is necessary to determine
                             expenditure priorities according to local needs.
                                    Responsibility:      City staff, City Council
                                    Time frame:          Ongoing
                                    Funding:             General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 14
                             TRANSPORTATION FUNDING. Work with Amador County
                             Transportation Commission (ACTC) and Caltrans to explore
                             funding opportunities, including grants or cost-sharing
                             programs, for all components of the City’s transportation
                             system that are required to meet the goals and objectives of the
                             General Plan, including the improvements identified under
                             implementation measures 28 and 29.
                                    Responsibility:      City staff, City Council
                                    Time frame:          Ongoing
                                    Funding:             General Fund
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 17

IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 15
                             ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS.                  New developments will be
                             required to establish assessment districts, where appropriate, to
                             fund long-term maintenance of internal roadways.
                                      Responsibility:        City staff, Project Developers
                                      Time frame:            Ongoing
                                      Funding:               Developer fees
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 16
                              AMADOR COUNTY PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE
                              TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND PEDESTRIAN AND
                              BICYCLE DESIGN GUIDELINES AND RECOMMENDED
                              STANDARDS. Work with Amador County Transportation
                              Commission (ACTC) to implement the Amador County
                              Pedestrian and Bicycle Transportation Plan and Pedestrian and
                              Bicycle Design Guidelines and Recommended Standards. The City
                              should also hold public workshops to update and refine the
                              City’s part in the countywide plan to clarify or expand upon the
                              City’s specific pedestrian and/or bicycle needs. These may
                              include:
                              •   New roads to accommodate bicyclists and pedestrians;
                              •   A designated bicycle route stop located along SR 49 in
                                  downtown Jackson to include such facilities as bike racks
                                  and lockers for storage;
                              •   Pedestrian-actuated signal crossings at key locations such as
                                  Busi Parking Lot, French Bar Road and Sutter Street;
                              •   Parking facilities at trailheads; safe, well-lit, unobstructed
                                  walking routes; and quick and convenient services located
                                  street-side;
                              •   Over- or underpass walkway between the Central Business
                                  District and City-owned Busi Parking Lot; and
                              •   Bicycle lanes along new or reconstructed arterial and
                                  collector routes in, or adjacent to, the City, wherever
                                  possible.
                                      Responsibility:        City staff, City Council, ACTC
                                      Time frame:            FY 2008 and ongoing thereafter
                                      Funding:               Grants
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 18

IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 17
                             FOOTHILL RIDESHARE PROGRAM. Support and help to
                             implement the Foothill Rideshare Program currently available
                             to residents of Jackson. This may include provision of public
                             information materials pertaining to carpooling and vanpooling
                             for distribution to public employees and large private
                             employers. Additionally, there shall be continued promotion of
                             the ride share lot within the Busi Parking Lot and a noteboard
                             shall be established in central public locations, (e.g. City Hall,
                             Fire Station, and Library) to facilitate coordination of these
                             ridesharing activities.
                                     Responsibility:     City staff
                                     Time frame:         FY 2008 and ongoing thereafter
                                     Funding:            General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 18
                             AIRPORT LAND USE PLAN.                 Apply the policies and
                              standards specified in the Airport Land Use Plan to new
                              development projects during the development review process.
                                     Responsibility:     City staff, Planning Commission,
                                                         City Council
                                     Time frame:         Ongoing
                                     Funding:            General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 19
                             ENVIRONMENTAL            REVIEW        PROCESS.          Conduct
                              environmental review of proposed development projects to
                              assess the environmental impacts generated by the new
                              development and identify needed mitigation measures.
                                     Responsibility:     Various responsible agencies
                                     Time frame:         Ongoing
                                     Funding:            Application fees
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 20
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 19
                             BICYCLE SAFETY AWARENESS PROGRAM. Continue to
                             work with the Cadet Program to present local schools with
                             information regarding bicycle safety and the responsibilities of
                             cyclists. Continue to utilize bicycle safety program information
                             provided by California State Automobile Association (CSAA)
                             when available.
                                     Responsibility:     City of Jackson Police Department
                                     Time frame:         Annually
                                     Funding:            Grants
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 21
                             RESOURCE           CONSTRAINTS              AND       PRIORITY
                             ALLOCATION POLICY. Apply the growth management
                             objectives of the City’s Resource Constraints and Priority
                             Allocation Policy to applicable projects. Implementation of this
                             policy will help maintain the LOS thresholds established in the
                             Circulation Element.
                                     Responsibility:     City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                         City Council
                                     Time Frame:         Ongoing
                                     Funding:            General Fund
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 22
                             CONSISTENCY WITH AMADOR COUNTY REGIONAL
                             TRANSPORTATION PLAN.                The City of Jackson shall
                             coordinate with the County and the Amador Country
                             Transportation Commission to ensure that all necessary
                             roadway and intersection improvements within the City and its
                             Sphere of Influence are addressed in all updates to the Amador
                             County Regional Transportation Plan.
                                     Responsibility:     City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                         City Council, ACTC
                                     Time Frame:         Ongoing
                                     Funding:            General Fund
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 20

IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 23
                             AMADOR COUNTY TRANSIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN
                             AND TRANSIT DESIGN GUIDELINES MANUAL. Help to
                             implement the countywide five-year Transit Development Plan
                             which includes fixed route express service between Jackson,
                             Martell, and Sutter Creek as well as Sacramento in addition to a
                             separate schedule of deviated transit routes for seniors, youth,
                             and transportation disadvantaged individuals. Also, help to
                             implement the Transit Design Guidelines Manual when
                             considering the designs of and locations for transit facilities in
                             the City’s plans or new land use development proposals.
                                     Responsibility:    City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                        ARTS, and ACTC
                                     Time Frame:        Ongoing
                                     Funding:           General Fund, ARTS, ACTC
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 24
                             CITY OF JACKSON AND/OR REGIONAL NEV PLAN.
                             Work with the Amador Transit project and the ACTC, as well
                             as citizens and businesses to develop a City of Jackson and/or
                             regional NEV plan that is feasible, beneficial, realistic, and in
                             conformance with applicable laws.
                                     Responsibility:    City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                         City Council
                                     Time Frame:        FY 2010
                                     Funding:           General Fund, ACTC
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 25
                             CITY OF JACKSON TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY
                             GUIDELINES. Review, modify as necessary and adopt the
                             ACTC recommended Traffic Impact Study guidelines.
                                     Responsibility:    City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                        City Council
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 21

                                    Time Frame:          FY 2008
                                    Funding:             General Fund, ACTC
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 26
                             INTERIM        CRITERIA         FOR        STATEMENTS        OF
                             OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION. Adopt interim criteria or
                             performance measures for consideration of projects that will
                             contribute to level of service conditions worse than “C” (local
                             roadways) or “D” (State highways) under cumulative 2025
                             conditions. (ACTC has recommended criteria in their TIS
                             Guidelines referenced in Implementation Measure 25, however,
                             specific quantifiable performance measures have not yet been
                             developed for them.)
                                    Responsibility:      City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                         City Council
                                    Time Frame:          FY 2008
                                    Funding:             General Fund, ACTC
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 27
                             SMART GROWTH GUIDELINES AND PERFORMANCE
                             MEASURES. Develop a specific package of guidelines for
                             consideration by developers when designing projects that will
                             meet Jackson’s vision, goals, and objectives. These guidelines
                             should be based on a new development code.
                                    Responsibility:      City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                         City Council
                                    Time Frame:          FY 2009
                                    Funding:             General Fund, ACTC
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 28
                             MARTELL AREA CMX AND SUB-REGIONAL TRAFFIC
                             MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM.                    Adopt and help to
                             implement the Martell Area Circulation Mapping Exercise
                             (CMX) and Sub-Regional Traffic Mitigation Fee developed in
                             2008 by ACTC for purposes of collecting mitigation fees in
                             addition to the previously adopted countywide regional traffic
                             mitigation fee. Said fees are necessary to fund highway
                             capacity as well as pedestrian, bicycle, NEV, and landscaping
                             improvements throughout the Martell area as new
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 22

                             development occurs over the next 20-50 years. Recommended
                             components of the draft Martell CMX include:
                             •   Installation of a traffic control signal at the intersection of SR
                                 88/Wicklow Way
                             •   Installation of a traffic control signal at the intersection of SR
                                 49/Martell Cut-off/Jackson Gate Road. In addition, left
                                 turn pockets shall be constructed on the east and westbound
                                 approaches or a center median shall be installed along SR 49
                                 to restrict left turns.
                             •   Installation of a traffic control signal at the intersection of SR
                                 49/88 and Argonaut Lane. In addition, a second eastbound
                                 approach lane shall be constructed at this intersection.
                             •   Construct the Sutter Street extension project from SR 49 to
                                 Hoffman Street eliminating use of Hoffman Street as a
                                 collector. Project includes installation of a traffic control
                                 signal at the intersection of SR 49/88 and Sutter Street.
                             •   Widen SR 49/88 from the SR 49/88 junction in Martell to
                                 Main Street to six lanes or, alternatively, accept LOS “F” for
                                 this roadway segment as a “traffic calming” feature,
                                 however support Caltrans shoulder widening (two 8 foot
                                 shoulders) for traffic safety purposes.
                             •   Widen the roadway segment of SR 88 from SR 104 to SR 49
                                 (in Martell) from 3 to 5 lanes.
                             •   Include pedestrian, bicycle, NEV and transit access and
                                 facilities.
                                     Responsibility:        City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                            City Council
                                     Time Frame:            FY 2008
                                     Funding:               General Fund, ACTC
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 29
                             JACKSON AREA CMX AND SUB-REGIONAL TRAFFIC
                             MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM. Work with ACTC to bring
                             the Circulation Mapping Exercise (CMX) and Sub-Regional
                             Traffic Mitigation Fee Program to the City of Jackson to provide
                             a means for developing preliminary designs, cost estimates,
                             and a funding mechanism for Jackson sub-regional
                             improvement projects.
                                     Responsibility:        City Staff, Planning Commission,
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 23

                                                         City Council
                                     Time Frame:         FY 2010
                                     Funding:            General Fund, ACTC
IMPLEMENTATION
MEASURE 30
                             LONG RANGE IMPROVEMENT OPTIONS.                         Continue
                             efforts to find a long range solution to projected future Jackson
                             Highway corridor congestion.
                                     Responsibility:     City Staff, Planning Commission,
                                                         City Council
                                     Time Frame:         FY 2008-On-going
                                     Funding:            General Fund, ACTC
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 24
                         III. EXISTING CIRCULATION SYSTEM
The following section describes the existing conditions of the City of Jackson
circulation system including roadways, intersections, goods movement, transit, and
bicycle and pedestrian facilities. The information used is based on the 1999 Draft
City of Jackson Circulation Element updated by the “Jackson Land Use, Circulation
and Zoning Project Draft Environmental Impact Report,” July, 2007.
ROADWAY SYSTEM
Figure 1 displays the major roadways in the City of Jackson study area. The
roadways fall into two general categories: State routes and local routes.
Descriptions of individual roadways in each category are provided below.
State Routes
The State highways serving the Jackson area include State Routes (SR) 49, 88, and
104. (See Figure 1). These routes provide for access to, from, and through the
County. The following briefly describes each route.
State Route 49, the Mother Lode Highway, sometimes referred to as the Golden
Chain Highway, extends from Oakhurst in Madera County to Vinton in Plumas
County, connecting many of the historic towns developed during the gold mining
days. It is the major north/south highway through Amador County. Within the
Jackson area, SR 49 becomes coincidental with SR 88 between Martell and Jackson
and is classified as an arterial. Within the Jackson city limits, SR 49 bisects the City
providing access to much of the commercial uses on both sides of the highway as a
four-lane facility with a continuous two-way left-turn lane.
State Route 88 is a two-lane, principal arterial that runs west to east through
Amador County, connecting San Joaquin County on the west to Alpine County near
Kirkwood on the east. SR 88 becomes coincidental with SR 49 in the Martell area
and runs south into the City of Jackson. Just south of the Jackson downtown area,
SR 88 and SR 49 separate with SR 88 continuing to the east into Alpine County. SR
88 serves significant local and recreational traffic traveling through the Jackson area.
The intersection of SR 49 and SR 88 is considered among the most heavily used
intersections in Amador County.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 25

City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 26
State Route 104 is a major collector which originates at SR 99 at Galt in Sacramento
County, enters Amador County and passes through the City of Ione, intersecting SR
88 at Post Mile 8.2 in Amador County, 2.3 miles east of Ione. It is then coincidental
with SR 88 until 1.6 miles west of Martell, where it changes to a northeasterly
direction as a major collector to SR 49 at Sutter Hill. At SR 49, Ridge Road becomes
an easterly extension of SR 104 and continues as a County major collector road to SR
88 near Pine Grove. Although SR 104 is not within the Jackson planning area, the
segment of SR 104 that is coincidental with SR 88 provides access into the Jackson
planning area near Martell. This route is also important because it provides an
alternate route for trucks and Jackson Rancheria Casino patrons instead of using SR
88 through Jackson. East of SR 49, the extension of SR 104 (Ridge Road) generally
follows the northern boundary of Jackson’s planning area.
Local Routes
The major local collector roadways within the study area include Hoffman
Street/Stony Creek Road, New York Ranch Road, North Main Street, Jackson Gate
Road and Ridge Road. Descriptions of each facility are provided below.
    •     Hoffman Street/Stony Creek Road extends in a southwesterly direction from
          SR 49 in the City of Jackson to Buena Vista Road near the Calaveras County
          line. In the Jackson study area, Hoffman Street provides access to Jackson
          Junior High School, Argonaut High School and the Amador County Superior
          Court.
    •     New York Ranch Road begins at Court Street in the City of Jackson and
          extends northerly out of the City limits, where it connects with Ridge Road.
          New York Ranch Road provides access to the Jackson Rancheria Casino and
          residential and professional office land uses within the City limits,.
    •     North Main Street is a historic route that extends from the downtown Jackson
          area to the north, where it transitions to Jackson Gate Road. North Main
          Street serves a variety of commercial, office and residential land uses between
          the downtown area and Jackson Gate Road.
    •     Jackson Gate Road loops around from SR 49 in the Martell area to the
          southeast, where it connects with North Main Street in the City of Jackson.
          Jackson Gate Road provides access from the Martell area to the northeast
          Jackson area, serving some commercial uses and historic sites along its route.
    •     Ridge Road extends northeasterly from SR 104 in Sutter Creek into the Pine
          Grove area, where it connects with SR 88. Ridge Road generally borders the
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 27

          northern portion of the Jackson planning area with some residential uses
          along its length.
Minor collectors with local significance include Argonaut Lane, Broadway, Butte
Mountain Road, China Graveyard Road, Clinton Road, Court Street, and French Bar
Road.
Roadway Operations
Field surveys were performed to document the general condition of the major
roadways in the Jackson area. The primary use of roadway condition data for this
effort was to determine the effect of non-standard conditions on a road’s capacity
and ultimately its level of service. Key data factors include lane widths, shoulder
widths, general terrain, percentage of the route in which passing is not allowed, and
pavement condition.
Through the study area, the State Routes generally provide 11 to 12 foot lanes with
varying shoulders between 0-4 feet. Many of the local routes have lane widths of
less than 12 feet and limited shoulders, if any. The road segments within the study
area are considered to be rolling with generally good pavement conditions, with the
majority of most sections not allowing for passing.
The quality of traffic operations is expressed in terms of level of service (LOS)
ranging from LOS A (best) to LOS F (worst). Table 1 provides a qualitative
description of each LOS category.
                                                      Table 1
                                          Level of Service Description
 Level of Service                                            Description
           A            Represents free flow. Individual users are virtually unaffected by the presence
                        of others in the traffic stream.
           B            Stable flow, but the presence of others in the traffic stream begins to be
                        noticeable.
                        Stable flow, but marks the beginning of the range of flow in which the operation
           C            of individual users becomes significantly affected by interaction with others in
                        the traffic stream.
           D            Represents high density, but stable flow.
           E            Represents operating conditions at or near the capacity level.
           F            Represents forced or breakdown flow.
 Source: Highway Capacity Manual - Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, 1994.
Level of service is measured for a road segment in terms of the traffic volume in
relation to its functional capacity. The capacity of a road segment is influenced by
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 28

many factors including lane width, shoulder width, terrain type, proportion of
trucks, peaking characteristics, and ability to pass. The field data collected for
existing road conditions was utilized to determine the capacity of key road
segments according to methods described in the Highway Capacity Manual - Special
Report 209, Transportation Research Board, 1994 and Transportation Research Record
1194, Transportation Research Board, 1988.
Figure 2 displays the average daily traffic volumes for the major roadways within
the study area. Peak daily volumes are typically 5 to 15 percent higher than average
daily volumes. These peak periods typically occur on the weekends with both local
and through travel encompassing a large portion of the demand.
In order to determine the existing LOS, the average daily and peak daily volumes
were compared to road capacities developed for each classification of roadway.
Table 2 presents the daily level of service criteria developed for the Jackson area
roadways. Table 2 also identifies selected roads that fall into each category.
                                                  Table 2
                                         Level of Service Criteria
                                                      Daily Service Volumes (vehicles per day)
                    Facility
                                                LOS A       LOS B      LOS C     LOS D       LOS E
 Arterial A (SR 88 west of SR       49)1         2,600       5,900     10,300    16,900      20,200
 Arterial B (SR 49 – two lanes, SR 88            1,600       4,500      8,600    14,200      18,600
 east of SR 49)1
 Arterial C (SR 49 – four lanes)2                N/A        24,900     30,800    32,700      34,900
 Arterial D (SR 49 with climbing lane)2          N/A        12,200     16,500    22,200      25,100
 Collector A (New York Ranch Rd,                 1,000       3,000      5,500     8,750      11,200
 Clinton Rd, Argonaut, Jackson Gate)1
 Collector B (Main St., Hoffman St.,              600        2,000     3,500      4,900       5,500
 Court St., Broadway)1
 Notes: 1 Source: Transportation Research Record 1194, Transportation Research Board, 1988.
 2 Source: Highway Capacity Manual - Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, 1994.
 N/A = Not Achievable.
Figure 3 presents the existing average daily LOS results for the roadway segments.
As shown in Figure 3, most of the local roadways currently operate at LOS C or
better under average daily conditions.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 29

City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 30
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 31
INTERSECTIONS
In addition to the congestion on the road segments of the State highway system,
Jackson currently experiences two other types of circulation issues relative to
intersections: (1) significant levels of peak hour congestion have been observed at
key intersections; and (2) operational and safety problems exist due to limited sight
distance and non-standard geometric design of certain intersections.
Similar to the problematic roadways, peak hour congestion at intersections occurs
primarily on the state highways. These peak periods may occur during typical
commuter hours on weekdays or during weekends as a result of tourist traffic.
Specific locations within the current City limits are described below.
LOS analyses indicate that all highway intersections in the City operate at an
acceptable LOS during the a.m. and p.m. peak hour as a whole; however, the
following stop controlled intersections have extensive delays on the side street
approaches:
    •     SR 88/Broadway - LOS F on the minor street approach (Broadway) during
          the a.m. and p.m. peak hours.
    •     SR 49/French Bar Road - LOS F on the minor street approach (French Bar
          Road) during the p.m. peak hour.
Three State highway intersections experience high volumes of traffic during peak
periods and suffer operational concerns during peak periods. These include the SR
49/88 intersection in Jackson, the SR 49/Main Street intersection, and the SR
49/Clinton Road intersection. All three intersections were recently signalized
which will help to relieve traffic congestion on a short-term basis.
In addition to these intersections, a number of other key intersections have
operational and safety problems, which include:
    •     SR 49 @ Sutter Street - skewed angle of intersection, limited sight distance,
          heavy student pedestrian use and conflicting movements with other
          driveways along the east side of SR 49;
    •     The Historic Broadway Corridor - between Clinton Road and SR 88 is limited
          by very narrow lanes and limited turning radii at several intersections;
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 32

    •     SR 49/Hoffman Street - limited by the steep grade and narrow width of
          Hoffman Street as it approaches SR 49;
    •     SR 88 @ Broadway - limited by narrow lanes and close proximity to the SR
          49/SR 88 intersection.
Although outside the Jackson city limits, three other key intersections in the
planning area currently experience congested operations and safety deficiencies:
    •     SR 49 @ Jackson Gate Road - installation of stop signs and flashing red lights
          have slowed traffic on SR 49 to improve safety at this location however it
          continues to experience traffic congestion;
    •     SR 49 @ SR 88 in Martell - installation of a traffic signal at this intersection has
          improved conditions for the foreseeable future; and,
    •     SR 49 @ Argonaut Lane - skewed angle of intersection, high speeds on SR 49,
          and impaired sight distance for the Argonaut Lane approach.
GOODS MOVEMENTS
Primary truck routes within the City include State Routes 49 and 88, as well as key
local roads such as Main Street, North Main Street, Jackson Gate Road, Hoffman
Street, Argonaut Lane and Clinton Road. Caltrans collects data to determine the
number of trucks in the traffic stream on State highways. Along SR 88 (north),
approximately 8 percent of the total vehicles are trucks, while just east of Jackson,
SR 88 (south) is composed of approximately 7 percent truck traffic. Along the
section of SR 49 in the Jackson study area, approximately 7-8 percent of the total
vehicles are trucks.
TRANSIT
The Amador Regional Transit System (ARTS) provides fixed-route/demand
responsive bus service to the City of Jackson, as well as the other cities and small
communities including Drytown, Fiddletown, Pine Grove, Pioneer and Buckhorn.
ARTS provides service Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. on 33
routes. The general fare is $2.00 per person, while seniors and handicapped
passengers ride for $1.00. A book of 40 tickets can be purchased for $68.00 (15
percent discount). Seniors and handicapped persons can buy a monthly pass for
$34.00.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 33

Weekday fixed-route service is provided between Jackson, Ione and Sutter Hill, and
between Jackson and Mace Meadows. In 2008, an hourly shuttle service is to be
initiated between Jackson and Sutter Creek, providing stops at or near the major
shopping centers, business plazas, apartment complexes and parks between the two
cities.
BIKEWAY AND PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
Currently there are no designated bike routes in the City of Jackson. Although
bicycling encompasses a very low percentage of all work trips, recreational
bicycling is very popular.
The downtown Jackson area is heavily utilized by pedestrians, particularly by
school children and people working and shopping along Main Street. SR 49 bisects
this area and many of the pedestrian origins and destinations are located on each
side of the road. For example, schools and a parking lot are located on the west
side of SR 49, while Detert Park and the Main Street shopping area are located on
the east side of SR 49. Although crosswalks controlled by traffic signals are located
at the intersections of Main Street and SR 88, they are a quarter mile apart and other
non-signalized crosswalks cause concern.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 34
                             IV. FUTURE NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The purpose of the future needs assessment is to analyze projected traffic volumes
and resulting deficiencies assuming build-out allowed under the land use element
as well as the City’s sphere of influence (SOI) and surrounding areas (also referred
to as build-out plus cumulative conditions). Improvement alternatives needed to
develop the circulation system to serve the area’s land use plans are included in
Chapters V and VI.
UPDATED LAND USE PROJECTIONS
The land use projections used for this analysis were developed as part of the 2007
Jackson Land Use, Circulation and Zoning Project Draft Environmental Impact
Report (DEIR). Table 3 reflects potential build-out scenarios from the DEIR. The
additional development shown on Table 3 is primarily due to changes in the
housing density allowed (from one dwelling unit per acre to five dwelling units per
acre) in the southern area of the City (all development in the Scottsville area which
annexed into Jackson after 1981). Despite changes in the commercial designations
of the 1981 General Plan, which effectively reduced commercial densities, Table 3
shows an increase in overall square footage of commercial anticipated under the
new General Plan. This is because the commercial designation square footage is
based upon anticipated commercial need per residence as opposed to the actual
amount of land with a commercial designation.
The subsequent evaluation (also from the DEIR) focuses on the third or highest
growth scenario to ensure circulation infrastructure is adequately addressed.
                                                 Table 3
                          JACKSON AND VICINITY LAND USE COMPARISON
  Model Version           Dwelling        KSF 1               KSF               K-8         High School
                            Units    Commercial            Industrial       Enrollment       Enrollment
Cumulative No                3,156        2,408                141             1,393             1,301
Project
Conditions 2
Cumulative Plus              3,688        2,912                141             1,769             1,598
Project
Conditions 3
Cumulative Plus              4,281        3,746                141             2,593             2,250
Project with
SOI 4
1 KSF = thousand square feet
2 Growth anticipated by 2025 countywide traffic model plus previous (1981) Jackson General Plan build-out
3 Growth anticipated by 2025 countywide traffic model plus 2008 Jackson General Plan build-out
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 35

Source: Fehr & Peers, 2006
FUTURE YEAR TRAFFIC FORECASTS
Figure 4 displays the average daily traffic volume forecasts for area roadways under
the 2025 cumulative plus General Plan build-out including sphere of influence
scenario. As expected, the most significant increases in traffic volumes occur on the
state highways. The existing trend of mixing through traffic with local development
traffic is expected to continue to further exacerbate problems along SR 49 and SR 88.
CIRCULATION SYSTEM DEFICIENCIES
This discussion focuses on deficiencies that would result from future travel demand
for the various circulation system components. Since the automobile is expected to
continue in its role as the primary travel mode in this area, the deficiency analysis
focuses on roadways and intersections. Given the price of fuel, lack of highway
funding, concerns for global warming and constraints to highway widenings, other
non-automotive components of the circulation system are given serious
consideration as well.
Roadway System
The volumes in Figure 4 were compared to the level of service thresholds described
in Table 2 to determine the projected deficiencies assuming no improvements to the
road system (see Figure 5). Table 4 summarizes the deficient roadways under the
2025 cumulative plus General Plan build-out including sphere of influence scenario.
                                                 Table 4
                         SUMMARY OF PROJECTED ROADWAY DEFICIENCIES
   Roadway Segment                                                    Average Daily Level of Service
   1. SR 49/88 from SR 49/88 Junction (Martell area) to                              F
         Main Street
   2. SR 49/88 from Main Street to SR 49/88 Junction                                 F
         (Jackson)
   3. SR 49 from SR 49/88 Junction (Jackson) to French Bar                           F
         Road
   4. SR 49 from French Bar Road to Clinton Road                                     F
   5. SR 49 from Clinton Road to Broadway                                            D
   6. SR 49 south of Broadway                                                        D
   7. SR 88 from SR 49/88 Junction (Jackson) to Court Street                         F
4 Growth anticipated by 2025 countywide traffic model plus 2008 Jackson General Plan build-out including
sphere of influence
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 36
   8.    SR 88 east of Court Street                    E
   9.    Hoffman Street from Argonaut Lane to SR 49/88 D
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 37
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 38
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 39
As this shows, the State highway system will continue to experience the majority of
the traffic congestion if no improvements are made. It is suspected that traffic
generated by new development in the area will also cause both Court Street and
North Main Street to operate unacceptably (LOS D).
Intersections
Five area intersections are expected to operate at LOS E or F under the 2025
cumulative plus General Plan build-out including sphere of influence scenario.
SR 49/88/Hoffman Street. Similar to the SR 49/88/Argonaut Lane intersection, a
limited number of gaps in oncoming traffic and poor sight distance cause long
delays for Hoffman Street in the AM and PM peak hours.
SR 49/SR 88 (Jackson). Heavy turn volumes lead to delays in excess of 55 seconds
in the AM and PM peak hours.
SR 88/Broadway. Increasing traffic along SR 88 leads to delays in excess of 50
seconds at this intersection during both peak hours.
SR 49/French Bar Road. The General Plan allows for additional growth in the
southwesterly portion of the City and much of this traffic is expected to use French
Bar Road. The existing side-street stop-control has insufficient capacity to serve the
expected demand for travel.
SR 49/Clinton Road. Heavy turning movements cause delays in excess of 80
seconds in the PM peak hour.
Goods Movement
It is anticipated that SR 49 and SR 88 will continue to be the primary truck access
routes serving the City. It is important that consideration be given to the
designation of certain new roads to allow truck traffic, particularly in the newly
developing areas. Trucks should be directed to specific major roads in order to
minimize the impacts on residential streets. The need to designate truck routes will
become more critical as the City grows.
Transit
As the population and traffic increase in the future, the demand for bus transit
services is also expected to increase. It is important that the Amador Regional
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 40
Transit Service expand the frequency and location of their bus service as the City
grows. There is a need for the City to provide such amenities as designated bus
stop locations, turnouts and shelters to better accommodate the ARTS services and
to encourage bus travel as a mechanism to reduce traffic congestion.
Bikeway and Pedestrian Facilities
The demand for bicycle and pedestrian facility improvements will become even
greater as the City and the surrounding area grows. Bicycle facilities will be needed
for both recreational and commuter travel as an alternative to the automobile. The
existing pedestrian circulation problems of a safe SR 49 crossing will become worse
if no improvements are implemented. Other problems will occur in the newly
developing areas unless actions are taken to develop a comprehensive bicycle and
pedestrian circulation system.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 41
                V. EVALUATION OF IMPROVEMENT OPTIONS
In 2005, ACTC and Wilbur Smith Associates evaluated potential alternatives for a
highway bypass of the City in the “Jackson SR-88 Corridor Improvement
Alternatives Analysis”. Four alternatives were evaluated as a part of this study.
The alternatives addressed were: 1) “Do Nothing” Alternative; 2) North Jackson
Bypass (Corridor 2) Alternative; 3) Ridge/Climax Road Bypass (Corridor 4)
Alternative; and 4) Western Bypass (Corridor 5) Alternative. The study provided
preliminary feasibility information, including engineering feasibility and
environmental issues. The study did not recommend one particular alternative, but
did note that the apparent community consensus was to do nothing.
In 2006, the City renewed efforts to find a long range highway bypass solution to
address projected traffic and circulation constraints. The California State University
at Sacramento Center for Collaborative Policy was retained to conduct a series of
town hall workshops to try to bring various elements of the community to agree
upon a preferred highway bypass solution. Again, the effort to gain community
consensus for a bypass failed. This outcome caused the City Council to instruct City
staff and the ACTC to focus efforts on short term interim improvements while the
effort to find a long range solution would be continued.
The short range planning options were initially developed by ACTC as part of the
2006 countywide transportation sales tax initiative. They were commonly referred
to as the “page eleven” improvements, identified by their page number in the
countywide sales tax expenditure plan. The sales tax initiative failed to secure voter
approval however, the City and the ACTC remain committed to the page eleven
projects. The page eleven projects are included in the Preferred Circulation Plan
(Chapter VI).
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 42

                          VI. PREFERRED CIRCULATION PLAN
The preferred circulation plan is focused upon the list of transportation
improvements contained in the “City of Jackson Land Use, Circulation and Zoning
Project Draft Environmental Impact Report” (DEIR). These projects together with
efforts to reduce automobile usage will reduce the frequency or location of future
LOS E and F conditions. Figure 6 identifies the location of the listed roadway
improvements.
Roadways:
• Widen SR 49/88 from Main Street north to the SR 49/88 junction in Martell to six
     lanes or because this alternative may be infeasible, accept LOS F along this
     segment which provides traffic calming or slower speeds. Support Caltrans
     shoulder widening to improve safety.
• Widen SR 49/88 from Main Street south to the SR 49/88 intersection in Jackson
     to six lanes or because this alternative may be infeasible, accept LOS D, E, and F
     along this segment. Support sidewalks, landscaping, and other “context
     sensitive solutions”.
• Widen SR 49 from the SR 49/88 intersection in Jackson south to French Bar Road
     to six lanes or accept LOS D, E, or F at this location.
• Widening of the roadway segment of SR 49 from French Bar Road to Clinton
     Road to four lanes.
• Widening of the roadway segment of SR 49 from Clinton Road to Broadway to
     four lanes.
• Widening of the roadway segment of SR 49 south of Broadway to four lanes.
• Widening the roadway segment of SR 88 from SR 49/SR 88 junction in Jackson
     to Court Street to four lanes where feasible and/or accept LOS D, E, and F
     conditions.
• Complete Mission Boulevard extension.
• Construct the Sutter Street extension to connect upper Hoffman Street with
     Sutter Street to SR 49/88.
Intersections:
• Install traffic control signal at the intersection of SR 49/88 and Sutter Street.
• Construction of a second southbound left turn lane at the intersection of SR
     49/SR 88 (Jackson).
• Install traffic control signal at the intersection of SR 88/Broadway if feasible.
• Install traffic control signal at the intersection of SR 49/French Bar Road.
• A second southbound left turn lane shall be constructed at the intersection of SR
     49/Clinton Road.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 43

City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 44
Long Range Planning Options
Unless local, regional, and State efforts to reduce automobile vehicle miles traveled
are successful, a long range highway solution (bypass) will be necessary or LOS E
and F conditions will need to be accepted at certain locations. Figure 7 generally
identifies the long range (highway bypass) planning options last considered in the
ACTC/Wilbur Smith 2005 “Jackson SR 88 Corridor Improvement Alternatives
Analysis.”
TRANSIT
In 2008, the ACTC adopted a new five-year “Amador County Transit Development
Plan (TDP)”. Along with this Plan, the ACTC adopted an Amador County Transit
Design Guidelines Manual. The TDP provides an in-depth look at the transit
system currently in place, provides options for adjusting or expanding the transit
system to meet the public’s needs within funding constraints, then sets forth a list of
recommended changes for ARTS and other transit services in the County. The
companion document, Transit Design Guidelines Manual, includes design
recommendations for bus stops, pedestrian access, passenger amenities, park and
ride/multi-modal facilities, and transit oriented development. ACTC and ARTS
intend to develop a ”long-range” Transit Development Plan as soon as Circulation
Elements for Amador County and its cities are updated in 2008 and 2009. Copies of
the TDP and Design Guidelines are available at the ACTC or online at www.actc-
amador.org/projects.
In terms of local service for ARTS, access would be enhanced by the installation of
bus turnouts and transit shelters along major routes in the City. These types of
improvements are often most effective when located adjacent to major access points
such as large residential areas or shopping centers. It is recommended that the
Capital Improvement Program include these improvements to be implemented in
conjunction with road widenings or new road construction.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 45

City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 46
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 47
BIKEWAY AND PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
In 2006 the Amador County Transportation Commission (ACTC) completed the
“Amador Countywide Pedestrian and Bicycle Transportation Plan” along with a
companion document “Pedestrian Bicycle Design Guidelines and Recommended
Standards”. Both documents were adopted by ACTC in April of that year. The
Countywide Pedestrian and Bicycle Transportation Plan contains lists of the highest
ranking and more feasible pedestrian and bicycle capital improvement projects. It
also serves as the countywide Americans with Disability Act (ADA) transition plan
for public rights of way. The purpose of the Plan and Guidelines is to improve
pedestrian and bicycle access for residents and visitors of Amador County traveling
to and from key destinations such as schools, transit facilities, parks, commercial
areas, and homes. The Plan includes a list of prioritized bicycle and pedestrian
projects for the City of Jackson. The Plan was adopted by the City of Jackson on
April 24, 2006. Copies of the Plan and Design Guidelines are available at the ACTC
or online at www.actc-amador.org/projects.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES (NEVs)
A group of Jackson area citizens have formed the “Amador Transit Project” and
have been developing a system of alternative transit lanes for use by pedestrians,
bicycles, and neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs). This system will include
public roads with speed limits under 35 MPH as well as specifically designated
lanes on higher speed routes and independent “quiet alternative travel lanes” or
QATLs across open territory where roads presently do not exist. The system will
include “solar (electrical charging) transit stations” and is intended to provide
alternative means of travel throughout and between Jackson, Martell, Sutter Creek,
and Amador City.
City of Jackson Circulation Element
November 2008
Page 48

CITY OF JACKSON
LAND USE ELEMENT
November 2008
                        Adopted November 10, 2008
                 City Council Resolution No. 2008-44
INTRODUCTION
Welcome to the 2008 Land Use Element of the City of Jackson’s General Plan. This
document is to replace the 1981 Land Use Element and is intended to be used as the
blueprint for planning development in the City of Jackson for the next 20 years.
The Purpose
The purpose of the Land Use Element is to establish the framework to direct the physical
development of the City and to form the organization of the City’s environment. The
associated Land Use Designations Map identifies the locations and land use categories
with the City of Jackson. The Land Use Element establishes the function and form of the
City because it is a composite statement of the goals, strategies and actions of the other
elements of the General Plan.
Vision Statement
Additionally, the Land Use Element provides the public decision makers and residents a
guide in understanding the long range intentions of the City and acts as a tool within
which to implement the vision of the City of Jackson. Ongoing input will be sought to
keep the Land Use Element fluid to reflect the citizens' viewpoints. The goals and
policies contained in this document are intended to address each of the critical issues
identified within the vision statement which is as follows:
        The Jackson area is blessed with many important resources and assets worthy of
        preservation, including the historic commercial and residential structures, our rich
        mining history, our diverse cultural heritage, the Jackson Creek and its many
        tributaries, and the views of the Sierra Nevada Mountains and Sacramento Valley.
        These attributes make the City of Jackson a highly desirable place to live and
        work. Through time, the people, uses of land and the environment have evolved a
        functional relationship, giving the City its present pattern and form.
        Enhancement and maintenance of this relationship between the citizens of the
        City of Jackson, our environment, and the City’s many attributes is essential for a
        continued high quality of life. The City of Jackson will remain the primary
        commercial, service, and employment center of the area and region. Growth will
        be allowed in an orderly and well managed manner that does not detract from the
        City’s attributes or negatively impact the environment. As such, the City of
        Jackson will continue to be a desirable community for its citizens and to the
        vacationing public.
        The City of Jackson “preserving our past, enriching our present, building our
        future.”
Page 1
Land Use Element
November 2008

The Process
The Land Use Element update process began in August of 1995 with the establishment of
the City’s Sphere of Influence and the Planning area which is, in this case, coincident
with the Sphere of Influence and City Limits boundary line. Subsequent to the
establishment of the Sphere of Influence and Planning Area, the City was broken into
neighborhoods. The intention of establishing neighborhoods was to break Jackson into
sizable chunks to help ease the planning process. The neighborhood boundaries were
based upon the land use, circulation patterns and geographical features. The result was
twelve very distinct neighborhoods each with very individual attributes and concerns.
The City held neighborhood meetings in an attempt to gather public input on how the
citizens wanted to see their neighborhood shaped for the next 20 years, the expected life
of this document. Despite sending brochures to virtually every property owner within the
City limits, notification in the City water bills, and media announcements, turn-out at the
neighborhood meetings was decidedly low.
As the General Plan update is intended to be a public process, the City leaders established
a nine person General Plan Steering Committee with representation from most of the City
neighborhoods. This document is the product of the information gathered at the
neighborhood meetings and the Steering Committee workshops, as well as public
hearings conducted by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
Statutory Regulations
The following California planning law is the force which has driven the need for a
General Plan Land Use Element update:
        Each planning agency shall prepare and the legislative body of each
        county and city shall adopt a comprehensive, long-term general plan for
        the physical development of the county or city, and any land outside its
        boundaries which in the planning agency’s judgment bears relation to its
        planning. (Government Code Section 65300)
Being that the 1981 land use element is no longer a long-term guide and due to the lack
of amendments has lost its comprehensiveness, the Planning Commission and City
Council determined the need to replace the element with a new one which better serves
as a useful tool for decision makers. While all of the seven mandated elements of the
general plan need to be updated, the local decision makers opted to start with the land use
element first, mainly to have an approved base to build upon. The land use element is
described in planning law as follows:
        The general plan shall include a land use element which designates the
        proposed general distribution and general location and extent of the uses
        of the land for housing, business, industry, open space, including
        agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and enjoyment of scenic
Page 2
Land Use Element
November 2008

         beauty, education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste
         disposal facilities, and other categories of public and private uses of land.
         The land use element shall include a statement of the standards of
         population density and building intensity recommended for the various
         districts and other territory covered by the plan. The land use element
         shall identify areas covered by the plan which are subject to flooding and
         shall be reviewed annually with respect to those areas. (Government
         Code Section 65302(a))
NEIGHBORHOOD DESCRIPTIONS
The following is a description of each of the twelve identified neighborhoods within the
Planning Area. The Goals and Polices of this document were developed to protect the
unique aspects of each of these neighborhoods.
Neighborhood 1- Southwest Jackson: This neighborhood is bound on the north by
French Bar Road, on the south and west by the City limits, and on the east by Highway
49. The predominant land use in this neighborhood is agricultural/residential with an
area of commercial along the Highway and a portion of French Bar Road. The
predominate issue of concern in this neighborhood is as the agricultural areas are
developed, care must be taken to appropriately handle the biological (wetlands and
vegetation), geological (slopes), and historical (the Moore Mine) resources in the area.
Neighborhood 2 – Peek Street Area: This neighborhood is bounded on the north by
Jackson Creek and the City limits, on the south by French Bar Road and the City limits,
on the east by Highway 49, and on the west by the City limits. Current land uses consist
of commercial along the Highway, residential behind the commercial, and the remaining
parcels are undeveloped and are used for agricultural purposes. Two issues of concern
have been identified for this area: First, there are two parcels on French Bar Road
adjacent to residential uses which are zoned commercial. Not only does this zoning
disagree with the land use designation, but also it is not really compatible with the rural
nature of the area. Second, there is a large area of undeveloped land in this neighborhood
which, depending upon how it is developed, could have a significant impact upon the
adjoining residents.
Neighborhood 3 – Hoffman St. Area: This small neighborhood is bounded on the north by
Hoffman Street, to the south by Jackson Creek and the City limits, to the west by the City
limits, and to the east by Highway 49. There are few vacant lots remaining in this
neighborhood. The predominant use is residential with some commercial along Highway
49. The primary issues of concern identified are traffic on Hoffman Street and the lack of
off-street parking for the school and associated events.
Neighborhood 4 – Argonaut Area: This neighborhood is bound by the City limits to the
north, Hoffman Street to the south, Highway 49 to the east, and Argonaut Lane to the
west. The majority of developed land in this neighborhood is used for single family
Page 3
Land Use Element
November 2008

residential units. There are some newer residential subdivisions as well as some that
were developed in the 1940s and 50s in this neighborhood. Other developed uses
include a commercial strip along Highway 49, Jackson Junior High between Hoffman
and Sutter Streets, and the County Courthouse located at the corner of Argonaut Lane
and Hoffman Street. The majority of the undeveloped land was historically used for
mining and processing of ore and tailings disposal. There exist a number of issues of
concern in this neighborhood, including, but not limited to the following: appropriate
designation of the Argonaut Mine site, unattractive commercial development along
Highway 49, limited parking for commercial along the Highway.
Neighborhood 5 - Westview: Neighborhood 5 is bounded on the north, south and west by
the City limits and to the east by Argonaut Lane. This neighborhood is half residential
(Westview) and half school district property (Argonaut High School). The residential
development is relatively new and is a mix of medium and low density. The primary
issue of concern for this neighborhood is growth around the residential neighborhood
(which is in Amador County’s jurisdiction).
Neighborhood 6 – Southeast Jackson: This neighborhood is bound on the north by
Jackson Creek, on the south and east by the City limits and on the west by Highway 49.
Existing and planned uses in this neighborhood vary widely from professional offices,
commercial, low, medium, and high density residential, and industrial. The most well
defined areas within this neighborhood include the Jackson Highlands subdivision of low
density, single family residential units, the Highlands mobile home park, and Scottsville
which is a planned development with industrial, commercial and residential development
(Terrace View). There are relatively large parcels of land between the Highlands and
Scottsville which are vacant. The majority of these parcels are currently designated
Planned Development (PD). The major roads traversing this neighborhood include
Broadway and Clinton Road. Issues of concern relating to this complex neighborhood
include the following; traffic along Clinton and Broadway, a desire to close south
Broadway to through traffic, topographic concerns for the area between the Highlands
and Scottsville, flooding along the South Fork Jackson Creek, and pedestrian access to
the west of town
Neighborhood 7 – Mission Area: This neighborhood is bound on the north by Highway
88, to the south by the South Fork Jackson Creek, the east by the City limits and the west
by Highway 49. Significant roads traversing this neighborhood include Broadway,
Bright Avenue, French Bar Road, Pitt Street, and Mission Boulevard. Existing land uses
in the area include commercial along Highway 49 and portions of Highway 88 and
Broadway, residential, institutional (St. Sava Mission) and Sutter Amador Hospital.
Concerns for this neighborhood include vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation on-
street parking, commercial development encroaching into the residential areas,
development concerns for the Saint Sava Mission property, future extension of Mission
Boulevard, and flooding along the South Fork Jackson Creek.
Neighborhood 8 - Downtown: This is the downtown commercial neighborhood. This
small, densely developed area is bounded to the north by North and Court Streets, the
Page 4
Land Use Element
November 2008

south by Highway 88, the east by Church and Pitt Streets and the west by Highway 49.
The predominant use in this neighborhood is retail commercial and governmental (i.e. the
old courthouse and Jackson City Office) with several pockets of residential uses. The
majority of the structures in this area are historic and should be protected. Issues of
concern for the downtown area include limited parking, pedestrian access to shops and
services, preservation of historic buildings and cultural resources, re-use of the old
courthouse, commercial encroachment into the residential pockets, and an under-utilized
natural resource -- the Jackson Creek
Neighborhood 9 – East Downtown: This neighborhood is bounded on the north by the
Amador D’Oro property, on the south by Highway 88, on the east by the City limits and
on the west by Church and Pitt Street. Existing land uses in this neighborhood include
professional offices, Amador County Administration Building, Jackson Elementary
School, the cemetery, retail commercial, and low, medium and high density residential.
The most defined area within this neighborhood is the residential subdivision, Old Mine
Estates. Significant roads traversing this neighborhood include Court Street and New
York Ranch Road. Issues of concern identified for Neighborhood 9 include, pedestrian
access to the medical services in the area and other parts of town, preservation of historic
buildings, commercial encroachment into the residential pockets, future local roads to
improve circulation, and an under-utilized natural resource -- the New York Ranch Road
drainage.
Neighborhood 10 – New York Ranch Road Area: This is a large area bounded by the
City limits to the north and east, the southern boundary of the Oro De Amador property
to the south and to the west. Significant roads traversing this neighborhood include and
New York Ranch Road and China Graveyard Road. Existing land uses include
residential, light commercial and a large area of open space. The most defined developed
area of this neighborhood is Rollingwood Estates, a mobile home park located along New
York Ranch Road. There is a large tract of vacant land between North Main Street and
New York Ranch Road known as the Oro De Amador property. Most of this land
contains waste rock and tailings from the Kennedy Mine. Though it is within the City
limits, the overall nature of this neighborhood is rural open space. Additionally, much of
the property surrounding this neighborhood is within the jurisdiction of Amador County
and is rural and agricultural. Issues of concern for this neighborhood include,
preservation of the rural and open space character of this neighborhood, preservation of
the riparian corridor along New York Ranch Road, appropriate zoning for the Oro De
Amador property and surrounding properties in County jurisdiction, pedestrian access
along New York Ranch Road and the appearance of any development in this area as
viewed from Highway 49/88.
Neighborhood 11 – North Main Area: This compact, densely developed historic
neighborhood is bounded on the north by Argonaut Street and the northern boundary of
Detert Park, North Street on the south, Church Street on the east and Highway 49 on the
west. Existing land uses included Detert Park, the Amador County Public Library,
commercial development along Highway 49 and historic residences. The North Fork of
the Jackson Creek also traverses this neighborhood. Issues of concern for this
Page 5
Land Use Element
November 2008

neighborhood are traffic circulation between North Main Street and Highway 49, parking
for the City Pool and the Library, lack of vegetation along Highway 49, preservation of
historic structures, encroachment of commercial uses in residential areas, under-
utilization of a natural resource -- the North Fork Jackson Creek.
Neighborhood 12 – Jackson Gate Area: This area is bounded by Highway 49/88 to the
west, unincorporated County area to the north, Oro De Amador property to the east and
the northern edge of Detert Park and the St. Sava Church property to the south. North
Main Street and Jackson Gate Road dissect this area and this curving rural road, the
original highway through town, played a key role in the development of this older section
of the City. Since much of this area evolved to meet the residential and commercial
needs of this area, a mix of residential and commercial uses are speckled throughout this
area. Inns and dining establishments are the most dominant commercial uses and many
of the residential structures date back over a century. Issues of concern in this
neighborhood include compatibility of residential and commercial uses, preservation of
the historical character of the neighborhood, vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation,
future development of the large vacant parcel between North Main Street and Highway
49/88 and flooding along the North Fork of Jackson Creek.
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
The following land use designations correspond to the enclosed Land Use Designation
Map and are intended to graphically portray the policies of the City of Jackson regarding
the use of land in the planning area. The following descriptions explain the general
nature and intensity of each land use category.
Residential Land Uses
The following residential land use designations were developed with the intent to provide
for a wide range of housing opportunities for the residents of the City of Jackson. For
added flexibility for property owners, these designations are also intended to be
hierarchical. Hierarchical means less dense residential uses will be allowed in each
residential designation. For example, single family residences will be allowed in areas
designated Residential Medium density.
The hierarchy from less to more dense is as follows: RS, RL, RSF, RD, RM and RH.
RS       Residential Suburban - The “RS” designation is applied to lands for residential
use, but with large lot sizes in order to promote and maintain the rural character of the
area. The “RS” designation is also applied to areas characterized by terrain which is less
suitable for higher residential densities. Minimum lot size is 1 acre. Population density
and building intensity is one household and one single family dwelling per acre.
RL       Residential Low Density - The “RL” designation is intended to provide a semi-
rural residential land use. The minimum lot size is ½ acre. Population density and
building intensity is one household and one single family dwelling unit per ½ acre.
Page 6
Land Use Element
November 2008

RSF Residential Single Family - The “RSF” designation has been applied to areas in
which urban services already exist or where they can easily be extended. The minimum
lot size for “RSF” is 8,000 square feet. The population density and building intensity is
one household and one single family dwelling per 8,000 square feet. When combined
with the Planned Development (pd) designation the Planning Commission, at their
discretion, may reduce the minimum lot size to 6,000 square feet as long as the following
findings are made:
         1.      Average slopes per lot are less than 15%;
         2.      Surrounding transportation infrastructure can accommodate the increased
                 density; and
         3.      Surrounding land uses are compatible with more dense single family
                 residential.
RD       Residential Duplex – The “RD” designation is intended to be applied to properties
predominately with duplexes, however, two detached residential units would also be
allowed. The minimum lot size for “RD” development is 8,000 square feet. Population
density and building intensity is one dwelling unit per 4,000 square feet of lot area.
RM Residential Medium Density - The “RM” designation is placed on lands where
more intense residential uses, such as four-plexes, would be acceptable. The minimum
parcel or lot size for “RM” development is 8,000 square feet with the building intensity
limited to one dwelling unit per 3,000 square feet.
RH       Residential High Density - The “RH” designation is placed on lands which are
suitable for multi-family housing. Minimum parcel or lot size is 4,000 square feet. The
maximum allowable density and building intensity is one dwelling units per 2,000 square
feet.
Commercial Land Uses
The following commercial land use designations encompass a wide variety of
commercial types from industrial and intense retail to personal services. This level of
specificity is intended to relieve issues which have been occurring where commercial and
residential land use designations are in the same area. Some properties previously
designated commercial, which allows all types of retail and service establishments, are
now designated with less intense commercial designations.
Commercial land use designations are also hierarchical. Hierarchical means less intense
commercial uses will be allowed in each designation. Residential uses will be allowed as
specified in each designation.
The hierarchy from less to more dense is as follows: PO, LC, HC, C, and I.
Page 7
Land Use Element
November 2008

PO      Professional Office - The professional office designation is intended for the
following list of low intensity “soft commercial” land uses:
        1.      Barber Shops
        2.      Beauty Salons
        3.      Delicatessens with a seating capacity of 40 or less
        4.      Dentists Offices
        5.      Doctors Offices
        6.      Legal Services
        7.      Offices – Business or professional
        8.      Personal Services
        9.      Public utility business offices
        10.     Residential Uses (Single or Multi-Family)
        11.     Voice, video, and data transmission facilities
A more detailed list of allowable uses will be specified in the City’s Development Code.
Minimum parcel or lot size is 8,000 square feet. Dwelling units shall be allowed within
this designation.
LC      Limited Commercial - The “LC” designation is intended to accommodate existing
business within predominately residential neighborhoods. Limited Commercial allows
for any use allowed in the Commercial (C) designation with the following exceptions:
        1.      Retail or wholesale stores or business over 3,000 square feet in size not
                involving any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products
                other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail business conducted
                on the premises and not more than fifty percent of the floor area of the
                building is used in the manufacture or treatment of products, and that such
                operations or products are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust,
                smoke, vibration or other similar causes,
        2.      Automobile service stations, including super-service stations and repair
                garages, including truck repair,
        3.      Banks,
        4.      Bowling alleys,
        5.      Department stores,
        6.      Drive-through restaurants,
        7.      Furniture stores,
        8.      Hotels with more than 12 rooms,
        9.      Medical laboratories,
        10.     New and used car lots,
        11.     Supermarkets,
        12.     Theaters, including drive-in theaters.
Minimum parcel or lot size is 8,000 square feet. Dwelling units are allowed in areas with
the “LC” designation.
Page 8
Land Use Element
November 2008

HC Historic Commercial - The “HC” designation is applied to the downtown area of
the City where the bulk of the commercial activities are related to tourism and the
buildings are historic. Proposed uses in the HC land use designation would include any
use allowed in the Neighborhood Commercial and Professional Office designations along
with retail or wholesale stores or businesses not involving any kind of manufacture,
processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental o the retail
business conducted on the premises. Residential uses are allowed in within this
designation. A preliminary list of allowable use is as follows:
        1.      Retail or wholesale stores or business not involving any kind of
                manufacture or processing
        2.      Automobile parking areas
        3.      Bakeries
        4.      Bowling alleys
        5.      Banks
        6.      Bus terminals and taxi stands
        7.      Churches
        8.      Copy/fax/mail box stores
        9.      Dry-cleaning establishments
        10.     Department Stores
        11.     Appliance stores
        12.     Express offices
        13.     Furniture stores
        14.     Grocery stores
        15.     Hardware stores
        16.     Hotels
        17.     Interior decorating shops
        18.     Medical laboratories
        19.     Motels
        20.     Music stores and schools
        21.     Nurseries and flower shops
        22.     Pet stores
        23.     Plumbing shops
        24.     Radio and television stores
        25.     Radio and television stations
        26.     Restaurants
        27.     Theaters
        28.     Trade Schools
        29.     Utility Offices
A more detailed list of acceptable land uses will be in the City’s Development Code.
Also in the zoning code will be development standards regarding set-backs and parking
that are intended to be less stringent than those for the Commercial Designation.
Additionally the zoning for Historic Commercial will include guidelines (voluntary) for
Page 9
Land Use Element
November 2008

architectural design intended to maintain/restore the historic nature of the downtown
area. These guidelines include the following:
         1.     New Structures shall be close to the street with parking the rear or at the
                side. Setbacks shall be allowed for sidewalks and street landscaping.
         2.     New structures shall continue the vertical emphasis (e.g. double hung
                windows, steep pitched roofs, etc.) of existing buildings.
         3.     Buildings within the Downtown Historic District shall be rich in
                architectural detail. Special emphasis shall be placed on replacing the
                balconies or awnings that once existed on many of the Main Street
                structures.
         4.     Buildings on Main Street shall be not higher in elevation that the
                Krabenhoff Building.
C        Commercial - The “C” designation is applied to those areas of the City where
retail, commercial and professional business services are acceptable. Minimum lot size is
8,000 square feet. Residential uses are allowed only with a Conditional Use Permit.
         1.     Retail or wholesale stores or business not involving any kind of
                manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is
                clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises and not
                more than fifty percent of the floor area of the building is used in the
                manufacture or treatment of products, and that such operations or products
                are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other
                similar causes
         2.     Automobile parking areas
         3.     Automobile service stations, including super-service stations and repair
                garages
         4.     Bakeries, employing not more than ten persons on premises
         5.     Banks
         6.     Bird stores or pet shops
         7.     Blueprinting and photostating shops
         8.     Bowling alleys
         9.     Bus terminals and taxi stands
         10.    Churches, temporary revivals
         11.    Cleaning and pressing establishments using non-inflammable and non-
                explosive cleaning fluid
         12.    Conservatories of music
         13.    Department stores
         14.    Destination resorts and inns
         15.    Dry-cleaning, pressing and laundry agencies
         16.    Electric appliance stores and repairs
         17.    Furniture stores
         18.    Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores, supermarkets
         19.    Hardware stores
         20.    Hotels
Page 10
Land Use Element
November 2008

         21.     Interior decorating shops
         22.     Medical laboratories
         23.     Motels, auto courts and tourist courts
         24.     Music stores and music and vocal instructions
         25.     New and used car lots
         26.     Nurseries and flower or plant greenhouses
         27.     Plumbing shops
         28.     Radio and television stores
         29.     Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, banquet rooms, and refreshments stands
                 including drive-through restaurants
         30.     Self-service laundries or launderettes
         31.     Telephone and public utility buildings and business offices
         32.     Television and radio studios
         33.     Theaters, including drive-in theaters
         34.     Trade schools and recreation centers, other than amusement centers, which
                 are not otherwise objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke,
                 vibrations, or other similar causes
         35.     Upholstery shops (not including auto upholstery)
         36.     Wedding chapels
         37.     All types of storage facilities, including truck repair
I        Industrial - The industrial designation is intended for land which is suitable for
manufacturing and light industrial uses. Commercial and residential uses may be allowed
in an area designated industrial with a Conditional Use Permit. Minimum lot size is
8,000 square feet.
Other Land Uses
Along with residential and commercial land uses, other land uses provide important
amenities to the City residents, as well as meet the needs of the surrounding community.
P        Public - The “P” designation applies to lands with public or quasi-public uses
such as schools, hospitals, churches, and County offices.
R        Recreation - The recreation designation is applied to lands where recreational
facilities are to be located and protected from conflicting uses.
OS       Open Space - Areas with an “OS” designation are intended to be undeveloped and
left in a natural state. Some landscaped areas, pedestrian pathway and plazas may be
allowed.
Planned Development
(pd) The “(pd)” designation is applied to lands that are presently largely undeveloped
where planned unit developments (PUDs) or neighborhood developments are
encouraged. Development in “(pd)” areas shall require the City’s approval of
Page 11
Land Use Element
November 2008

development plans that show how projects in these areas will conform to all general plan
goals, policies, objectives and design guidelines.
The “(pd)” designation is a “combined” land use designation meaning that it will always
be combined with one of the City’s other primary general plan designations. The “(pd)”
designation is also intended to encourage planned developments with a mixture of land
uses including different densities of residential units, professional office uses, and public
and recreational uses.
When the (pd) overlay is combined with another land use designation (for example
pd/OS) it is intended that the planned development include some of that use in the
development design.
OVERLAY LAND USES
Four overlay land uses designations have been developed primarily for the purpose of
providing extra protection to sensitive areas which the city officials and citizens wish to
have preserved or avoided. The overlay designations provide additional development
requirements to properties located within overlay beyond the requirements of the base or
combined land use designation. City Staff will implement these overlay land use
requirements. Should any dispute arise in regards to implementation of these
requirements, the dispute may be taken to the Planning Commission for review and
interpretation.
Creek/Floodplain Overlay
The purpose of the Creek/Floodplain Overlay is to promote open space along the City’s
numerous creeks, to encourage public use of many of these creeks, and to discourage
development in areas designated as a floodplain.
The boundary of the Creek/Floodplain overlay shall be contiguous with the Federal
Emergency Management Agency’s 100-year floodplain Boundary (FIRM Flood
Insurance Rate Map - Community Panel Number 060448 0001 D received on July 17,
1997).
Visual Corridor Overlay
The creation of the Visual Corridor Overlay is to protect the scenic views enjoyed by
everyone as they enter the City of Jackson from both the north and south of town. The
purpose of the Visual Corridor Overlay is not to restrict development in these areas, but
to provide development guidelines to promote development in an aesthetically pleasing
manner which will neither add nor detract from the viewshed. These development
guidelines would include the following criteria:
Page 12
Land Use Element
November 2008

         1.     The architectural style of structures within the Visual Corridor Overlay
                shall be consistent with historic structures in the Jackson area. Preference
                should be given to metal roofs with steep pitches and horizontal siding.
         2.     The height of structures within the Visual corridor shall not block the
                surrounding view shed’s points of interest (e.g. the Kennedy Wheels, the
                Serbian Orthodox Church, and the Kennedy Mine structures).
         3.     Development within the Visual Corridor shall be clustered near roads
                (with appropriate set-backs) as much as feasible. This would maximize
                the amount of open space within the corridor.
         4.     Development within the Visual Corridor shall be landscaped to minimize
                appearances to the greatest extent possible.
Historic Corridor Overlay
The purpose of the Historic Corridor Overlay is to protect historic features which exist
within the City. The Historic Corridor Overly is applied to primarily residential areas
which have a great amount of historic structures.
New construction or redevelopment within the Historic Corridor shall be consistent with
the late nineteenth century character of the Jackson area and shall meet the following
criteria:
         1.     Reconstruction shall utilize same building foot print for structures built
                prior to 1940 unless a Conditional Use Permit is obtained by the Planning
                Commission
         2.     Design of redeveloped structures within the Historic Corridor Overlay
                shall be consistent with original historic structure.
Plans for development will be reviewed at the staff level for consistency with these
requirement.
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE/URBAN RESERVE DESIGNATION
In California, “Sphere of Influence” has a legal meaning as a plan for the probable 20
year growth area of a local agency. This State policy recognizes that cities are better
equipped than counties to provide housing for all income levels and other urban uses and
amenities. The land within the sphere of influence (SOI) is outside city limits and is
zoned and governed by the County. The City must place a land use designation on land
within the SOI consistent with the probable future use of this area.
Recognizing that proposals for development in the SOI will likely require significant
review and studies to determine the ability to provide urban services in the undeveloped
areas, an “Urban Reserve Designation” shall be applied to all lands within the City’s SOI.
The Urban Reserve Designation is intended to preserve undeveloped lands surrounding
the City until such time that conversion to urban/suburban uses are determined
Page 13
Land Use Element
November 2008

appropriate and feasible. A General Plan amendment will be required for any projects in
the SOI area desiring to annex to the City of Jackson for municipal services at which time
specific City land use and zoning designations will be determined. To achieve a gradual
transition between areas in the SOI annexing to the City and neighboring agricultural
land uses, properties in the annexing area shall be planned with the most intense
development located closest to the city with increasingly reduced densities as the
development gets closer to adjacent agricultural uses.
POPULATION PROJECTIONS
Existing Land Use Inventory
Total size of the City of Jackson is approximately 2,280 acres. Of this, the total amount
of vacant land (most of which is residential) is approximately 1,315 acres. Land use
designations by acres are as follows:
        Residential Suburban                434 acres
        Residential Low Density              23 acres
        Residential Single Family           552 acres
        Residential Duplex                   25 acres
        Residential Medium Density           36 acres
        Residential High Density             37 acres
        Professional Office                 107 acres
        Limited Commercial                  149 acres
        Historic Commercial                  17 acres
        Commercial                          382 acres
        Industrial                           28 acres
        Open Space/Recreation               170 acres
        Public                              127 acres
Growth Rate
Based on historical growth rates, vacant property within the City and the current and
proposed uses of that property it is assumed that within a 20 year period the following
development will occur within the existing incorporated city:
        Single Family Residential Units               460
        Multi-Family Residential Units                125
Page 14
Land Use Element
November 2008
Based on the above information, the City’s population growth rate is projected at 1.33
percent (2.13 per household – 2000 Census, and current population of 4,371 – January 1,
2007 CA Dept. of Finance).
In addition to residential units, it is assumed that in a 20 year period the City’s non-
residential uses will increase as follows:
        Commercial              373,500 square feet
        Office space            70,000 square feet
        Industrial              117,000 square feet
        Public/Institutional    25,000 square feet
The above growth assumptions are important because future infrastructure and service
needs are based on population and building demands. These assumptions are susceptible
to change as a result of economic and social forces. For this reason, these assumptions
must be reviewed on a regular basis.
GOALS AND POLICIES
The following goals and polices are a combination of views and suggestions gathered at
the City’s Neighborhood and Steering Committee meetings, input from community
organizations and numerous public hearings at the Planning Commission and City
Council meetings.
Goal 1: Growth in the City of Jackson shall occur only if new development adequately
mitigates its environmental impacts, addresses housing availability and affordability
needs, respects open space resources and occurs so that the growth is in a manner which
is not detrimental to the City’s neighborhoods and small town quality of life.
          Policy 1.1: The City shall ensure, through implementation of the Resource
          Constraints and Priority Allocation Ordinance, the availability of public
          resources and services prior to acceptance of new residential and commercial
          subdivision applications.
          Policy 1.2: To protect its neighborhoods, the City shall participate in adjoining
          County projects to the greatest extent possible.
          Policy 1.3: The City shall continue to pursue a sphere of influence expansion
          with the intent of eventually annexing surrounding properties to act as a buffer
          between the County’s commercial area and the City’s residents.
          Policy 1.4: In order to curtail urban sprawl, expansion of the City by
          annexation shall focus on areas where infrastructure currently exists or is easily
          extended.
Page 15
Land Use Element
November 2008

          Policy 1.5: A hazards study shall be performed for the purpose of outlining
          areas considered hazardous due mainly to historic mining operations. The
          hazards study shall consider hazards associated with the use of hazardous
          materials and with ground disturbances that may have resulted in land
          instability. Once identified, these areas will be designated in a Hazards Overlay
          to be incorporated into this Land Use Element. New development standards for
          properties within this overlay shall be developed to protect the City’s citizens
          from exposure to hazardous materials.
          Policy 1.6: The density of new development shall be greater in the center core
          areas of the City and lesser in the periphery areas.
          Policy 1.7: All development within or adjacent to the City of Jackson in the
          vicinity of the Westover Field shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Land
          Use Plan (CLUP) as well as applicable height restrictions.
          Policy 1.8: A balanced mix of housing, workplaces, shopping, recreational
          opportunities, and institutional uses, including mixed-use structures (combined
          residential and non-residential uses), that help to reduce vehicular trips shall be
          encouraged.
          Policy 1.9: For developments that are on the edge of the City, an urban
          agricultural transition area shall be required. These urban agricultural transition
          areas may include fencing or other barriers as deemed appropriate depending
          upon the neighboring use.
          Policy 1.10: The City shall facilitate and promote the development of child
          care centers and homes in all areas and encourage inclusion of child care centers
          in non-residential areas, with the exception of Open Space and Industrial
          designations.
Goal 2: The City of Jackson has numerous natural and historic features. These features
shall be identified, enhanced if necessary, and protected.
          Policy 2.1: The City shall establish a grading ordinance which protects the
          natural topography and directs that all roads and structures be designed, built
          and landscaped to control erosion and other pollutants during and after
          construction. This shall include the use of Best Management Practices (BMPs)
          that demonstrate the ability to treat storm water drainage consistent with
          Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB), State and Federal
          requirements.
          Policy 2.2: The City shall pursue tree planting and Highway beautification
          grants.
Page 16
Land Use Element
November 2008

           Policy 2.3: The City shall promote the scenic development of the Jackson
           Creek corridor.
           Policy 2.4: Encourage public use of the New York Ranch Road Creek, the
           creek area adjacent to the Civic Center, Jackson Creek along Highway 88, and
           the North Fork Jackson Creek in Detert Park.
           Policy 2.5: Limit new development within the Creek/Floodplain overlay by
           requiring new development proposed within the overlay to obtain Planning
           Commission approval.
           Policy 2.6: A cultural resources study shall be performed for the purpose of
           outlining areas considered to be historically and culturally sensitive and creating
           a Cultural/Historic Overlay to be incorporated into this Land Use Element.
           New development standards for properties within this overlay shall be
           developed to protect the City’s historic and cultural features.
           Policy 2.7: New development shall promote natural amenities that are fronted
           by thoroughfares or public spaces, and not privatized behind backyards.
           Policy 2.8: New residential development shall provide park areas within
           reasonable walking distance to all residences.
           Policy 2.9: Encourage clustered residential development to create efficient
           development patterns, and to minimize environmental impacts and threats to
           public safety.
           Policy 2.10. To promote the architectural styles evident in the downtown
           historic district throughout the City including Greek Revival, Italianate, Neo-
           Classical Revival, Mediterranean Revival & Streamline, architectural standards
           shall be developed for all new commercial development.
Goal 3: As the Amador County seat, the City of Jackson shall continue to support efforts
to keep the majority of the County facilities as close to the downtown a possible.
           Policy 3.1: The City shall encourage the development of new parking areas and
           provide better access to existing parking areas.
Goal 4: The City of Jackson shall take a proactive role in preserving and improving its
economic vitality through protection and enhancement of its resources, both natural and
historic, and through solicitation of new forms of economic development.
           Policy 4.1: The City shall update the parking standards for commercial
           development. This update could include the creation of an in-lieu parking fee.
Page 17
Land Use Element
November 2008

          Policy 4.2: To increase pedestrian access, development standards shall be
          created which require the installation of sidewalks for new development.
          Policy 4.3: The City shall solicit grants to install sidewalks in existing
          developed areas, particularly along New York Ranch Road, North Main Street,
          and Court Street.
          Policy 4.4: The City shall encourage the development of a regional recreational
          facility on the Oro De Amador site.
          Policy 4.5: The City shall encourage open space designations at the southern
          (near Scottsville) and northern (near the Kennedy Mine property) entrances for
          the purpose of maintaining a visual town boundary.
Goal 5: Recognizing the importance of the downtown area to the City and region,
measures should be taken to restore, enhance and preserve the downtown district.
          Policy 5.1: Require design review for all Downtown projects so that they blend
          with other architectural styles contiguous or in proximity to the development.
          Policy 5.2: Encourage the restoration of historic buildings within the district.
          Special emphasis shall be placed on replacing the balconies or awnings that
          once existed on many of the Main Street structures.
          Policy 5.3: Encourage development of a pedestrian walkway from the Jackson
          Creek to the Busi Parking Lot.
CORRELATION BETWEEN LAND USE AND ZONING CATEGORIES
Because the Land Use Element and the associated Land Use Designation Map so
specifically designates properties within the City of Jackson, the correlation between the
land use designations and the zoning categories will be direct. With the adoption of this
Element and the associated designation map, there will no longer need to be a separate
zoning classification map. The zoning ordinance will need to be updated to bring the
zoning classifications into accordance with the Land Use Element and the Land Use
Designation Map.
Page 18
Land Use Element
November 2008
