                                Key Opportunity Sites
                                Medium (MR) & High (HR) Density Residential
                                    1) 567 Pope St 10 Acres (MR)
                                    2) 591 McCorkle 7.93 Acres (MR)
                                    3) 1817 Spring St 1.5 Acres (MR)
                                    4) Sulphur Springs Ave 15.3 Acres (MR
                                    5) Spring St 4.39 Acres (MR)
                                    6) 576 Pope St 4.64 Acres (MR)
                                    7) 1105 Pope St .22 Acres (MR)
                                    8) 684 McCorckle Ave .54 Acres (HR)
                                    9) 1515 Spring St .89 Acres (HR)
                                    10) 1447 Spring St 1.5 Acres (HR)
                                    11) 821 Pope St 1 Acres (HR)
                                    St. Helena City Limits
                                    St. Helena Urban Limit Line
               6
                 1
             8
                   2
          11
     7
   9   10
 3
5
                                                                           ´
        4
                     0 0.25 0.5                                    1 Miles
                                                  © OpenStreetMap (and) contributors, CC-BY-SA

                                                      Vacant & Underutilized Sites
                                                          12) Spring St 14.31 Acres (MR)
                                                          13) Stockton St .36 Acres (MR)
                                                          14) 1521 Oak Ave .20 Acres (MR)
                                                          15) Kearney St .24 Acres (MR)
                                                          16) 1405 Adams St .25 Acres (MR)
                                                          17) Madrona .17 Acres (MR)
                                                          18) Madrona .15 Acres (MR)
31                                                        19) Allyn .11 Acres (MR)
                                                          20) 1623 Adams St .20 Acres (MR)
    32                       29                           21) Stockton St .12 Acres (MR)
                                                          22) Spring St .38 Acres (MR)
                                                          23) Sulphur Springs .39 Acres (MR)
                 25       33
                                                          24) Crinella .14 Acres (MR)
                      33
                                                          25) Park .11 Acres (MR)
                                                          26) Sulphur Springs .15 Acres (MR)
   28       24     14
                                                          27) Olive Ave .18 Acres (MR)
                                                          28) Quail Court .38 Acres (MR)
             15
                                                          29) No Address 17.02 Acres (MR)
      13                                                  30) Vidovich 13.42 Acres (HR)
                                                          31) Spring Mountain 29.3 Acres (WW)
       18
                                                          32) Spring Mountain 5 Acres (WW)
                      20                                  33) Library Ave/Adams 5.6 Acres (CB/AG)
       17                  35      34                     34) 1000 Mills 10.03 Acres (SC)
                       21               36
                                                          35) 905 Main St .27 Acres (SC)
         16
                                                          36) Dowdell Ln .78 Acres (I)
                          30                              St. Helena City Limits
                                                          St. Helena Urban Limit Line
           19     22
                          27
                                      26
                                23
              12
                                           0 0.25 0.5                             1 Miles     ´
                                                                      © OpenStreetMap (and) contributors, CC-BY-SA

2.0 LAND USE AND GROWTH MANAGEMEN
                                                            Land Use & Growth Management
 2.0      LAND USE AND GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
 2.1      PURPOSE OF THE ELEMENT
 The Land Use and Growth Management Element is the central element of the General
 Plan in that it addresses the relationship between all land uses within the St. Helena
planning area The policies contained in the Land Use and Growth Management Element
provide a basis for and are intended to be consistent with the policies set forth in the other
eight elements. The Element consists of text, policies and the General Plan Land Use
Map, which together describe the planned location, amount, and intensity of all uses
within the planning area The General Plan Land Use Map is shown in Figure 2-1.
The text and policies in the element need to be considered in conjunction with the Land
Use Map to understand the City's intentions for future growth and conservation within the
community. The policies are intentionally general in nature to provide flexibility in
guiding future development throughout the community. The Land Use Map complements
the land use policies by graphically illustrating the City's desired, long-term land use
pattern.
2.2      LAND USE CHARACTER AND GROWTH ISSUES
Character
As of 1990, St. Helena was a community with 4,990 residents. The 3,055 acres within
the incorporated limits of the City consists of roughly 1,500 acres of urbanized area and
1,420 acres of undeveloped agricultural lands. Within the urbanized area, residential
deSignations comprise approximately 684 acres (22%), commercial and business
designations comprise approximately 169 acres (6%), and public and quasi-public
designations comprise 135 acres (4%). Table 2-1 shows the acreage breakdown for the
City by general land use category. Commercial uses in St Helena are primarily service
oriented. Aside from the wine industry, there is little industrial development in the City.
There are four active wineries within the City, and approximately 1,400 acres are planted
with vineyards.
The City's development pattern is relatively compact, with commercial development and
wineries concentrated along the Highway 29 corridor, and residential development
radiating out from the Central Business District which lies along Highway 29 (Main
Street) between Sulphur Springs Creek and Pine Street. The majority of the residential
development is located west of Main Street and north of Sulphur Springs Creek.
Agricultural lands surround the urban area on the valley floor, and very low density
residential development is beginning to occupy the wooded hillsides that frame the valley
on the east and west.
St. Helena's character is a function of three factors: its location in a rural agricultural
valley; the Valley's renown as a world-class wine-making region; and the City's proximity
                                            2-1
 St. Helena General Plan
 to a major metropolitan area Because of these three factors, the forces that influence St.
 Helena's growth and character are more complex "than one would normally expect for a
 small agriculturally-oriented community.
                                                 Table 2-1
                                         CITY OF ST. HELENA
                    LAND USE BY GENERAL PLAN DESIGNATION (1990)
    Land Use Designation                            Total Acreage l            Percentage of Total
     Residential
             Low Density                                    135
             Medium Density                                462
             Higher Density                                 87
                      Subtotal:                            684                           22%
     Commercial
             Central Business                               18
             Local-Serving                                  36
             Service Commercial                             33
                      Subtotal:                             87                           3%
     Business and Professional Office                       19                            1%
     Industrial                                             63                           2%
     Public/Quasi -Public                                  135                           4%
     Parks and Recreation                                   46                           2%
     Woodland and Watershed                                467                           15%
     Agriculture                                          1,420                         47%
     Open Space                                            1332                          4%
            TOTAL:                                        3,055                         100%
     1All calculations are based planimeter measurements, and have been rounded off to the nearest
whole acre.
     ~is figure is a very rough estimate. It assumes 55 acres for the Sulphur Springs Creek
channel, and 34,000 linear feet of creek corridor with an average width of 100 feet.
                                                2-2
  General Plan
  Land Use Map· Core Area
 ~'"                     Central Business
 t§'§SS$SI               Service Commercial
 11111111111111111       Office
 [':?:>""2;:-:3          Industrial
 !OOOOOOOO               Public & Semi-Public
 H ·'j:®i>.i,%.i         High Density Residential
 1·:-:     :·:··:·:·;.:1 Medium Density Residential
 I·.·.. ·.·.·.·.·l       Low Density Residential
 I' •••.••• 1            Woodlands & Watershed
 IX X     x x          I Agriculture
 P··:··:··.'!            Park
                         Open Space
                         Proposed Framework
                         Roadways
 IIUDUunlDl              Rail road
PLEASE NOTE: This map
depicts the land use
categories adopted in
conjunction with the
1993 St. Helena General
Plan. This is a general
representation map
which does not depict
revisions since 1993
and should not be used
for exact boundary
designations. Please
contact the St. Helena
Planning Department at
963-2741 to confirm the
land use category
of a parcel.
  Figure 2-2
 St. Helena
  General Plan Update
                         Wallace Roberts & Todd

 St. Helena General Plan
 Historically, the City developed as a service center for the agricultural industry in the
 Upper Napa Valley. While the community still'sees itself as an agricultural service
 center, the change in the agricultural base over the past three decades from a locally-
 important farming area to a world-class viticultural center has significantly altered the
 economic and social climate in the Upper Valley. The land use implications of this
 change include significant increases in land values for both agricultural and urbanized
 land; substantial increases in agricultural land planted in vineyards, proliferation of
 wineries and viticultural-related services; rapid increases in visitorltourist-serving uses;
 demand for vacation/second homes; and a general increase in growth pressures.
 The increasing pressures to grow caused serious concern in the community and resulted
 in the City adopting a Residential Growth Management System in the late 1970' s. Public
 workshops and a telephone survey conducted for the General Plan update indicate that
 concern about the rate of growth is still the principal land use issue in the community.
 The community is generally concerned that if the City is allowed to grow unchecked that
the charm and beauty that has developed over the last century could be lost; that traffic
 conditions, which are already bad at times, could seriously deteriorate; and that limited
water supplies may not be adequate to accommodate a larger population. In addition,
continued growth could begin to adversely affect the viability of vineyard operations
 within the City. Expansion of the urban area to accommodate growth would not only
irreversibly alter prime agricultural land, but could impede agricultural practices because
of nuisance conflicts with nearby residents.
Next to growth, the land use issue of most concern to the City is how to maintain St.
Helena's small-town character in the face of pressures from regional tourism. The
community is concerned that the City remain a viable living/working community, and not
become a tourist-dependent, winery-related theme park/destination. Sentiment is strong
in the community that primarily tourist-serving uses need to be regulated in terms of
number and location.
2.3       LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
The thirteen (13) land use designations shown on the Land Use Map are defined below.
Each designation indicates the general narure of land uses that are intended to occur in
specific locations. The land use designations have the force of General Plan policy.
Furure projects which do not conform to the land use designations in the Land Use Map
must receive a General Plan amendment to an appropriate designation before the project
can be approved by the City Council. Each designation is necessarily broad to permit
flexibility. The City's Zoning Ordinance further defines land use types and development
standards within each designation. In some instances, more than one zoning district may
be consistent with the overlying General Plan land use designation.
Consistent with State law (Government Code Section 65302 (a», the standards for
development intensity are identified for each designation. Development intensity for
residential designations is expressed in terms of dwelling units per gross acre.
Development intensities for non-residential designations are expressed in terms of Floor
Area Ratio (FAR). ''Floor Area Ratio" is the gross floor area of structures on a site
                                             2-6

                                                             Land Use & Growth Manageme1l1
  divided by the net site area, expressed in decimals to one or two places (e.g., an FAR of
  1.0 will allow 10,000 square feet of building space on a 10,000 square foot net site). The
 intensity standards defme maximum levels of development permitted. These maximum
 levels do not establish entitlement to a specific level of dwelling units or amount of floor
  area. Maximum levels of development will only be permitted if attainable while
 conforming to all other City policies and development standards.
 RESIDENTIAL
 Low Density Residential (LDR)
 The LDR designation provides for Single-family detached homes, secondary residential
 units, limited agricultural uses, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible
 uses. Residential densities shall be in the range of 1.0 to 5.0 units per gross acre. The
 LDR designation is applied to limited areas of the City where large, residentially-
 subdivided parcels already exist, particularly near the City's perimeter. The LDR
 designation is not intended for the more central areas of the community, where the lower
 densities would be inconsistent with historic development patterns.
 Medium Density Residential (MDR)
 The MDR designation provides for single-family detached and attached homes, secondary
 residential units, public and semi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
 Residential densities shall be in the range of 5.1 to 12.0 dwelling units per gross acre.
The MDR designation is the predominant residential designation, occurring throughout
large areas of the City. The wide distribution of this designation is intended to maintain
 a development pattern in newly developing areas that is consistent with historic
development patterns.
Higher Density Residential (HDR)
The HDR designation provides for Single-family and multi-family residential units, group
quarters, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. Residential
densities shall be in the range of 12.1 to 20.0 dwelling units per gross acre.
COMMERCIAL
Central Business (CB)
The CB designation provides for retail, personal service uses, offices, restaurants,
hotels/motels, service stations, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible
uses that serve local residents and the surrounding area Emphasis is on pedestrian-
oriented retail and service uses on ground floor level, with office uses on the upper levels.
Residential uses in this designation can be considered for upper floor areas, subject to
discretionary review and approval. The intent is for the CB district to remain primarily
local resident serving in character. New uses which serve both local residents and tourists
will be allowed Uses which are primarily tourist-serving are not permitted The
maximum allowable FAR in the CB district is 2.00, with off-site parking.
                                             2-7
 St. Helena General Plan
 The Central Business District generally extends from Sulphur Springs Creek north along
 Main Street to midway between Adams Street and Pine Street, and west to Oak Street and
 easterly along the north side of Adams Street.
 Service Commercial (SC)
 The SC designation provides for service and retail uses, restaurants, service stations,
 motels, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. The designation
 is intended primarily for service and retail uses that are automobile-oriented or whose
 operational characteristics and space needs are not considered appropriate for the Central
 Business District. The intent is for the SC district to be primarily local resident serving
in character. Strictly tourist-serving retail uses are prohibited within this deSignation.
 Maximum FAR in the SC district is 0.50.
The SC designation includes areas fronting on Highway 29 south of Sulphur Springs
Creek.
Business and Professional Office (BPO)
The BPO designation provides for professional and administrative offices, medical and
dental offices, laboratories, fmancial institutions, public and quasi-public uses, and similar
and compatible uses. Residential uses in this designation can be considered for upper
floor areas, subject to discretionary review and approval. The FAR shall not exceed 0.50.
The BPO designation is distributed throughout the central portion of the City along the
fringes of the commercial area, where it provides a compatible transition use between
commercial and residential areas.
Industrial (I)
The I designation provides for industrial parks, warehouses, light manufacturing, auto and
farm related equipment sales and repairs, viticulture support services, and similar and
compatible uses. The FAR shall not exceed 0.50. This designation is found in two
places: an area along Sulphur Springs Creek between Highway 29 and Valleyview Street,
and an area east of Highway 29 and south of Mills Lane. An Urban Reserve Area is
designated to the east of the existing industrial area south of Dowdell Lane for future
expansion of the industrial area.
OTHER
Woodland and Watershed (WW)
The WW designation provides for very low density residential development within the
context of the protection of wildlife, vegetation, open space, and watershed resources.
Minimum parcel size is 5 acres. This designation is applied to areas in the hilly eastem-
and western-most portions of the City. The intent is to accommodate low-density, estate
type development on the steep, heavily wooded slopes on either side of the valley that are
less suitable for agricultural use, rather than permitting such uses to continue to occupy
prime vineyard lands.
                                              2-8
Agriculture (AG)                              Land Use & Growth Management
The AG designation provides for agricultural uses, wineries, single-family
residences, and public and quasi-public uses.        Within the Agricultural
Preserve Zoning District one residential unit per legal lot is permitted; new
lots must have a minimum area of 40 acres. Within the A-20 and Winery Zoning
Districts residential uses are permitted at a ratio of one (I) dewelling unit
per 5 acres provided that after the first unit, any additional units would be
restricted to parcels 0.5 acres or less in area; new lots must have a minimum
area of 20 acres. The AG designation is applied to extensive areas of the
valley floor that surround the urban core area. With the exception of those
hillside areas designated WW, all lands outside the Urban Limit Line are
designated AG regardless of their size or actual use. (Rev. 4/95)
Public/Quasi-Public (PQP)
The PQP designation provides for government-owned facilities, public and
private schools, and quasi-public uses such as churches and the cemetery.
The maximum FAR for the PQP district is 0.50. The PQP designation occurs
throughout the City, and includes City Hall, the City library, all of the
public schools (including a future elementary school site and the Napa
Community College site), all of the churches, the cemetery, and the
wastewater treatment plant.
Parks and Recreation (PR)
The PR designation provides for public parklands whose primary purpose is
public recreation. The PR designation is applied to existing public parks,
ranging from active sports parks like Crane Park to more passive, open
space-oriented parks such as Stonebridge Park, and to proposed park sites.
Proposed park sites include the Lower Reservoir and three sites along Sulphur
Creek: I} along the west side of Main street at the Sulphur Springs bridge;
2) between the creek and Pope Street north of the intersection with Mariposa
Lane; and 3} along the Napa River south of Pope Street.
Open Space (OS)
The OS designation provides for natural open space areas that are devoted to
the preservation of natural resources, the managed production of resources,
outdoor recreation, or public health and safety.   Areas designated for open
space are all associated with stream corridors that pass through or adjacent
to the City including: the Napa River, Sulphur Springs Creek, York Creek,
and Spring Creek.
2.4    URBAN LIMIT LINE AND URBAN RESERVE
The Land Use Map shows the incorporated City consisting of two distinct
areas, a predominantly developed urban core area and a minimally developed
rural, agricultural area around the periphery.     The Urban Limit Line is a
parcel-specific boundary that defines the outer edge of the Urban Service
Area, marking the limit of where urban development is permitted. The intent
of the Urban Limit Line is to discourage urban sprawl by containing urban
development within a limited area during the planning period 1993-2010.
Figure 2-3 shows the location of the Urban Limit Line.
                                   2-9
 St. Htlcra GeMrai Plan
 1be Plan has been developed with enough developable land designated witbin the Urban
 Service AIea to both accommodaIc projected growth. aDd maintain a competitive real
 eswe market during the pla.tming period. However, given the long-term natUre of the
 General Plan and the potential for unforseen circumstances. the Plan anticipares the
 poa::mi3l need to expand the urban area by idemifying Urban Reserve areas. These areas
 can be considered for urban development after adler urban sections of S&. Helena are
 built-up or largely so, and additional land is needed in tile Upper Valley for urban uses.
 1be Urban Reserve Areas, which are contiguous with tile existing urban area (see Figure
 2-3). have been c:aretuIly 10C3Ied to ensure that urban development would ~nrajn the
 compact development pam:m desired by the community and to encourage balanced
 growth.
 Urban Reserve lands are all designated AG and are expected to remain in agricultural uses
 or undeveloped for the planning period. or at least for many years. Zoning in the Urban
Reserve Areas will be the same as in other areas designated for agriculture. Figure 2-3
does give an underlying land use designation for each UIban Reserve Area to indiC31e the
intention of the City regarding future uses of reserve areas. The ultimate designation
 (residential, commercial. or .industrial) Qf any specific Urban Reserve lands will be
determined by the City Council at the time of incorporation within the Urban Service
 Area. and will depend upon many factors including:
         •        compatibility with existing or proposed SUIIOunding uses.
         •        the availability of services.
         •        demand for the proposed uses.
         •        the availability of other suitable areas. and
         •        agricu1tm:al resomce value of tJle land.
LocaE1onal suitability and timing will be considered when considering changes to the
Urban Llmit IJne. Requests for expansion of the Uman Service Area sball be coDSideted
in logical groupings that retlect the best long-term imeI~1S ot the Oty, and shall not be
comidered in a piecemeal. parce!-by-parcel manner or in a manner that would pennit non-
comiguous. Le.. "1eap-frog". development.
2.S      GENERAL PLAN HOLDING CAPACITY
The holding capaciry of tJle City refers to the ultimate size of the community if a1lIand
uses shown in the General PIan map were developed according to their cuxrent land use
designations. SIze in this instance does not refer to physical area, but instead refers to
dweWng units. resident populaJion. building area, and jobs. In calculating the holding
C3p3City for the Oty, the emphasis has been placed on me Urban Service Area defined
by tbe Urban Umit Line. Being the only area in wbich urban development can occur, it
representS the only area for wbich ultimate development potemial can be reasonably
projected. 1be balding capacity of agricultural areas oursidc the Urban Limit Line is very
lhnittrl under cmrem designations. but can change if aDDeXt.d imo the Uman Service
Area.
                                             2-10

                                                             lAnd Use & Growth Management
 Figure 2-4 shows the developable land within the Urban Service Area The Urban Service
 Area has 663 acres designated for residential uses. If all of this residential land were
 developed, it is estimated that St Helena would contain approximately 3,432 housing
 units, which would support a residential population of roughly 7,450 persons. This
 holding capacity estimate assumes current development, plus development of vacant
 residential lands at average densities (Table 2-2), and an average household size of 2.31
 persons per household.
 It is important to note that the residential holding capacity of the Urban Service Area is
 different from its growth potential during the planning period. Residential growth is
 controlled by the City's Residential Growth Management System which restricts growth
to 17 dwelling units per year. Assuming this rate of growth is sustained for the planning
 period, the population in the year 2010 would be approximately 6,389 (Table 2-2).
The Urban Service Area has 147 acres deSignated for employment-generating commercial,
office, and industrial uses. Development of all land designated for commercial, Office
and industrial uses would result in approximately 1.88 million square feet of building
floor area, enough to support about 3,605 jobs. This holding capacity estimate assumes
that employment generating uses are built at average densities (Table 2-2), and
employment densities will approximate current levels.
Unlike residential development, employment-generating uses are not directly subject to
growth management controls, although the effects of employment growth, such as traffic,
noise and air quality, are monitored and subject to adopted performance standards. The
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) estimates that the number of jobs in St
Helena will increase from its 1990 level of 4,546 to 5,100 in 2010, an average annual
increase of 0.61 %.
                                            2-11
          St. Helena General Plan
                                                      Table 2-2
                                             CITY OF ST. HELENA
 I                                   URBAN AREA HOLDING CAPACITY
                                                                                                               I
   Land Use              Existing          Developable       New            Total            Projected 2010
                         Development       Land              Development    Holding          Growth
                         (111/92)          (Gross acl        PotentW.r      CapacitY
   Residential
    Single-Family              1,695 du         326.96 ac            728 du       2,423 du            285 7 du
                                                                                                  658 persons
    Multi-Family                 717 du           32.5 ac            292 du       1,009 du             114 du
                                                                                                  263 persons
            TOTAL:             2,412 du          359.4 ac          1,020 du      3,432 do              399 du
                                                                                                  921 persons
   Non-Residential8
    Commercial               954,800 sf           20.4 ac        266,587 sf  1,221,387 sf          175,9739 sf
                                                                                              352 employees
                                                                                              (@ 11500 sq ft)
    Office                   145,840 sf            4.4 ac         95,832 sf    241,672 sf           26,879 sf
                                                                                                92 employees
                                                                                              (@ 11290 sq ft)
    Industrial               373,320 sf            3.0 ac         39,204 sf    412,524 sf           68,804 sf
                                                                                               116 employees
                                                                                              (@ 11590 sq ft)
            TOTAL:         1,475,960 sf           27.8 ac       401,623 sf   1,875,583 sf          271,656 sf
                                                                                               560 employees
    3Represents a rough estimation of vacant or underutilized land based on interpretation of aerial
photographs.
    4Represents development potential based on approved and proposed projects and on gross acreage and
assumed mid-range development intensity.
    SRepresents the total of the existing development and the mid-range estimate of future development.
    ~ total includes 193.3 acres of Woodlands and Watershed designated land with a development
potential for 28 d.u.s.
    7Housing numbers are based on an annual growth rate of 17 d.u. plus adjustments for previously
exempted units.
    8Based on 1992 field survey estimates. The figures are not precise calculations.
    ~on-residential   growth assumes a rate of 1% per year.
                                                        2-12
                                                              Land Use & Growth Management
2.6     GOALS AND POLICIES
 GROWTH MANAGEMENT
Growth continues to be one of, if not the primary issue facing St. Helena according to
input from the community. Since the early 1970's when the City experienced a dramatic
increase in growth pressures, the community has strongly supported a policy of deliberate
slow growth in order to protect the fragile charm and beauty of the City, to ensure that
natural resources such as water supply and prime agricultural land are not lost or
overused, and to ensure that adequate public services such as schools and sewers can be
provided. In addition to regulating the rate of growth, the City will also control where
growth can occur by establishing an Urban Service Area.
Urban Service Area
In order to protect the City's agriculture and its historic small town character, the General
Plan restricts new development to a well-defined Urban Service Area surrounded by
agriculturally-designated land. The Urban Service Area includes enough developable land
to accommodate projected growth, while maintaining competitive land values. The
distribution of developable land within the Urban Service Area has been balanced to
ensure a rational and compact development pattern at buildout.
       Guiding Policies
       2.6.1     New development should be required to occur in a logical and orderly
                 manner within well-defined boundaries, and be consistent with the ability
                 to provide urban services.
       2.6.2     Urban development shall be allowed to occur only within the Urban
                 Service Area during the time frame of the General Plan.
       2.6.3     Urban services such as sewer, water, and storm drainage will only be
                 extended to development within the Urban Service Area. Exceptions will
                 be permitted when undue hardship can be demonstrated, and proposed
                 improvements are not found to be growth inducing.
       2.6.4     Permit infill development and higher densities within currently developed
                 areas wherever possible to minimize and postpone the need for expansion
                 of the Urban Service Area.
       2.6.5     Encourage the continuation of agricultural and low-intensity uses adjacent
                 to the Urban Limit Line.
       Implementing Policies
       2.6.6     Limit the amount of land designated for urban uses to those areas that can
                 reasonably be predicted to be developed over the life of the plan. Areas
                                            2-17
 St. Helena General Plan
                  not projected for urban development within the life of the plan shall be
                  designated for agricultural or other non-urban uses.
        2.6.7     Expansion of the Urban Service Area should only be considered when the
                  amount of developable land within the Urban Limit Line is insufficient
                  to implement General Plan Policies.
        2.6.8     Urban Service Area expansion should only occur in the designated Urban
                  Reserve Areas. Expansion into non-Urban Reserve areas should be
                  considered only when the proposed land use is found to further the goals
                  and long-term objectives of the City, and does not result in adverse
                  impacts to adjacent uses in either the urban or rural areas.
Residential Growth Management
The attractiveness of the Napa Valley has resulted in significant increases in land values
that have adversely affected the type of housing that is developed and its affordability.
The combination of land costs, construction costs, and a limited housing supply has
resulted in housing costs that preclude the provision of low or moderate income housing
that is affordable to many who work in St. Helena's agricultural and service industries.
Conditions are such that, without government assistance, the percentage of those who can
afford to both live and work in the community would in all likelihood continue to decline.
Since 1986, the City's Residential Growth Management System has been the mechanism
for monitoring and regulating the City's growth rate, specifically the rate of new
residential development. In addition to maintaining a deliberate rate of growth, the
Growth Management System has also been designed to:
        -   Ensure that the diverse housing needs of the community are met,
        -   Direct the development of new housing to appropriate areas, and
        -   Ensure adequate public facilities and the efficient provision of public services.
        Guiding Policies
        2.6.9     Limit the approval of new residential development to a maximum rate of
                  17 dwelling units per year.
        2.6.10    Maintain a cap on residential development of 2,850 total dwelling units
                  citywide by the year 2010. The total number of dwelling units shall not
                 be construed as a goal, but shall be an absolute maximum allowable
                  number.
                                            2-18
                                                            Land Use & Growth Management
        Implementing Policies
        2.6.11    Adjust the Residential Growth Management System that regulates the
                 issuance of building permits as necessary to ensure the Year 2010
                 dwelling unit count does not exceed 2,850 dwelling units.
        2.6.12   Establish a housing inventory based on the 1990 Census, that allows the
                 City to track the status of residential growth.
        2.6.13   Review the City's housing needs annually to reassess hOUSing priorities
                 for the subsequent year.
RESIDENTIAL
St Helena provides a very attractive residential environment A number of factors
including the City's: central location in the Napa Valley, good climate, scenic rural
setting, small town ambience, and historic residential architecture, have all contributed to
keeping residential demand strong over the years. The character of the residential
neighborhoods vary in different parts of the community, but the older residential area west
of the Central Business district is the image most people associate with St. Helena.
Characterized by a compact pattern of one and two-story homes along a grid of quiet tree-
lined streets, this area epitOmizes the rural small-town character that the community
wishes to preserve. More recently developed areas that have been developed using more
typical suburban standards, tend to lack the charm of the older areas. Older areas east of
the CBD have many attractive older homes and rural characteristics, but these areas have
been developed in a more dispersed pattern that lacks the unity and identity that
characterizes the west side of town.
In response to the community's desire to protect agricultural lands and enhance
community character, while still meeting the demand for new housing, City policy
encourages a compact development pattern that emulates the character of the historic west
side neighborhoods. This approach emphasizes a more efficient use of land through infill
development and slightly higher densities. To address the housing needs of the
community, residential land use policies encourage development of a broader range of unit
types, sizes and costs that is more consistent with the economic and social profile of the
community. The residential land use policies in this section should be considered in
conjunction with policies and programs in the Housing Element, which addresses in more
detail the housing need and the City's program to preserve and expand the supply of
housing.
       Guiding Policies
       2.6.14    Encourage a mix of housing types and price ranges to allow choice for
                 current and future generations of St. Helenans.
                                           2-19
St. Helena General Plan
        2.6.15   Encourage new residential development in all density ranges that is
                 consistent with scale and character' of the older residential districts of the
                 City, particularly the neighborhoods west of Main Street
       2.6.16   Encourage the development of higher density housing in areas near the
                 center of town and close to recreation and services.
       2.6.17    Minimize situations where new residential development will block public
                 view of surrounding vineyards
       2.6.18   Minimize large lot development (one dwelling unit per acre or less),
                except where this scale of development would not threaten retention of
                vineyards, inefficiently utilize land, or phYSically separate the community
                from the surrounding vineyards
       2.6.19   Permit higher density housing in single family neighborhoods as long as
                the development character of the Single family area is maintained (i.e., lot
                widths, orientation to street, building heights, etc.).
       2.6.20   Encourage the subdivision and development of larger parcels (3 acres or
                more) as "planned unit developments" to ensure a more comprehensive
                and creative approach to planning the development as a single unit
                The "planned unit development" approach provides developers with
                greater design flexibility while ensuring the City adequate design review.
                The intent is to create developments that complement existing community
                character. The City will favor planned unit developments that provide
                generous amounts of open space, covered parking, the separation of
                pedestrian and vehicle traffic, and on larger tracts, a variety of housing
                types: single-family detached, duplex, and multi-family dwellings, in one
                and two-story structures.
       2.6.21   Require new residential projects to be designed to facilitate non-
                automobile modes of travel (i.e., walking, biking, transit, etc.).
       Implementing Policies
       2.6.22   Revise residential zoning consistent with General Plan land use map and
                designations.
       2.6.23   Revise zoning standards to encourage:
                - a variety of lot widths and sizes such as found in the older areas of
                    town
                - garages at the rear of lots rather than on the street
                                            2-20
                                                              Land Use & Growth Management
                   - lot coverage that is consistent with the scale of historic and older areas
                   - planting of street trees
                   - setbacks, building massing and configuration consistent with older
                      parts of town
         2.6.24    Require residential developers to contribute toward the provision of
                   community facilities and services (e.g., recreation facilities and programs,
                   educational facilities, traffic and transportation facilities and services)
                   consistent with State law requiring a nexus between project impacts and
                   required mitigation.
 RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES
 St Helena has developed over the years as a rural agricultural center whose economy is
 based primarily on agriculture, particularly wine grape growing and wine-making. Retail
 and service commercial uses in the City traditionally provided goods and services to
 residents of the City and the surrounding North Valley area. However, as the wine
 industry in the Valley has matured the growing number of tourists visiting the Valley and
 its wineries has generated increasing numbers of commercial uses that cater primarily to
 visitors rather than residents.
 In general, community reaction has been strongly opposed to this change in the
 commercial composition of the community. While recognizing the economic benefits that
the influx of tourist-serving uses provides the City, the community generally feels the cost
in community character and quality of life is too high. The demand for prime commercial
space generated by the tourist-serving commercial uses has driven rents up in the
downtown area, resulting in the displacement of local-serving uses and the elimination of
important services to local residents.
Commercial development in St Helena has historically been divided into two clearly
defined geographic areas. The Central Business District (CBD), which is the heart of the
City's historic commercial district, extends north from Sulphur Springs Creek to Pine
Street, and from Oak Street on the west to beyond the railroad tracks on the east. The
CBD includes a mixture of local- and tourist-serving uses, but in recent years has
experienced an increasing number of uses which are both tourist- and local-serving. The
second area extends south along Highway 29 from the creek to the City limits.
Commercial development in this area generally fronts directly on Highway 29, and
includes uses that are more automobile-oriented than those in the CBD, including both
local- and tourist-serving uses.
Community sentiment is clearly in favor of maintaining and encouraging local serving
businesses in the downtown area, and in all commercial areas in general. Although
"local-serving" is difficult to precisely defme, there are a number of attributes which
distinguish businesses which serve the community from those which primarily
accommodate tourist and other outside interests. Local-serving businesses are considered
to be those that derive a significant portion of their revenues from St. Helena residents,
                                              2-21
 St. Helena General Plan
 and which provide services and products which satisfy local residents' day-to-day needs.
 They are those businesses for which a majoritY of the shoppers are regular repeat
 customers from the community.
Local-serving businesses are of a smaller scale commensurate with the needs of the
community. The number of any particular type of business is generally not greater than
that required by the community. The nature of the goods and services are such that
 necessities are emphasized over novelty. Non-local serving or tourist serving uses, on the
other hand, are those which would generally not be in St. Helena if it were not for the
presence of visitors. Tourist serving business use is generally characterized by a
redundancy in merchandise from store to store with goods sold being substantially similar
to such goods sold in other major destination points. Some in the community have been
in favor of controlling commercial growth in a manner and at a rate similar to policies
controlling residential growth.
In addition to the regulatory type of commercial activity that occurs in St. Helena, the
community is also concerned about the physical character of the two commercial areas.
North of the bridge, the compact scale and historic character of the CBD establish a
strong identity for the downtown as an attractive shopping district. In the CBD, the
emphasis is on preserving the historic character and pedestrian scale, and then, where
poSSible, extending those characteristics to adjoining commercial areas. South of the
bridge, where commercial development embodies the characteristics more typical of auto-
oriented, strip commercial development, the principal concern is encouraging the
renovation and redevelopment of commercial sites to create a more attractive southern
entrance to the City and a more vital and inviting commercial environment for local-
serving retail.
The commercial land use policies should be read in conjunction with the policies in the
Tourism Management and Community Design Elements when considering the physical
form and character of the City's commercial areas.
        Guiding Policies
        2.6.25    Designate only as much land area for service and commercial uses as is
                  sufficient and necessary to maintain St Helena's historic role as a
                  commercial center providing supplies and services to the surrounding
                  area, and avoid the speculative expansion of commercial areas beyond the
                  needs of the St. Helena community and its surrounding service area.
        2.6.26    Designate sufficient acreage to accommodate needed local-Serving
                  commercial uses within the community.
        2.6.27    Prohibit commercial uses that are primarily tourist-serving in nature, and
                  that are inconsistent with the community image of St Helena.
                                             2-22
                                                   Lmui Use & Growth Management
 2.6.28  Maintain the pedestrian-oriented character of the Central Business District
         and provide for convenient pedestrian connections to encourage walking
         and reduce vehicle trips within the commercial core area.
 2.629  Minimize the strip commercial appearance of the area south of the bridge
        by encouraging the redevelopment of underutilized parcels and poorly
        designed developments, and by maintaining open space corridors
        extending from the highway to the east and west as shown on the Land
        Use Map.
 2.6.30 Protect historic resources in the commercial areas, and encourage their
        rehabilitation and re-use.
2.6.31  Require the design of all new commercial development to be compatible
        with and complementary to the image and character of the historic Main
        Street area.
2.6.32  Work with the County of Napa to establish a procedure for review of
        land use and design changes for projects in the unincorporated areas at
        the City's gateways.
2.6.33  Provide sufficient parking to serve the needs of residents in proximity to
        commercial destinations
2.6.34  Prohibit further expansion of commercial development on the west side
        of Oak Avenue and westeriy therefrom north of Mitchell or on the east
        side of Oak Avenue north of Adams Street.
2.6.35  Maintain the Central Business District as the City's sociaIlcultural core,
        and the primary center of retail business.
2.6.36  Limit the expansion of commercial development to the areas immediately
        east and south of the Central Business District.
2.6.37  Prohibit retail commercial zoning on Main Street north of Pine Street
2.6.38  Encourage primarily local serving businesses in the CB and SC
        designated areas.
2.6.39  All retail businesses shall conform to a scale commensurate and
        compatible with the small town character of St Helena.
Implementing Policies
2.6.40  Rezone all commercially-designated properties in the General Plan Land
        Use Map with the appropriate commercial zoning district.
                                   2-23
      2.6.41   Kstablisb an inventory of all non-residential uses in the City and a proqral for
               lonitorinq future non-residential developlent.
     2.6.42    Allot only businesses which are prilarily local-servinq within all cOllercial areas.
               Kxclude all fast food restaurants. outlet and discount type stores as well as larqe
               retail businesses whose consuler base requires a population larqer than St. Helena and
               its vicinity. lor purposes of the General Plan. ·vicinity· shall be defined as the
               surroundinq aqricultural area for which St. Helena has historically provided qoods and
               services.
     2.6.43    In order to ensure the cOlpatible inteqration of new cOllercial and residential
               developlent with existinq developlent. require the preparation of Specific Plans for
               tbe areas desiqnated in liqure 2-5. The contents of each Specific Plan will include,
               but not be lilited to, the type, quantity, and distribution of land uses; developlent
               standards; circulation and infrastructure plans; a financinq proqral; an
               ilplelentation plan; and any other statutory requirelents for Specific Plans as set
               forth by Governlent Code. A Site Developlent Plan lay be proposed for a particular
               parcel within a Specific Plan area in lieu of a Specific Plan for the entire Specific
               Plan Area. Prior to processinq of a Site Developlent Plan the City shall deterline
               tbe infrastructure elelents within the Specific Plan Areas to be analyzed in
               conjunction with tbe review of the Site Developlent Plan.
     2.6.44    10 new developlent will be approved within the desiqnated Specific Plan areas until a
               Specific Plan or a site developlent plan for a parcel or parcels in lieu of a Specific
               Plan is approved by the City. Tbe site developlent plan shall include analysis of
               infrastructure needs to litiqate ilpacts associated with the site developlent plan.
      2.6.45   Revise the Zoninq Ordinance to require the City to lake findinqs' that a proposed
               cOllercial use is consistent with the local-servinq purpose of the district prior to
               approval of a use perlit.
      2.6.46   Lilit the floor area and size of buildinqs in the CB and SC districts to ensure that
               new buildinqs are in scale with existinq older buildinqs in the district.
ornCK
Office space in St. Helena is located prilarily around the edqes of the Central Business District and
alonq Hiqhway 29. Consistent with the predolinantly local-servinq nature of these offices. lost are
sinqle tenant offices or relatively slall office buildinqs with lultiple slaller tenants. Typical
office uses include financial. insurance. real estate, law, and bealth-related services to local
residents and businesses.
Office uses are considered necessary and cOlplelentary to establishinq a vital cOllercial district,
and are therefore perlitted in all three cOllercial land use desiqnations. The prilary concern.
however. is to ensure that office uses do not detract frol the retail environlent either by
displacinq retail uses or by alterinq the pedestrian-oriented environlent of the shoppinq district.
                                                2- 24
                                                                                      (Rev.    7/q4)

            Designated Specific Plan Area
NOTE:
The following general land use parameters have been established for the
cross-hatched area west of Highway 29:
            Service Commercial        10 acres
            High Density Residential  12 acres
            Agriculture               11 acres
The Specific Plan or Site Development Plan will determine the exact
location and acreage for these uses.
St. Helena
General Plan Update                                                         Specific Plan Areas
         Wallace Roberts & Todd
                                                                     DACRES
                                                                                           Figure 2- 5
                                                                               01 6001 12001
                                                                                       FEET
                                                                                                 /N
                                                                                     (Rev.   7/q4)
St. Helena General Plan
        Guiding Policies
        2.6.47   Provide sufficient opportunities for offices that support the regional
                 economy and the local needs of the community.
        2.6.48   Support the development of office uses as a transitional use between
                 commercial areas and residential neighborhoods.
        2.6.49   Encourage active, pedestrian-oriented retail districts by restricting office
                 uses to upper story locations or locations along the periphery of the retail
                 district.
        2.6.50   Require office development that is located within a commercial district
                 to be similar in appearance and character with surrounding businesses so
                 that it does not detract from the design character or pedestrian orientation
                 of the shopping district.
        Implementing Policies
        2.6.51   Limit office use in the CBD to second story areas or a limited percentage
                 of the total CBD ground floor area.
        2.6.52   Require adherence to strict design controls on office development to
                 guide the scale, appearance, and site planning of new offices
INDUSTRIAL
As an agricultural service center, St. Helena needs to accommodate industrial-type uses
that support the region's agricultural and wine-making industries. The City also needs to
accommodate warehouse uses, distribution centers, and other similar "light" industrial
activities that may not be directly related to agriculture, but serve the North Valley
population. The City is not striving to establish a true industrial base in the sense of
heavy manufacturing or materials processing.
The Land Use Map designates the area south of Mills Lane and east of State Highway 29
for industrial-type uses. This area is flat, free of flooding, has direct access to rail and
highway transportation, and is physically separated from sensitive residential or retail uses.
The Plan also designates an area west of Highway 29, along the Sulphur Springs Creek
corridor between the Service Commercial uses along the highway and Valleyview Street.
This area has historically been occupied by industrial type uses such as the City
Corporation Yard, a nursery, a gravel mining operation, and a contractor's yard
                                             2-26
                                                               lAnd Use &: Growth Management
        Guiding Policies
        2.6.53      Maintain a buffer betWeen indusaial areas and residential areas to the
                    north.
        2.6.54     Support the development of only those industries that are consistent with
                    agricultural and environmental values. and the role of the City as an
                    agriculturally-based service center for the surrounding area.
        2.6.55     Ensure that industrial projectS are designed and sited so as to provide a
                   positive image of the community. Landscaping and setbacks should be
                   utilized to mjnimize visual impaas.
        2.6.56     Ensure that appropriate traffic improvements are implemented as needed
                   to provide safe ingress and egress to the industrial area from Highway 29.
        Implementing Policies
        2.6.57     Provide detailed design guideUnes to ensure an appropriate image for all
                   industrial areas.
AQRICULTURE
Agriculture is essential to maim;rining, The character and economy of St. Helena. Over the
past three decades. the viticultme and wine-ma.\dng induso:y have been a major factor in
shaping the direction of the community. In response to agricultme's value to the
commUDity, large areas of the city are designated to remain in agricultural uses. Unlike
many communities. where an agriculture designation signifies a holding pattern pending
urban development. the Cty of St Helena is committed to maimajning agriculrure within
the incorporar.ed limits for the long term.
Wbile discouraging urban eIJCI'03Cbment on agricultuI3l lands. General Plan policy does
permit Umited development on agriculturally· designated land. In order to maintain the
financial viability at agriculture in the face of vineyard re-plaming costS and soft II13Ikets.
the Plan permits limited residential development as long as it does DOt threaten the overall
viability of agdcultmal use.
        Guiding Policies
       2.6.58     Promote the continuation of agricultural activities within and adjacent to
                  the Cty.
       2.6.59     Protect prime agricultural land and prime vineyard land from premawre
                  and/or mmecessary urban enaoachmem.
                                              2-27

2.6.60 Encourage the County to continue to promote agricultural land use and to strictly limit further residentia
       development on lands surrounding the City's incorporated area.
2.6.61 Limit residential development on properties existing at the time of adoption of this General Plan which
       are designated Agriculture and are outside of the Urban Limit Line in accordance with the following
       criteria:
       - Maximum density of one unit for every five acres of base parcel area;
       - New parcels created after October 1, 1993, shall not exceed one-half acre in area unles&nsistent
         with Policy 2.6.62;
       - For a legal parcel existing on October 1, 1993, the total area for new residential development shall n
         exceed a ratio of one-half acre per unit allowed. To determine the area of the parcel which can be use
         for residential development, the maximum determining the area of the parcel which can be used for
         residential development, any number of units below the maximum permitted may be located within
         that area.
       - Existing unites) on the base parcel shall be included when determining compliance with the criteria
         establishing the permitted number of parcels;
       - New parcels shall be contiguous and accessible from existing streets;
       - New parcels shall be located so that they minimize the impact on the agricultural viability of the
         base parcel and adjoining properties;
       - Adequate provision of utilities shall be considered prior to approval of creation of new parcels and/or
         building sites.
       AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE ZONING DISTRICT
       - A maximum of one dwelling unit per legal lot. New lots created shall have a minimum area of 40 ac.
2.6.62 - In areas outside the Urban Limit Line, which are zoned A-20 and Winery, new parcels can be created
         to separate residential development that existed prior to the adoption of the 1993 General Plan from
         remaining agricultural lands The area of the new parcel on which the existing residential developmen
         is located may exceed one-half acre provided the area does not include existing agricultural land
         except land which is restricted to agricultural use. The area of the new parcel on which the existing
         residential development is located and the number of units existing within the area of the new parcel(s)
         shall be counted against the development potential of the base parcel as set forth in Guiding Policy
                                                   2-28                                    (Rev. 4/95)
                                                 Land Use & Growth Management
                 2.6.61.     Neither the area (one-half acre per unit) nor the
                 number of units (one unit per five acres)           shall be
                 exceeded, except as provided for residential development
                 which existed prior to the adoption of the General Plan.
  2.6.63    Permit wineries and other agriculture related industry to locate
            in the City if their location does not adversely impact
            surrounding uses or city services (water, traffic, etc.) or the
            quality and character of the community.
  Implementing Policies
  2.6.64    Re-zone all agriculturally-designated lands outside the Urban
            Limit Line to A-20 or AP and adopt zoning regulations consistent
            with the General Plan criteria.
  2.6.65    Adopt a "right-to-farm" ordinance that protects the right of
            agricultural operations in agriculturally designated areas to
            continue their operations, even though such practices may
            generate complaints from established urban uses.     The ordinance
            shall require developers and new homeowners in areas in or
            adjacent to designated agricultural areas to sign a
            disclosure form acknowledging the City's "right-to-farm" policy
            and the potential for nuisances relating to agricultural
            operations.
  2.6.66    Initiate studies to explore the feasibility and desirability of
            implementing permanent agricultural protection for lands within
            the incorporated area in the form of agricultural preserves.
PUBLIC USES
As the City grows there is a need to provide new public facilities, such as
parks and schools, to serve the larger community.        In addition, as the
community ages, existing facilities may need to be renovated, expanded, or
replaced (e.g., the fire station). Land use policies presented here should
be read in conjunction with policies in the Public Facilities and Services
Element and the Parks and Recreation Element.
  Guiding Policies
  2.6.67    Pursue sites for future schools, parks,         and other public
            facilities     (e.g.,   tire station,    community center, etc.)
            consistent with projected growth.
  2.6.68    Revise zoning to provide a zoning district compatible with the
            Public/Quasi-Public land use designation introduced in the
            General Plan.
                                     2-29                          (Rev. 4/95)
                                           Land Use & Growth Management
2.6.69 Undertake a study to identify the appropriate use/reuse of the
       train station and the surrounding area in light of the proposed
       Wine Train service and the City's long-term objectives.
                              2-30                          (Rev. 4/95)









                                       6
              City of St. Helena
Housing Element Update 2015-2023
Goals, Policies, and Eight-Year Action
                   Plan
                 ADOPTED
                 May 26, 2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
    A. Purpose of the Element ....................................................... ……... 2
    B. Housing Element Update Components................................ ……. 2
    C. Key Findings and Recommendations .................................. …….. 3
    D. Goals .................................................................................. …….. 5
    E. Policies, Implementing Actions, and Quantified Objectives……….. 6
    F. Implementation Matrix ......................................................... …….. 21
Housing Element                                                                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                    Page 1

HOUSING ELEMENT
A. Purpose of the Element
Housing Elements are one of seven General Plan Elements required by section 65302(c) of
the California Government Code. Specific requirements for Housing Elements are set forth
beginning at section 65580 of the Government Code, with additional guidance provided by
the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD).
The purpose of the Housing Element is to establish a comprehensive plan to address
housing needs in St. Helena over the eight-year planning period between January 31, 2015
and January 31, 2023. The Housing Element sets the community goals, and policies
surrounding the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing units to meet the
needs of St. Helena residents (present and future), and every jurisdiction in the State of
California is required to submit a Housing Element to the Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD) for review and certification. St. Helena is a member of
the Association of Bay Area Association of Governments and, therefore, is required submit
an updated Housing Element to HCD by January 31, 2015.
B. Housing Element Update Components
The 2015-2023 St. Helena Housing Element Update consists of two parts; the Housing
Needs Assessment, and this Housing Element Policy Document. The Housing Needs
Assessment identifies and analyzes the existing and projected housing needs for St. Helena
and also provides a list of sites for housing development that are adequate to accommodate
the City’s regional housing needs allocation. The Housing Policy Document states goals,
policies, quantified objectives, and implementing actions for the development, rehabilitation,
and preservation of housing, based upon the findings of the Housing Needs Assessment and
input received through the public outreach that the City incorporated into the Housing
Element Update process. Then, throughout the eight-year planning period, St. Helena will
implement the actions specified in the Policy Document to meet the community’s housing
goals.
Housing Element                                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 2

C. Key Findings and Recommendations
The following section summarizes the key findings in the Housing Needs Assessment and
outlines the resulting policy recommendations.
Review of Existing Housing Element
Since the City of St. Helena adopted the Housing Element Update in 2009, the City has
successfully removed many of the previously identified governmental constraints to housing
production, maintenance, and rehabilitation. Among other achievements, the City amended
the Municipal Code to: allow emergency shelters for the homeless in the Industrial and
Service Commercial zoning districts as a permitted use; allow transitional and supportive
housing in all zoning districts that allow residential uses; allow agricultural employee housing
for 6 or fewer employees in all residential zoning districts; allow agricultural employee
housing of up to 36 beds or 12 units as a permitted use in the Agricultural, Agricultural
Preserve, and Winery zoning districts; allow single room occupancy housing as a permitted
use in the High Density Residential district; and provide a procedure to allow for persons
with disabilities to seek reasonable accommodation from zoning laws, rules and regulations
pertaining to housing.
Demographic and Economic Trends
Since 2000, the City of St. Helena experienced a slight population decline and an increase in
the number of households, causing the average household size in St. Helena to fall. The
median age of St. Helena residents rose from 40 to 43 years. The median household income
in St. Helena ($71,100 in 2012) exceeds the Napa County median but is lower than the Bay
Area median. Many people travel into St. Helena from the surrounding area for work, and
that pattern will continue as local population and household growth projections lag strong
employment growth estimates for the next three decades.
Existing Housing and Market Conditions
Around 2,802 housing units exist in St. Helena in 2014, an increase of about 26 units since
2010. About 60 percent of the new homes are single-family units, and the rest are
multifamily units. There is a significant difference between the income necessary to
purchase the median priced single-family home in St. Helena (nearly $200,000 a year) and St.
Helena’s 2012 median household income of $71,100. Rental units in St. Helena, while
limited in supply, provide more affordable options for low- and moderate-income
households. Approximately 37 percent of the apartments in St. Helena are subsidized
affordable units. Market rents are unaffordable to some very low-income households and all
extremely low-income households. This highlights the need for additional subsidized
affordable housing, to meet the needs of local households in these lower income categories.
While only about five percent of households in St. Helena live in overcrowded conditions,
most households experiencing overcrowding are renters.
Housing Element                                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 3

Special Housing Needs
Both St. Helena and Napa County have high concentrations of seniors compared to the Bay
Area, with residents aged 65 and over comprising 19 percent of the population in St. Helena.
Thirty-five percent of all St. Helena households are headed by a senior. In addition, a
disproportionately large number of St. Helena’s elderly households have severe housing cost
burdens compared to the overall population. The percentage of large family households in
St. Helena is significantly lower than the rates in Napa County and the Bay Area, while St.
Helena has a similar percentage of single female-headed households. While the number of
farmworkers and homeless persons in need of permanent or transitional housing specifically
within the City of St. Helena is unknown, these two special needs populations have an
unmet need for housing in Napa County as a whole and St. Helena must work with
surrounding jurisdictions to meet that need.
Non-governmental and Governmental Constraints
The non-governmental constraints that restrict building in St. Helena are the price of land
and the availability of financing with the tightening of the national credit market. The
governmental constraints present in St. Helena include water capacity, given that the City has
limited water supplies and must prioritize water service for proposed development that
includes housing for lower-income households. Other non-governmental and
governmental conditions such as construction costs, zoning code, General Plan land use
designations, and impact fees do not unnecessarily inhibit housing production.
Sites Inventory and Analysis and Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
The housing sites inventory analysis indicates that St. Helena has a sufficient number of
housing sites to meet the City’s 2014-2022 Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). St.
Helena received a RHNA of 31total units distributed across very low-income (8 units), low-
income (5 units), moderate-income (5 units), and above moderate-income (13 units)
categories. Given the 43 units built or approved since January 2014, the City needs sites for
at least 8 more housing units affordable to very low income households. After accounting
for possible site constraints, the City has the capacity to accommodate 62 units on four high-
density sites that meet the State’s default density and therefore are adequate to provide
affordable housing for lower-income households. The City also has capacity to develop an
additional 172 units on six medium density sites. Market rate housing on these sites is
assumed to be affordable to above-moderate income households, but development projects
will be required to provide 20 percent affordable units under the City’s inclusionary
regulations.
Housing Element                                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 4

D. Goals
Based upon the conclusions reached in the Housing Needs Assessment, and information
gathered in the public participation process, St. Helena has defined six overall goals for
responding to housing needs in the City. A goal is a general statement of values or
aspirations held by the community. It is the end towards which the City will direct its
efforts. The goals of the St. Helena Housing Element are:
A Diversity of Housing to Meet Local Needs
Facilitate development of a variety of housing types to meet the full range of housing needs
in our community, with particular emphasis on housing for our local workforce, people with
special housing needs, and people with extremely low, very low, low and moderate incomes.
Efficient Land Use and High Quality Neighborhoods
Make efficient use of land within the Urban Limit Line to protect agricultural lands,
promoting compact, well-designed developments that ‘fit in’ with existing neighborhoods
and contribute to the overall livability of our community. Encourage a balance of housing
types throughout the entire community.
Conservation of Existing Housing
Improve and conserve existing housing, with particular attention to the rehabilitation and
retention of existing affordable units.
Assistance to Support Affordable Housing
Provide technical and financial resources to support development of affordable housing in
our community, especially housing that meets the needs of our local workforce, people with
special housing needs, and people with moderate, low, and very low incomes.
Resource Conservation
Promote resource conservation by encouraging housing types and designs that use fewer
resources (water, electricity, etc.) and therefore cost less to operate over time, supporting
long-term housing affordability.
Equal Housing Opportunities
Assure that housing programs maximize choice, avoid economic segregation and avoid
discrimination based upon age, sex, race, sexual orientation, religion and ethnic background.
Housing Element                                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 5

E. Policies, Implementing Actions, and Quantified Objectives
A range of policies, implementing actions, and quantified objectives are outlined below and
organized according to the six Goals:
    1. A Diversity of Housing to Meet Local Needs
    2. Efficient Land Use and High Quality Neighborhoods
    3. Conservation of Existing Housing
    4. Assistance to Support Affordable Housing
    5. Resource Conservation
    6. Equal Housing Opportunities
For each goal, one or more policies help define how the goal will be interpreted and
implemented. Policies are referenced by goal number. Policy HE1.1 is the first policy
supporting Goal 1; Policy HE1.2 is the second policy, and so on.
Each policy statement is followed by one or more implementing actions that define
exactly what is to be done to put the policies into practice, while working towards the goals.
This might include ongoing programs sponsored by the City; discrete time-specific actions;
or further planning actions. In accordance with requirements of State law, the agencies
and/or officials responsible for implementation are identified for each program in the
Implementation Matrix at the end of the document, along with the timeframe for taking
action.
Quantified objectives are also identified for each group of implementing actions, and
summarized at the end of the document. These identify the number of units to be
constructed, rehabilitated or conserved, and the number of households to be assisted as the
result of implementing actions under each Housing Element goal. This provides a measure
for gauging the Housing Element’s success in meeting identified housing needs and
achieving stated goals through the planning period.
The City of St. Helena’s housing goals, policies, implementing actions and quantified
objectives for the January 31, 2015 to January 31, 2023 planning period are presented below,
in response to the housing needs, resources and constraints identified in the Housing
Element Update Housing Needs Assessment and building upon the achievements and
experiences from the City’s previous Housing Element.
Housing Element                                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 6

Goal 1: A Diversity of Housing to Meet Local Needs
Policies
HE1.1           Ensure that the General Plan’s Growth Management Policies do not limit our
                ability to meet regional housing needs.
HE1.2           Focus on key opportunity sites and work with property owners and
                developers to facilitate development of new affordable housing.
HE1.3           Encourage the development of affordable housing and remove development
                constraints as feasible.
HE1.4           Address workforce housing needs by supporting an improved jobs/housing
                “match.”
HE1.5           Encourage innovative housing types and designs.
HE1.6           Address emergency shelter and transitional housing requirements.
Implementing Actions
HE1.A           Continue to exempt permits for regulated affordable units as well as second
                units from the Growth Management System. The objective is to
                accommodate production to meet the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
                (RHNA) of 31 housing units (8 units for very low-income households, 5 for
                low-income households, 5 for moderate-income households, and 13 for above
                moderate-income households). Developers shall be encouraged to propose
                projects that meet this need.
HE1.B           Review and possibly amend the Growth Management System to encourage
                the production of regulated affordable and workforce housing units. Review
                the Growth Management System (GMS) to make sure that it is not
                disproportionately affecting the development of affordable housing.
                Exemptions for restricted “workforce” housing units should be explored, and
                adopt as appropriate, in addition to current exemptions for affordable housing
                units. Continue to allow a maximum of 9 market rate units per year and
                priority allocation of annual building permit allocations and carryover permits
                to market rate units in development projects that include a minimum of 40
                percent affordable units.
HE1.C           Give projects that include affordable housing units priority access to water
                and sewer resources over other new projects should the capacity of the local
                water or sewer systems become inadequate to meet the full demand for new
                connections.
Housing Element                                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 7

HE1.D           Revise the permitting process to streamline the review of affordable housing
                and market rate multifamily projects. The City will establish different design
                guidelines for various neighborhoods in the City in order to provide
                appropriate guidelines for neighborhood character. The design guidelines will
                address architectural character, building materials, appropriate “massing” of
                structures, parking, tree planting/ preservation, mitigating visual impacts, and
                preserving vineyard views, among other design issues. The City will prioritize
                the adoption of design guidelines for the Affordable Housing and Mixed-Use
                overlay zones, should such zones be adopted, as well as for the high density
                residential zone and key sites in the medium density residential zone. Design
                guidelines will facilitate and not hinder the production of units affordable to
                lower-income households. Upon adoption of design guidelines for
                multifamily projects, the City will eliminate the current requirements for a use
                permit for multifamily projects in the high density residential district and for
                the key housing sites in the medium density residential district that are listed in
                the Available Land Inventory Summary, Table 42, in the Housing Element
                Needs Assessment. Concurrently, the City will evaluate redesignating and
                rezoning medium density parcels, other than those listed in the Available Land
                Inventory Summary (Table 42), with a land use designation that better reflects
                the type and character of existing development. In addition, the City will
                eliminate, as appropriate, use permit requirements for multifamily projects for
                the remaining parcels in the medium density residential district. The City will
                adopt multifamily design guidelines and eliminate CUP requirements by no
                later than May 31, 2016. This timing will allow the City to first complete the
                update and adoption of the 2030 General Plan. Once the General Plan is
                adopted, the City can begin work on establishing design guidelines for the
                zones established in the General Plan.
HE1.E           Work with private property owners/developers to plan for road and utility
                improvements necessary to support housing on key opportunity sites, in the
                event these sites are developed. Funding for off-site improvements will be
                provided through development impact fees.
HE1.F           Fast-track housing developments that meet lower income and special housing
                needs. Ensure that housing development proposals that meet the needs of
                lower income households and special needs groups, such as seniors, people
                with disabilities, farmworkers, and homeless families and individuals, receive
                the highest priority and quickest turn-around possible in the development
                review process.
HE1.G           Improve and enhance the local preference policy to possibly include people
                needed for work during city emergencies. The current local preference policy
                gives weighted preference to local residents as regulated affordable housing
                units become available. This benefit will be extended to persons employed in
Housing Element                                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 8

                St. Helena that are needed during city emergencies, such as firefighters and
                police officers.
HE1.H           Explore, and adopt as appropriate, a program to address the housing needs of
                “workforce” households, which have incomes above 120 percent of AMI, but
                are still unable to afford market rate housing. Conduct further study and
                define the upper income limit of workforce households. Provide incentives
                and assistance for new workforce housing developments. Such incentives may
                include, but are not limited to, relaxing site development standards and
                extending priority for water and sewer connections to such housing projects.
                Explore the feasibility of adding an above moderate-income workforce
                housing component to the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance requirements and
                amend the Ordinance as appropriate.
HE1.I           Implement a program to provide financial assistance for the development of
                second units in exchange for affordability restrictions that will provide
                workforce housing. Target 5 second units for development during the
                Housing Element planning period. Potential funding sources include, but are
                not limited to, Housing Trust Funds and Transient Occupancy Tax revenues.
HE1.J           Encourage development of co-housing, ecohousing, ‘green’ manufactured
                homes, and other ‘nontraditional’ forms of housing. Ensure these housing
                types are addressed in the development of design guidelines to streamline the
                approval process.
HE1.K           Amend the Zoning Ordinance to define “family” as one or more persons
                living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. The definition
                should not distinguish between related and unrelated individuals and should
                not impose a numerical limit on the number of persons that constitute a
                family.
Quantified Objectives for the Implementing Actions of Goal 1:
 Construct 4 units of housing affordable to Extremely Low-Income households; 4 units
    of housing affordable to Very Low-Income households; 5 units for Low-Income
    households, 5 units for Moderate-Income households, and 13 units for Above Moderate-
    Income households by October 31, 2022, or the end of the current Housing Element
    planning period, as may be amended by state law.
 Provide financial assistance for 5 second units with affordability restrictions for
    workforce households by June 30, 2014, or the end of the current planning period, as
    may be amended by state law.
Housing Element                                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 9

Goal 2: Efficient Land Use and High Quality Neighborhoods
Policies
HE2.1           Encourage higher density development where appropriate.
HE2.2           Ensure that higher density housing opportunity sites are not lost to lower
                density uses.
HE2.3           Promote mixed-use developments.
HE2.4           Promote second unit production.
HE2.5           Allow conversion of single-family homes to multi-unit dwellings.
HE2.6           Promote a balance of types of housing throughout the whole community.
Implementing Actions
HE2.A           Provide incentives for higher density housing. Explore possible incentives for
                building attached market rate housing units for rent and for sale. Incentives to
                adopt as appropriate include, but are not restricted to, fast tracking
                development applications, deferred development fees, reduced parking and/or
                other city standards, and density bonuses.
HE2.B           Study potential modifications to the Zoning Ordinance to facilitate higher
                density housing [and discourage construction of oversize homes]. Modify the
                Zoning Ordinance to encourage higher density developments [and restrict
                construction of large single-family units], including current floor area ratios
                and yard and setback requirements.
HE2.C           Amend regulations to discourage exemptions from the minimum density
                requirements. The City shall discourage exemptions for minimum density
                requirements and establish mitigation measures for exemptions in the Zoning
                Ordinance.
HE2.D           Modify section 17.100 of the Zoning Ordinance to rename the Mobilehome
                Park Overlay District to “Manufactured Housing Overlay District.” Develop
                policies to streamline the review process for this overlay district on residential
                land for projects that create land-ownership opportunities for residents.
                Support giving residents the right of first refusal if an existing park is to be
                sold.
HE2.E           Amend the “Subdivisions” section of the Municipal Code. The City will
                amend Title 16 of the Municipal Code to prevent subdivision activity from
Housing Element                                                         City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 10

                effectively resulting in lower densities and a loss of potential housing units on
                the site.
HE2.F           Update the General Plan Land Use Element in consideration of the
                established Housing Element land use goals and policies. Amend General
                Plan Elements concurrent with adoption of the General Plan Update as
                needed to ensure internal consistency.
HE2.G           Promote both ‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ mixed-use. Encourage mixed-use
                developments that combine compatible uses on the same site, either in the
                same structure or adjacent structures. Amend the Zoning Ordinance
                accordingly. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance include permitting the
                FAR for the residential component of a mixed-use development to be
                ‘additive’ rather than within the established FAR for that zone, and allowing
                commercial and residential users to ‘share’ their parking, resulting in a lower
                overall parking requirement. Requirements for covered parking should also be
                reconsidered.
HE2.H           Explore the possibility of allowing mixed use and live/work units in non-
                residential zoning districts.
                 Explore and adopt as appropriate modifications to non-residential Zones
                    that would permit, either as of right or as a conditional use, residential uses
                    including mixed use and integrated live/work units.
                 Analyze requirements that commercial projects provide housing for a
                    portion of the employment that will be generated on site. The City will
                    study and determine what portion of employment generated will require
                    housing, whether housing will be required on-site or allowed off-site, if
                    pricing for the non-inclusionary units will be tied to anticipated salaries for
                    employees in the commercial portion of the project, and if in-lieu fees will
                    be permitted for smaller sized projects.
                 Explore and adopt as appropriate development incentives such as higher
                    density and height allowances, a streamlined design review process, and
                    financial incentives, including fee reductions and waivers and contributions
                    from the City’s Housing Trust Fund, to encourage employers to provide
                    on-site employee housing.
HE2.I           Review and revise development standards pertaining to second units. Ensure
                that the development of second units is physically and financially feasible in
                targeted areas. Give particular attention to parking standards, setbacks, and
                impact fees.
Housing Element                                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 11

HE2.J           Provide financial incentives for second unit development. Incentives might
                include low interest loans or fee waivers.
HE2.K           Target specific areas for second unit incentives. Create incentives to construct
                second units in the medium density areas near downtown. Incentives to adopt
                as appropriate include, but are not restricted to, fast tracking development
                applications, deferred development fees, and reduced parking and/or other
                city standards.
HE2.L           Provide public information regarding second units. Develop a guide for
                homeowners explaining the benefits and procedures for adding a second unit.
HE2.M           Link financial incentives and development standard variances to affordability
                requirements for second units. Require that either the main house or the
                second unit is used as a rental unit that is affordable to households with
                moderate- or below- moderate incomes whenever the City assists in
                development through financial incentives or by granting a variance.
HE2.N           Respond to complaints regarding illegal units. The City will work with the
                property owners to help bring illegal units up to code and to abate the use of
                non-habitable buildings as living units.
HE2.O           Identify appropriate ‘target’ areas for conversion of single-family homes to
                multi-unit dwellings. Identify areas, zoning districts, or specific sites where
                conversion would be appropriate or desirable.
HE2.-P          Develop a program to encourage affordable housing in clusters of 4-6 units on
                Infill parcels on west side of town. The City will post an inventory of
                potential sites on the City’s web site. In addition the City will explore and
                adopt as appropriate incentives to encourage affordable housing clusters,
                including, but not limited to priority permit processing, reduced or waived
                development fees, reduced parking and/or other city standards, and an
                additional density bonus.
Quantified Objectives for the Implementing Actions of Goal 2:
Same as the Quantified Objectives listed for Goal 1.
Housing Element                                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 12

Goal 3: Conservation of Existing Housing
Policies
HE3.1           Protect the existing stock of affordable and market rate housing.
HE3.2           Monitor housing conditions.
Implementing Actions
HE3.A           Restrict the conversion of rental units to condominiums. Current policy
                allows conversion to condominiums under certain circumstances when the
                vacancy rate is high. The presence of second homes within the community
                results in an inflated vacancy rate. The policy should be further studied and
                revised to reflect a general guiding principle of preserving the affordable
                housing stock while eliminating the current linkage to vacancy rates.
HE3.B           Charge an affordable housing impact fee whenever housing units are
                converted to other uses. Exempt conversion projects that create affordable
                for-sale housing from this impact fee.
HE3.C           Address the potential loss of assisted units. Identify assisted properties at risk
                of conversion to market rates and work with the property owners and/or
                other parties to ensure that they are conserved as affordable housing.
HE3.D           Continue to limit the conversion of market rate housing to vacation rentals.
                Abate the use of illegal vacation rentals, including time shares and fractional
                interests.
HE3.E           Review housing needs, conditions, achievements and challenges as part of the
                City’s regular General Plan review. As required by State law, submit a progress
                report to the State Department of Housing and Community Development and
                the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research by April 1st of each year.
Quantified Objectives for the Implementing Actions of Goal 3:
 Conservation of all existing affordable housing units.
 Assist in the acquisition of low-interest loans for rehabilitation, including energy
    conservation, of 10 lower-income housing units by January 31, 2023 or the end of the
    current Housing Element planning period, as may be amended by state law (2 extremely
    low-income, 2 very low-income, 3 low-income, and 3 moderate-income households).
Housing Element                                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 13

Goal 4: Assistance to Support Affordable Housing
Policies
HE4.1           Develop permanent local sources of funding to support affordable housing.
HE4.2           Aggressively pursue and ‘leverage’ State and Federal housing funds.
HE4.3           Address farmworker housing needs.
HE4.4           Support housing that meets special needs, including senior citizens and
                persons with disabilities.
HE4.5           Explore methods to increase Housing Trust Fund money.
Implementing Actions
HE4.A           Review and possibly amend the inclusionary housing ordinance to:
                 Adjust the inclusionary housing ordinance to require further distribution
                    of affordable units within the various income categories. For example, a
                    project required to provide two low-income units under the current
                    inclusionary housing ordinance could be required to provide one unit
                    affordable to households with incomes of up to 65 percent of area median
                    income and one unit affordable to households with incomes of up to 80
                    percent of area median income.
                 Balance collecting housing impact fees with the requirement to construct
                    affordable housing, either on or off site depending on the size of the site
                    and other site conditions, for larger commercial developments. Evaluate
                    increasing the housing impact fees to reflect the increasing cost of housing
                    in the community. Collect housing impact fees for small commercial
                    development where requiring residential construction would not be
                    feasible.
                 Increase as appropriate residential construction in-lieu fees and/or create a
                    sliding scale for larger houses.
                 Add an above moderate-income workforce housing component to the
                    Inclusionary Housing Ordinance requirements.
HE4.B           Generate Revenues for Affordable Housing through the Transient Occupancy
                Tax. Either increase the Transient Occupancy Tax or increase the number of
                transient occupancy rooms and apply the increased revenue to support
                affordable housing.
Housing Element                                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 14

HE4.C                Reduce, defer, or waive fees for affordable housing developments. The City
                     will establish a set of criteria for project eligibility to have fees reduced,
                     deferred, or waived. The City will explore and adopt as appropriate higher
                     incentives for affordable housing developments with units affordable to
                     extremely low- and very low-income households.
HE4.D                Prioritize the use of Housing Trust Funds in support of the development and
                     preservation of regulated affordable units for extremely low-income
                     households.
HE4.E                Pursue mortgage revenue bonds and/or mortgage credit certificates. Promote
                     affordable homeownership opportunities for moderate- and lower-income
                     households.
HE4.F                Pursue additional funding for affordable housing. Explore other options for
                     affordable housing funding, including a real property transfer tax and Housing
                     Trust Fund contributions from the wine and hospitality industry in Napa
                     Valley. 1
HE4.G                Continue Section 8 rent subsidy certificates. Work with the City of Napa
                     Housing Authority to provide continued rental assistance to low-, very low-,
                     and extremely low-income households.
HE4.H                Explore the possibility of establishing a full-time, shared Housing Coordinator
                     for the up-valley communities to promote development of new affordable
                     housing and enter into a cost-sharing agreement if feasible. The position
                     would serve all of the up-valley communities, including Napa County.
HE4.I                Address farmworker housing needs. The City will contribute staff time and
                     City resources, as appropriate, to countywide farmworker housing efforts that
                     may occur during the Housing Element planning period. The City will reach
                     out to affordable housing developers to support regional and City efforts to
                     develop farmworker housing, including assisting with financing or
                     applications, incentives and concessions, expedited review or other strategies
                     to encourage the development of housing for farmworkers.
HE4.J                Establish regulations requiring that a portion of units in all new developments
                     meet the special housing needs of seniors and persons with disabilities,
                     including developmental disabilities. Target 20 percent of new housing units
1 In order for the City of St Helena to levy a real property transfer tax the City is required by State law to become a
charter city. The process to become a charter city is complex, and requires the City to accomplish a number of
procedural steps, including a supportive vote of the electorate. As a result, the requirement for St Helena to become a
charter city is an impediment to the City adopting a real property transfer tax.
Housing Element                                                                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                              Page 15
                to meet senior household needs and 10 percent accessible to persons with
                disabilities.
HE4.K           The City shall participate with mediation between property owners if needed
                to facilitate affordable housing. The City will provide staff resources and/or
                work with affected parties along with an outside mediator if necessary to
                address issues raised by community members in response to affordable
                housing development applications.
HE4.L           Explore the potential of using Housing Trust Fund money to purchase
                existing housing for conversion to restricted affordable housing and commit
                funding as appropriate. Priority for use of Housing Trust Fund monies will be
                given to the creation of housing affordable to extremely-low-income
                households.
Quantified Objectives for the Implementing Actions of Goal 4:
 Generate adequate funds to support achievement of the City’s new housing construction
    objectives, as defined in Policy 1A.
 Reduce, defer, or waive fees for 18 housing units affordable to extremely low, low, very
    low and moderate income households.
 Assist in the acquisition of low-interest loans to 10 first-time homebuyers through
    January 31, 2023 or the end of the current Housing Element planning period, as may be
    amended by state law.
 Facilitate the continuance of Section 8 rental assistance to all currently served
    households.
 20 percent of new units to meet senior housing needs; 10 percent accessible to persons
    with disabilities.
 Purchase of 3 existing housing units and conversion to regulated affordable housing for
    lower-income households.
Housing Element                                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 16

Goal 5: Resource Conservation
Policies
HE5.1           Encourage alternative energy sources.
HE5.2           Encourage energy and resource conservation.
Implementing Actions
HE5.A           Adopt a Green Building Ordinance. The City shall adopt building code
                standards that meet or exceed the State’s Green Building Standards Code. The
                Planning and Building Department shall coordinate this effort with the
                Climate Protection Task Force.
HE5.B           Encourage use of alternative energy technologies. Create incentives for the
                use of solar energy in new and rehabilitated housing. Incentives to adopt as
                appropriate include, but are not restricted to, ensuring a streamlined review
                process for applications, deferred fees, and reduced applicable city standards.
HE5.C           Provide public information on alternative energy technologies for residential
                developers, contractors, and property owners. The City will provide
                information on its web site and/or at City Hall regarding alternative energy
                technology options, possible sources of financing, and any applicable
                information regarding necessary local permits.
HE5.D           Require cost-effective energy conservation measures in all new and
                rehabilitated housing to promote long-term affordability for occupants. The
                City will adopt the State’s new Energy Efficiency Standards as part of any
                update to the California Building Standards Code and ensure that all new
                housing units constructed in the City meet or exceed these standards.
HE5.E           Provide low-interest loans for implementation of energy conservation
                measures. The City will identify a source of loan funds to provide energy
                conservation assistance to homeowners and home-builders. The City will
                continue to participate in AB-811 programs and will explore additional state
                and federal sources of funding to finance local energy conservation measures.
                Sources of state and federal funds include, but are not limited to, the
                California Energy Commission State Energy Program and Energy Efficiency
                and Conservation Block Grant Program, and the Low Income Home Energy
                Assistance Program.
HE5.F           Provide public information on energy conservation measures for
                homeowners, tenants, developers, contractors and property owners. The City
Housing Element                                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 17

                will provide information on its web site and/or at City Hall regarding actions
                homeowners, tenants, developers, contractors, and property owners can take
                to conserve energy.
HE5.G           Require bicycle and pedestrian amenities and connectivity to surrounding
                areas, in all new housing developments. Support programs to develop more
                local and regional walking and biking trails. In addition to requiring bicycle
                and pedestrian connectivity in all new residential developments, the City will
                provide staff time in support of regional trail programs.
HE5.H           Continue to apply Municipal Code provisions pertaining to water resources.
                The City will continue to require water-efficient landscaping for new
                residential and commercial construction, as well as implementing the Water
                Use Efficiency and Use Guidelines.
HE5.I           Promote passive natural heating and cooling opportunities in new
                development and protect to the extent possible solar access for existing
                development. Incentives to be adopted as appropriate include, but are not
                restricted to, ensuring a streamlined review process for applications, deferred
                fees, and relaxing applicable city standards.
HE5.J           Explore feasibility of incorporating efficient on-site alternative wastewater
                facilities. The City will study options for on-site alternative wastewater
                facilities, including graywater reuse, recycling, and/or on-site treatment. The
                City will then ensure that the local Municipal Code does not include
                regulations that may unnecessarily present barriers to implementing these
                technologies, amending the Municipal Code as appropriate.
HE5.K           The City shall explore policies that give local preference in the procurement
                process when municipal funds may be used for housing.
Quantified Objectives for the Implementing Actions of Goal 5:
Assist in the acquisition of low-interest loans for rehabilitation, including energy
conservation of 10 lower-income households by January 31, 2023, or the end of the current
Housing Element planning period, as may be amended by state law.
Housing Element                                                         City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 18
Goal 6: Equal Housing Opportunities
Policies
HE6.1           Support equal housing opportunities for all residents of St. Helena.
Implementing Actions
HE6.A           Provide educational materials at City Hall, through the press and directly to
                interested parties to educate real estate professionals, property owners and
                tenants on their rights and responsibilities and the resources available to
                address fair housing issues.
HE6.B           Continue to utilize and support Fair Housing Napa Valley for implementing
                fair housing programs, receiving complaints, and providing referrals to
                available resources when necessary.
Quantified Objectives for the Implementing Actions for Goal 6:
No specific objectives identified.
Housing Element                                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 19
Summary of Quantified Objectives
New Construction Objectives
   4 units affordable to Extremely Low-Income households
   4 units affordable to Very Low-Income households
   5 units affordable to Low-Income households
   5 units affordable to Moderate-Income households
   13 units affordable to Above Moderate-Income households
Rehabilitation and Conservation Objectives
 Conservation of all existing affordable housing units.
 Conserve 200 manufactured homes at manufactured home parks.
Assistance for Special Needs Households
   Assist in the acquisition of low-interest loans to 10 first-time homebuyers.
   20 percent of new units to meet senior needs.
   10 percent of new units accessible to persons with disabilities.
   Purchase of 3 existing housing units and conversion to regulated affordable housing for
    lower-income households.
Quantified Objectives Summary Table
The City will strive to exceed the following targets for affordable housing development in St.
Helena.
                                 Extremely        Very
                                                                                                 Above
                                    Low           Low            Low         Moderate          Moderate
Construction                           4           4               5               5                13
Rehabilitation                         2           2               3               3                 0
Conservation/Preservation
                                       0          116             67              239                0
of Existing Housing
Housing Element                                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 20

F. Implementation Matrix
Goal 1
 Implementing
 Actions          Lead Responsibility Time Frame   Related Polices
 HE1.A            Planning Department Ongoing      HE1.1
 HE1.B            Planning Department 2017         HE1.1, HE1.3, HE1.4
 HE1.C            Planning Department Ongoing      HE1.3
 HE1.D            Planning Department May 31, 2016 HE1.3
 HE1.E            Planning Department As needed    HE1.2
 HE1.F            Planning Department Ongoing      HE1.3
 HE1.G            Planning Department 2017         HE1.4
 HE1.H            Planning Department 2017         HE1.4
 HE1.I            Planning Department 2017         HE1.4
 HE1.J            Planning Department Ongoing      HE1.5
 HE1.K            Planning Department May 31, 2016 HE1.3, HE6.1
Housing Element                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                      Page 21
Goal 2
 Implementing
 Actions        Lead Responsibility Time Frame Related Polices
 HE2.A          Planning Department 2019       HE2.1
 HE2.B          Planning Department 2018       HE2.1
 HE2.C          Planning Department 2014       HE2.1
 HE2.D          Planning Department 2018       HE2.1
 HE2.E          Planning Department 2016       HE2.2
 HE2.F          Planning Department 2015       HE2.2
 HE2.G          Planning Department 2017       HE2.3
 HE2.H          Planning Department 2017       HE2.3
 HE2.I          Planning Department 2016       HE2.4
 HE2.J          Planning Department 2018       HE2.4
 HE2.K          Planning Department 2018       HE2.4
 HE2.L          Planning Department 2017       HE2.4
 HE2.M          Planning Department Ongoing    HE2.4
 HE2.N          Planning Department Ongoing    HE2.4
 HE2.O          Planning Department 2019       HE2.5
                Planning Department
 HE2.Q          & City Council      2017       HE2.6
Housing Element                                City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                  Page 22
Goal 3
 Implementing
 Actions        Lead Responsibility Time Frame         Related Polices
 HE3.A          Planning Department 2016               HE3.1
 HE3.B          Planning Department Ongoing            HE3.1
 HE3.C          Planning Department Ongoing            HE3.1
 HE3.D          Planning Department Ongoing            HE3.1
 HE3.E          Planning Department Annually           HE3.2
Goal 4
 Implementing
 Actions        Lead Responsibility Time Frame         Related Polices
 HE4.A          Planning Department 2018               HE4.1, HE4.5
 HE4.B          Planning Department 2016 and Ongoing   HE4.1, HE4.5
 HE4.C          Planning Department Ongoing            HE4.1
 HE4.D          Planning Department Ongoing            HE4.1
 HE4.E          Planning Department Ongoing            HE4.2
 HE4.F          Planning Department 2016 and Ongoing   HE4.1
 HE4.G          Planning Department Ongoing            HE4.2
 HE4.H          Planning Department Ongoing            HE4.2
                                    Outreach to
                                    affordable housing
                                    developers by 2017
                                    and biannually
 HE4.I          Planning Department thereafter         HE4.3
 HE4.J          Planning Department 2018               HE4.4
 HE4.K          Planning Department Ongoing            HE4.1, HE4.4
 HE4.L          Planning Department 2019               HE4.1
Housing Element                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                          Page 23
Goal 5
 Implementing
 Actions        Lead Responsibility Time Frame            Related Polices
 HE5.A          Planning Department 2016                  HE5.1
 HE5.B          Planning Department Ongoing               HE5.1
 HE5.C          Planning Department Ongoing               HE5.1
                                    Triennially beginning
 HE5.D          Planning Department 2016                  HE5.2
 HE5.E          Planning Department Ongoing               HE5.2
 HE5.F          Planning Department Ongoing               HE5.2
 HE5.G          Planning Department Ongoing               HE5.2
 HE5.H          Planning Department Ongoing               HE5.2
 HE5.I          Planning Department Ongoing               HE5.2
 HE5.J          Planning Department 2016                  HE5.2
 HE5.K          Planning Department 2016                  HE5.2
Goal 6
 Implementing
 Actions        Lead Responsibility Time Frame            Related Polices
 HE6.A          Planning Department Ongoing               HE6.1
 HE6.B          City Manager        Ongoing               HE6.1
Housing Element                                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                             Page 24
                City of St. Helena
Housing Element Update 2015-2023
      Housing Needs Assessment
                            Adopted
                       May 26, 2015
Table of Contents
List of Tables and Figures ........................................................................................... iii
Executive Summary ......................................................................................................v
Introduction ...................................................................................................................1
    Housing Element Purpose ......................................................................................................... 1
    Authority ................................................................................................................................... 1
    Status ......................................................................................................................................... 1
    Consistency with the General Plan............................................................................................ 2
    Public Participation ................................................................................................................... 2
Review of Existing Housing Element ........................................................................... 5
    Housing Production During the 2007-2014 Planning Period.................................................... 5
    Progress in Implementation....................................................................................................... 6
Demographic and Economic Trends ......................................................................... 29
    Population and Employment Characteristics .......................................................................... 29
    Employment Trends ................................................................................................................ 33
    Population, Household and Employment Projections, 2010-2035.......................................... 35
    Summary ................................................................................................................................. 37
Housing Conditions .................................................................................................... 51
    Existing Housing Conditions .................................................................................................. 51
    Housing Market Conditions .................................................................................................... 59
    Summary ................................................................................................................................. 61
Special Needs Populations ......................................................................................... 70
    Persons with Disabilities ......................................................................................................... 70
    Elderly ..................................................................................................................................... 72
    Large Households.................................................................................................................... 75
    Single Female-Headed Households with Children ................................................................. 76
    Farmworkers ........................................................................................................................... 76
    Families and Persons in Need of Emergency Shelters ............................................................ 81
    Summary ................................................................................................................................. 83
    Non-governmental Constraints ............................................................................................... 94
    Governmental Constraints ....................................................................................................... 96
    Summary ............................................................................................................................... 110
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                   Page i
Sites Inventory and Analysis and Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types ............ 119
    Regional Housing Needs Allocation ..................................................................................... 119
    Housing Sites Inventory ........................................................................................................ 121
    Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types ................................................................................ 126
    Summary ............................................................................................................................... 130
Appendix A: Definitions ........................................................................................... 136
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                              Page ii
List of Tables and Figures
Table 1: Housing Units Built, 2007 – 2013 ........................................................................................ 6
Table 2: Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element Programs ................................................................ 11
Table 3: Population and Household Trends, 1990, 2000, and 2010 ................................................. 40
Table 4: Age Distribution, 1990, 2000, and 2010............................................................................. 41
Table 5: Household Income Distribution, 2000 and 2012 ................................................................ 42
Table 6: Household Income Categories, City of St. Helena, 2010 .................................................. 42
Table 7: Labor Force Trends, 2007 and 2012 ................................................................................... 44
Table 8: Jobs by Industry, 2000 and 2010 ........................................................................................ 45
Table 9: Wages by Occupation, Napa County, First Quarter 2013 .................................................. 46
Table 10: St. Helena Workers by Place of Residence, 2010 ............................................................ 47
Table 11: St. Helena Residents by Place of Work, 2010 .................................................................. 47
Table 12: Ratio of Jobs to Employed Residents, 2000 and 2010 ..................................................... 49
Table 13: ABAG Population, Household, and Employment Projections ......................................... 50
Table 14: Housing Stock Characteristics, 2000 and 2010 ................................................................ 56
Table 15: Housing Stock by Year Built, 2012 .................................................................................. 56
Table 16: Housing Occupancy and Vacancy Status, 2012 ............................................................... 57
Table 17: Overcrowding by Income Category and Tenure, St. Helena, 2010 .................................. 57
Table 18: Housing Cost Burden, City of St. Helena, 2010 ............................................................... 58
Table 19: Housing Conditions Survey Results for St. Helena, February 2014 ................................ 58
Table 20: Single-Family Housing Sales Prices, St. Helena, 2013 .................................................... 63
Table 21: Condominium Sales Prices, St. Helena, 2013 .................................................................. 64
Table 22: Affordable For-Sale Housing Prices, Napa County, 2014 ............................................... 64
Table 23: Multi-Family Housing Survey Results for St. Helena, February 2014 ............................ 66
Table 24: Market-Rate Apartment Rental Rates, St. Helena, 2014 .................................................. 66
Table 25: Affordable Rents, Napa County, 2014 ............................................................................. 68
Table 26: Affordable Housing Developments, St. Helena ............................................................... 69
Table 27: Civilian Non-Institutionalized Population with Disabilities, 2012................................... 84
Table 28: Household Tenure by Age of Householder, 2000 and 2012............................................ 86
Table 29: Elderly Households and Housing Cost Burden, City of St. Helena, 2010 ....................... 87
Table 30: Family and Non-Family Households by Size, 2000 and 2012 ......................................... 88
Table 31: Large Family Households and Housing Cost Burden, City of St. Helena, 2010.............. 89
Table 32: Single Female-Headed Households with Children, 2000 and 2012 ................................. 90
Table 33: Farm Employment, Napa County, 1993 - 2012 ................................................................ 91
Table 34: Farmworkers, Napa County, 2012 .................................................................................... 91
Table 35: Farmworker Rents and Incomes, Napa County, 2005 .................................................... 93
Table 36: St. Helena Residential Zoning Districts.......................................................................... 112
Table 37: Building Permit and Development Impact Fees, ............................................................ 114
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                               Page iii

Table 38: Building Permit and Development Impact Fees, 8-Unit Multi-Family Development,
     2014 ........................................................................................................................................ 115
Table 39: Timelines for Permit Procedures .................................................................................... 115
Table 40: Typical Processing Procedures by Project Type ............................................................ 116
Table 41: St. Helena Regional Housing Needs Allocation, 2014-2022.......................................... 120
Table 42: Available Land Inventory Summary, Key Housing Sites .............................................. 132
Table 43: Available Land Inventory Summary, Other Vacant/Underutilized Sites ....................... 133
Figure 1: Key Housing Opportunity Sites ...................................................................................... 134
Figure 2: Other Vacant/Underutilized Sites.................................................................................... 135
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                  Page iv
Executive Summary
This document represents the first of two documents that will constitute the 2015-2023 St. Helena
Housing Element Update. The Housing Element is one of the seven General Plan elements, and
every jurisdiction in the State of California is required to submit a Housing Element to the
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for review and certification. St.
Helena is a member of the Bay Area Association of Governments (ABAG) and, therefore, is
required to submit an updated Housing Element to HCD by January 31, 2015.
Review of Existing Housing Element
Since the City of St. Helena adopted a Housing Element in 2009, the City of St. Helena has
successfully removed many of the previously identified governmental constraints to housing
production, maintenance, and rehabilitation. In January 2015, the City adopted an ordinance to:
allow emergency shelters for the homeless in the Industrial (I) and Service Commercial (SC)
zoning districts as a permitted use; allow transitional and supportive housing in all zoning districts
that allow residential uses, subject to the same regulations as other housing of the same type in the
same zone; allow agricultural employee housing for 6 or fewer employees in all residential zoning
districts; allow agricultural employee housing of up to 36 beds or 12 units as a permitted use in the
Agricultural (A-20), Agricultural Preserve (AP), and Winery (W) zoning districts; allow single
room occupancy housing as a permitted use in the High Density Residential (HR) district; provide
a procedure to allow for persons with disabilities to seek reasonable accommodation from zoning
laws, rules and regulations pertaining to housing; and amended the zoning code in accordance with
State density bonus law. These zoning amendments implemented programs HE1.Q, HE1.R,
HE1.S, and HE4.I, HE4.K of the 2009 Housing Element.
Demographic and Economic Trends
Since 2000, the City of St. Helena experienced a slight population decline and an increase in the
number of households, causing the average household size in St. Helena to fall. The median age of
St. Helena residents rose from 40 to 43 years. The median household income in St. Helena
($71,100 in 2012) exceeds the Napa County median but is lower than the Bay Area median. Many
people travel into St. Helena from the surrounding area for work, and that pattern will continue as
local population and household growth projections lag strong employment growth estimates for the
next three decades.
Existing Housing and Market Conditions
Around 2,802 housing units exist in St. Helena in 2014, an increase of about 26 units since 2010.
About 60 percent of the new homes are single-family units, and the rest are multifamily units.
There is a significant difference between the income necessary to purchase the median priced
single-family home in St. Helena (nearly $200,000 a year) and St. Helena’s 2012 median
household income of $71,100. Rental units in St. Helena, while limited in supply, provide more
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page v

affordable options for low- and moderate-income households. Approximately 37 percent of the
apartments in St. Helena are subsidized affordable units. Market rents are unaffordable to some
very low-income households and all extremely low-income households. This highlights the need
for additional subsidized affordable housing, to meet the needs of local households in these lower
income categories. While only about five percent of households in St. Helena live in overcrowded
conditions, most households experiencing overcrowding are renters.
Special Housing Needs
Both St. Helena and Napa County have high concentrations of seniors compared to the Bay Area,
with residents aged 65 and over comprising 19 percent of the population in St. Helena. Thirty-five
percent of all St. Helena households are headed by a senior. In addition, a disproportionately large
number of St. Helena’s elderly households have severe housing cost burdens compared to the
overall population. The percentage of large family households in St. Helena is significantly lower
than the rates in Napa County and the Bay Area, while St. Helena has a similar percentage of single
female-headed households. While the number of farmworkers and homeless persons in need of
permanent or transitional housing specifically within the City of St. Helena is unknown, these two
special needs populations have an unmet need for housing in Napa County as a whole and St.
Helena must work with surrounding jurisdictions to meet that need.
Non-governmental and Governmental Constraints
The non-governmental constraints that restrict building in St. Helena are the price of land and the
availability of financing with the tightening of the national credit market. The governmental
constraints present in St. Helena include water capacity, given that the City has limited water
supplies and must prioritize water service for proposed development that includes housing for
lower-income households. Other non-governmental and governmental conditions such as
construction costs, zoning code, General Plan land use designations, and impact fees do not
unnecessarily inhibit housing production.
Sites Inventory and Analysis and Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
The housing sites inventory analysis indicates that St. Helena has a sufficient number of housing
sites to meet the City’s 2014-2022 Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). St. Helena
received a RHNA of 31total units distributed across very low-income (8 units), low-income (5
units), moderate-income (5 units), and above moderate-income (13 units) categories. Given the 39
units built or approved since January 2014, the City needs sites for at least 4 more housing units
affordable to very low income households. After accounting for possible site constraints, the City
has the capacity to accommodate 62 units on four high-density sites that meet the State’s default
density and therefore are adequate to provide affordable housing for lower-income households.
The City also has capacity to develop an additional 172 units on six medium density sites. Market
rate housing on these sites is assumed to be affordable to above-moderate income households, but
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page vi

development projects will be required to provide 20 percent affordable units under the City’s
inclusionary regulations.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                         City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                            Page vii

Introduction
Since 1969, California Housing Element Law has required that local governments develop plans to
accommodate and facilitate housing for current and future residents, at all income levels.
Housing Element Purpose
The purpose of the Housing Element is to establish a comprehensive plan to address housing needs
in St. Helena over the eight-year planning period between January 31, 2015, and January 31, 2023.
The Housing Element sets the policies surrounding the development, rehabilitation, and
preservation of housing units that meet the needs of St. Helena residents.
The Housing Element consists of two parts, the Housing Needs Assessment and a Housing Element
Policy Document. The Housing Needs Assessment identifies and analyzes the existing and
projected housing needs for St. Helena and also identifies sites for housing development that are
adequate to accommodate the City’s regional housing needs allocation. The forthcoming Housing
Policy document will state goals, policies, quantified objectives, and implementation programs for
the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing, based upon the findings of the
Housing Needs Assessment and input received through the public outreach that the City
incorporated into the Housing Element Update process. Then, throughout the eight-year planning
period, St. Helena will implement a set of programs to meet the goals included in the Housing
Element Policy Document.
Authority
Housing Elements are required by section 65302(c) of the California Government Code. Housing
Elements are one of seven mandatory General Plan Elements. Specific requirements for Housing
Elements are set forth beginning at section 65580 of the Government Code, with additional
guidance provided by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). The
combination of the Housing Needs Assessment and the Housing Element Policy Document will
address all applicable requirements of State law.
Status
The St. Helena City Council adopted the prior Housing Element in 2009. Upon review of the
adopted Housing Element, HCD sent the City of St. Helena a letter of compliance on October 15,
       1
2009. The 2015-2023 Housing Element Update will plan for St. Helena’s housing needs through
    1
      California Department of Housing and Community Development. Housing Element Review Letters.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                               City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                  Page 1

October 31, 2022, in accordance with the Housing Element RHNA projection period for
                                                                     2
jurisdictions in the Association of Bay Area Governments.
Consistency with the General Plan
State Law requires that a General Plan and its constituent elements “comprise an integrated,
                                                                      3
internally consistent and compatible statement of policies.” Each and every element has equal
standing in the eyes of the law. The City of St. Helena is undertaking a comprehensive General
Plan Update concurrent with the Housing Element Update. Due to mandated schedule for
adoption of the Housing Element Update, the remainder of the General Plan Update will be
completed after adoption of the Housing Element. This will provide the City with the opportunity
to review and revise all policies and programs in the remaining General Plan elements, to ensure
internal consistency across all seven General Plan elements.
In 2011, the Governor signed SB 244 which requires local governments to make determinations
regarding “disadvantaged unincorporated communities,” defined as a community with an annual
median income that is less than 80 percent of the statewide annual median household income. The
City has determined that there are no disadvantaged unincorporated island, fringe or legacy
communities, as defined in the legislation, inside or near its boundaries.
Public Participation
Public participation in the Housing Element process began with a community workshop on April
29, 2014, to solicit comments from the community on key issues and strategic directions to pursue
in the Housing Element update. The public was encouraged to participate via the following
outreach efforts:
-    Articles in the City of St. Helena E-News.
-    Posting of the workshop notice on the St Helena web site.
-    An article for the Housing Element public workshop was published in the local newspaper.
-    A Notice for the Housing Element public workshop was published in the local newspaper.
-    Posting of Housing Element public workshop flyers throughout the community.
Approximately 40 people attended the public Housing Element Workshop on April 29, 2014. The
     http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/plan/he/he_review_letters/. Accessed on March 11, 2014.
     2
       California Department of Housing and Community Development. Housing Element Update Schedule for
     Regional Housing Need Assessment (RHNA). January 2014.
     http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/plan/he/web_he_duedate.pdf. Accessed on March 11, 2014.
     3
       Government Code Section 65300.5
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 2

attendees represented a variety of organizations such as local housing advocacy organizations (e.g.,
Napa Valley Fair Housing, Our Town St. Helena, Latinos Unidos del Valle de Napa y Solano, and
California Rural Legal Assistance, Inc.), developers (Calistoga Affordable Housing), the local
press, and members of the general public. Attendees were presented with a summary of the
preliminary key findings from the Housing Needs Assessment regarding special housing needs,
existing housing and market conditions, demographic and economic trends, and a review of the
2009 St. Helena Housing Element. Planning staff and the City’s consultant reviewed housing
opportunity sites from the 2009 Housing Element and potential strategies to address affordable
housing needs, including the development of second units.
Attendees noted that the City needs more housing for local employees, farmworkers and seniors, as
well as young families who make too much to qualify for subsidized housing but not enough to
find affordable housing in St. Helena. Public input provided during the workshop guided the
process of refining the housing element needs assessment and sites inventory, and also provided
initial guidance regarding potential policy changes. In particular, attendees suggested implementing
a transfer tax on real estate sales to finance low income housing needs, and seeking funding from
the local hospitality and wine industries to address the need for affordable housing for their
              4
employees.
In addition, public hearings were held at Planning Commission and City Council meetings in
February of 2015, with both those bodies providing comments and direction regarding the Housing
Element update. The Planning Commission held a follow-up study session in April 2015 to further
consider potential development incentives for second units and on-site employee housing. The
following organizations were notified of Planning Commission and City Council meetings: Bridge
Housing, California Rural Legal Assistance, Inc., EAH, City of Napa Housing Authority, Calistoga
Affordable Housing, Latinos Unidos del Valle de Napa y Solano, Napa Valley Ecumenical
Housing, Fair Housing Napa Valley, Napa Valley Vintners, Napa Valley Migrant Farmworker
Housing Commission, Napa Valley Grapegrowers, Our Town St. Helena, and the St. Helena
Catholic Church.
To augment the public outreach process, the consultant also conducted interviews with the key
housing stakeholders in St. Helena as follows:
Mary Stephenson, Our Town St. Helena
Mary Stephenson is a member of Our Town St. Helena, an advocacy group working to make
     4
       In order for the City of St Helena to levy a real property transfer tax the City is required by State law to
     become a charter city. The process to become a charter city is complex, and requires the City to accomplish a
     number of procedural steps, including a supportive vote of the electorate. As a result, the requirement for St.
     Helena to become a charter city is an impediment to the City adopting a real property transfer tax.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                          City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                               Page 3

housing available for all members of the St. Helena community. The discussion with Ms.
Stephenson focused on governmental and non-governmental constraints to creating additional
housing for low-income households who work in St. Helena.
Leeanne Martinson, Planner, Area Agency on Aging
The Area Agency on Aging in Napa and Solano Counties is an advocacy organization for elderly
persons and their caregivers. Ms. Martinson discussed how the existing policies and programs of
the City of St. Helena could change or new programs and policies could be created to better serve
the local elderly population.
Shirley King, Program Director, St. Helena Food Pantry
The St. Helena Food Pantry supplies food to households in need, on a weekly basis, in St. Helena.
Ms. Bertoli discussed the needs and challenges faced by a growing number of lower-income St.
Helena families who are completing applications to receive food from the pantry.
The input from these key stakeholders is reflected and attributed accordingly within the remainder
of this document.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                          City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                             Page 4
Review of Existing Housing Element
This section examines the effectiveness of the 2009 Housing Element, the progress made in
achieving the goals, objectives and policies outlined in the Housing Element, along with a
discussion of the Element’s appropriateness given current conditions within the City of St. Helena.
This evaluation will inform the policies and programs developed as part of the 2015-2023 Housing
Element Update.
Housing Production During the 2007-2014 Planning Period
The City’s RHNA for the 2007-2014 planning period was for 30 units affordable to very low
income households, 21 units affordable to low income households, 25 units affordable to moderate
income households, and 45 units affordable to above moderate income households, for a total of
121 housing units. The City’s actual construction during the period was 73 units. The City
developed 21 market rate single family homes and 37 market rate second units. In addition, the
City developed 3 deed-restricted single family homes affordable to moderate income households, 2
deed-restricted second units affordable to very low income households pursuant to an affordable
housing agreement with the City, and an affordable multifamily development containing 4 units
affordable to low income households and 6 units affordable to moderate income households.
The majority of the deed-restricted affordable housing units were developed as part of the
Magnolia Oaks development. Units built in Phase I of this development have been constructed and
are being credited toward the 2007-2014 planning period. Phase II is under construction and Phase
III is expected to begin construction within the next year. As a result, the 20 market rate single
family homes and 4 deed-restricted second units that have been approved for Phase II and III will
be credited toward the City’s 2014-2023 planning period. The deed-restricted second units are
affordable to very low income households, as per the City’s affordable housing agreement with the
developer.
An additional deed-restricted single family unit was built under the inclusionary requirements for
the Vintner’s Court subdivision. The development consists of 5 single family houses, one of which
is affordable to a moderate income household.
Affordability levels for housing units built between January 1, 2007, and December 31, 2013, are
shown in Table 1. In determining affordability levels, the City may use actual rents to determine
the affordability level of market rate second units. The City limits the size of second units to 850
square feet, and, as a result, second units are typically designed as one bedroom units. The City
conducted a second unit survey in 2014 to determine the affordability levels of existing second
units. Based upon the survey response, the City estimates that 4 out of 10 second units are being
rented, and that 25 percent of these second units are affordable to low income households, 50
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 5

percent are affordable to moderate income households, and 25 percent are affordable to above
moderate income households.
Another affordability indicator is current market rents for second units advertised on Craigslist. In
recent months, these have ranged from $750 to $1,350 per month, indicating second units are
affordable to low and moderate income households. Table 1 assumes affordability levels for rented
second units as determined by the second unit survey.
Table 1: Housing Units Built, 2007 – 2013
                                                   Very Low             Low                             Above
                                                    Income            Income           Moderate       Moderate   TOTAL
   Original ABAG Allocation                                30                21               25              45     121
   Market Rate Single Family Units                                                                            21      21
   Deed-Restricted Single Family Units                                                         3                       3
   Market Rate Second Units*                                                  4                7               4      15
   Deed-Restricted Second Units                             2                                                          2
   Market Rate Multi-Family Units                                                                                      0
   Deed-Restricted Multi-Family Units                                         4                6                      10
   Total                                                    2                 8               16              25      51
   Percent of RHNA Met                                    7%               38%              64%            56%      42%
   * Only the estimated number of second units that are being rented is reported here.
   Sources: City of St. Helena Planning Department, 2015; O'Rourke Community Planning, 2015.
The City fell short of its total housing production goal. The City met 7 percent of its goal for very
low income units, 38 percent of its goal for low income units, and 64 percent of its goal for
moderate income units.
Progress in Implementation
The 2009 Housing Element established the following six main goals and a coordinated set of
policies and implementing programs.
     1. A Diversity of Housing to Meet Local Needs
     2. Efficient Land Use and High Quality Neighbors
     3. Conservation of Existing Housing
     4. Assistance to Support Affordable Housing
     5. Resource Conservation
     6. Equal Housing Opportunities
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 6

Table 2 provides a detailed evaluation of the implementing programs that support each of these
goals, and the subsequent sections discuss the extent to which the 2009 Housing Element policies
and implementing programs helped the City of St. Helena meet the goals.
Diversity of Housing to Meet Local Needs
In order to supply a diversity of housing types to meet local needs, the 2009 Housing Element
developed Policies 1.1 through 1.6 and Implementing Actions 1.A through 1.S. The City
completed many of these programs, including: amending the Municipal Code to allow emergency
shelters for the homeless in the Industrial (I) and Service Commercial (SC) zoning districts as a
permitted use; amending the Municipal Code to allow transitional and supportive housing in all
zoning districts that allow residential uses, subject to the same regulations as other housing of the
same type in the same zone; amending the Municipal Code to allow single room occupancy
housing as a permitted use in the High Density Residential (HR) District; exempting affordable
units from the Residential Growth Management System; fast-tracking an affordable housing
development application at 1105 Pope Street and providing the project with priority water and
sewer access; and encouraging the development of green building, both on private property and a
city-owned parcel.
Efficient Land Use and High Quality Neighbors
Policies 2.1 through 2.6 encourage higher density development where appropriate, mixed-use
development, second units, and a variety of housing type throughout the community. These
policies are supported by Implementing Actions 2.A through 2.Q. Most of these programs were
not implemented due to the City’s prolonged General Plan Update process, which has diverted staff
resources from completing some housing element programs. Once the General Plan Update has
been adopted, the City intends to initiate an update of the Municipal Code, which will implement
several programs under this goal.
The City abated two non-habitable buildings on Pope Street and worked with Calistoga Affordable
Housing to replace the dilapidated single family buildings with an 8-unit building. All units will be
deed-restricted with affordable housing requirements and 60 percent of the units will be affordable
to lower income households. The City provided significant incentives for this project, including: a
density bonus which increased the number of allowable units on the Medium Density site from 3.5
units to 8 units; concessions on development standards for parking, building height, setback, and
floor area coverage; and a reduction in City fees totaling more than $150,000.
In addition, the City provided significant incentives that encouraged the development of 37 market
rate second units and 2 deed-restricted units affordable to very low income households, well in
excess of the 5 units that were expected over the 2007-2013 planning period. This represents a
Housing Element Needs Assessment                              City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                 Page 7

production rate of just over 5.6 second units per year. Staff attributes this exceptionally high rate
of second unit production to existing incentives including: 1) a 400 square foot floor area bonus for
single family dwellings; 2) a 200 square foot floor area exemption for a covered parking space for
single family dwellings; and 3) access to the supply of carryover housing building permits
available through implementation of the City Growth Management System, which are available to
developments that include at least 40 percent affordable units. In addition, the City does not
require separate water or sewer connections for second units, nor charge additional hook-up fees
beyond impact fees charged for all residential development on a per square foot basis. As a result
of these very attractive incentives and policies, the City expects second unit development to
continue at the historical rate of 5.6 second units per year; indeed, 10 second units have already
been approved and are expected to be built during the 2014-2023 planning period.
Finally, the City successfully applied for a Community Development Block Grant that will analyze
the feasibility of developing small affordable housing developments on six sites.
Conservation of Existing Housing
Policies 3.A through 3.E are designed to conserve the existing housing stock through restricting
conversion of rental units to condominiums, assisting subsidized affordable housing developments
at risk of losing subsidies and converting to market rate housing, and preservation of market rate
housing. Actions 3.A through 3.B implement these policies.
In 2013, the City worked with the owners of the Woodbridge Apartment Complex (727 Hunt Ave)
and CalHFA to re-finance and renovate 50 units of affordable housing. Through this effort the
Woodbridge Apartment Complex will continue to offer regulated affordable housing for the next
30 years.
The City continues to restrict the conversion of rental units to condominiums, and no such
conversion occurred during the housing element period.
Faced with a number of illegal rental units, the City chose to implement a program to allow a
limited number of vacation rentals for periods less than 30 consecutive days. The ordinance,
adopted in 2012, allows a maximum of 25 permits for short-term rentals. In order to preserve the
affordable housing stock, short term rentals are only permitted for single family dwellings and are
not permitted for second units.
Quantified objectives for the goal include assisting in the acquisition of low-interest loans for
rehabilitation, including energy conservation, of 10 lower-income housing units. The City has not
implemented a low-interest rehabilitation loan program, but the City has joined two Property
Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) financing programs called CaliforniaFIRST and HERO which
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 8
allow property owners to finance energy and water efficiency improvements and renewable energy
installations on their property tax bills.
Assistance to Support Affordable Housing
There are five policies and Implementing Actions 4.A through 4.M designed to support this fourth
goal. The City reduced fees and provided incentives, as discussed above, for an affordable housing
project at 1105 Pope Street and used Housing Trust funds to purchase a high density residential
parcel with an existing single family residence located at 684 McCorkle Place. This parcel is listed
as a key opportunity site in the 2009 housing element and will be developed with between 9-12
affordable housing units.
The City adopted an ordinance to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation
in rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.
The purpose of the ordinance is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make
requests for reasonable accommodation in regard to relief from the various land use, zoning, or
building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City.
In addition, the City adopted an ordinance to amend the zoning code to allow agricultural employee
housing for six or fewer employees in all residential zoning districts, subject only to the regulations
for other types of residential development, and that agricultural employee housing for more than
six employees, with a maximum of 36 employees or 12 units, as a permitted use in the agricultural
zoning districts, subject only to the regulations for other agricultural uses in accordance with
California Health and Safety Codes 17021.5 and 17021.6.
The City achieved some of the quantified objectives identified for the implementing action of Goal
4 as follows:
    Generate adequate funds to support achievement of the City’s new housing construction
     objectives, as defined in Policy 1A. The City received $512,000 in housing impact fees
     between 2009 and 2014.
    Assist in the acquisition of low-interest loans to ten first-time homebuyers. The City did not
     identify a program to assist first-time homebuyers purchase homes.
    Facilitate the continuance of Section 8 rental assistance to all currently served households. The
     City continues to work with the City of Napa’s Housing Division to provide Section 8 rent
     subsidy certificates in St. Helena. There are currently nine Section 8 housing choice vouchers
     in use in St. Helena. The Section 8 waitlist closed as of March 29, 2013.
    20 percent of new units to meet senior housing needs; 10 percent accessible to persons with
     disabilities. The City did not adopt regulations requiring new housing developments to provide
     specific numbers of units for senior and disabled persons.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                              City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                 Page 9

     Purchase of 3 existing housing units and conversion to regulated affordable housing for lower-
      income households. As discussed above, the City purchased a single family residence at 684
      McCorkle Place and is currently developing plans to construct 9-12 affordable units on the
      property. In addition, the City abated two non-habitable buildings on Pope Street and is
      working with Calistoga Affordable Housing to replace the dilapidated single family buildings
      with 8 units of affordable housing.
Resource Conservation
The City of St. Helena took an active role in promoting the use of alternative energy sources and
encouraging energy conservation, as targeted by Policies 5.1 and 5.2. The City waives permit fees
for all solar and electric vehicle charging stations, provides information to the public regarding
alternative energy technologies and how they relate to the permitting process, and promotes energy
and resources savings programs including rebates, audits, and water-efficient landscaping practices.
The City also participates in an AB811 program that allows commercial property owners to finance
renewable energy, water efficiency and energy efficiency improvements through a property tax
assessment. The program is expected to be extended to residential property owners in the summer
of 2014.
The City adopted the 2013 State Building Codes, including the CALGreen Building Code, and a
bicycle plan. Through these steps, the City has implemented programs 5.A through 5.H. Programs
still to be implemented include incentives for passive natural heating and cooling and provisions
for on-site alternative wastewater facilities.
Equal Housing Opportunities
The sixth and final goal has only one policy, and two implementing programs. The City works
with Fair Housing Napa Valley to provide information to the public regarding the rights and
responsibilities and resources available to address fair housing issues. The City provides funding
to Fair Housing Napa Valley and responds to all referrals from the agency.
Effectiveness of 2009 Housing Element
As discussed in the preceding section and in Table 1, the City implemented many policies and
programs to facilitate housing production. In some cases, the City did not have the necessary staff
resources or funding to implement programs. The ongoing General Plan Update process has
required significant staff time, and has delayed implementation of some municipal code
amendments. As that process draws to its conclusion, the City will have more resources available
to update the municipal code and implement outstanding program actions. For this reason, these
programs will be continued in the new housing element.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 10

Table 2: Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element Programs
                                                                                                          Achievements/Evaluation
                                                                                              Was it successful? Reasons why it was or was not
                                    Program Title                                                                                               Continue, Modify
                                                                                                 implemented or able to meet its objectives.
                           Reference number and description                                                                                          or Delete
                                                                                                          Quantify results if possible.
HE1.A Continue to exempt permits for regulated affordable units as well as second            Completed. The City continues to exempt           Continue. Modify to
units from the Growth Management System. The objective is to accommodate                     regulated affordable units and 2nd units from the reflect 2014-2022
production to meet the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) of 121 housing               growth management system.                         RHNA.
units (30 units for very low-income households, 21 for low-income households, 25 for
moderate-income households, and 45 for above moderate-income households).
Developers shall be encouraged to propose projects that meet this need.
HE1.B Review and possibly amend the Growth Management System to encourage                     The Planning Commission and City Council         Continue
the production of regulated affordable and workforce housing units. Review the               reviewed the Growth Management System
Growth Management System (GMS) to make sure that it is not disproportionately                numerous times. Between 2010 and 2012, the City
affecting the development of affordable housing. Exemptions for restricted                   conducted an annual review that compared the
“workforce” housing units should be explored, in addition to current exemptions for          number of permits available under the GMS
affordable housing units. Continue to allow a maximum of 9 market rate units per             system to the RHNA requirements and housing
year and priority allocation of annual building permit allocations and carryover             approvals and permits. The City discussed
permits to market rate units in development projects that include a minimum of 40            increasing the eligibility threshold for rollover
percent affordable units.                                                                    permits from 40% affordable units to 60-65%.
                                                                                             The Council also discussed revising the GMS to
                                                                                             limit the total number of new units to those
                                                                                             required by RHNA. However, the City has taken
                                                                                             no action to amend the Growth Management
                                                                                             System ordinance.
HE1.C Amend the Residential Growth Management System section 17.152.030 to                   Completed. Ordinance adopted in 2010.             Delete
read:
“The 2000 Census found that the City had 2,708 total dwelling units. With a
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                    Page 11

limitation of 9 building permits for market rate housing per year, issued over 15 years,
the number of dwelling units will be approximately 2,840 by the year 2015, not
including regulated affordable units, guest cottages, accessory dwelling units or
second units. This number shall not be construed as a goal, but as a maximum number
of units.”
HE1.D Give projects that include affordable housing units priority access to water            Completed. The City gave priority water and        Continue
and sewer resources over other new projects should the capacity of the local water or         sewer access to the following affordable housing
sewer systems become inadequate to meet the full demand for new connections.                  developments:
                                                                                              1105 Pope Street – 8 units
                                                                                              684 McCorkle Place – 9 units
                                                                                              The City amended the Municipal Code to state that
                                                                                              the City shall grant priority for the provision of
                                                                                              water and sewer services to developments that
                                                                                              include housing units affordable to lower income
                                                                                              households. The City also adopted a resolution
                                                                                              establishing a policy and procedure for granting
                                                                                              priority water and sewer services.
HE1.E Revise the permitting process to streamline the review of affordable housing            Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s           Continue
and market rate multifamily projects. The City will establish different design                General Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once
guidelines for various neighborhoods in the City in order to provide appropriate              adopted the City will initiate an update of the
guidelines for each neighborhood’s character. The design guidelines will address              Municipal Code. This process will be evaluated at
parking, tree planting/ preservation, and vineyard views, among other design issues.          that time.
The City will prioritize the adoption of design guidelines for the Affordable Housing
and Mixed-Use overlay zones, should such zones be adopted. Design guidelines will
facilitate and not hinder the production of units affordable to lower-income
households. Upon adoption of design guidelines for multifamily projects, the City
will eliminate the current requirements for a use permit for multifamily projects in
both the medium and high density residential districts. The City will adopt
multifamily design guidelines and eliminate CUP requirements by no later than June
30, 2012. This timing will allow the City to first complete the update and adoption of
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 12

the 2030 General Plan. Once the General Plan is adopted, the City can begin work on
establishing design guidelines for the zones established in the General Plan.
HE1.F Amend the General Plan to reconfigure the Urban Limit Line in accordance               Not implemented. The City held a series of             Delete
with the adopted Adams Street property Preferred Alternative.                                workshops re: the Adams Street property in 2013.
                                                                                             Due to a lack of consensus regarding the
                                                                                             appropriate use of the property, the City has not
                                                                                             initiated the reconfiguration process for this parcel.
HE1.G Work with private property owners/developers to plan for road and utility              Not implemented. During the 2009-1014 Housing          Modify and delete
improvements necessary to support housing on key opportunity sites, in the event             Element Cycle the City did not receive any             references to
these sites are developed. Funding shall be done on a fair share proportion of the cost.     applications that required any of these                specific new roads
     • Extend Adams Street and Starr Avenue to intersect. Include water, sewer,              improvements.                                          and street extensions
          and storm drain extensions.                                                                                                               in order to avoid
     • Construct new road to Paladini property from Sulphur Springs Avenue (APN                                                                     potential conflicts
          009-362-015), including water, sewer, and storm drain improvements.
                                                                                                                                                    with policies and
                                                                                                                                                    programs that may
                                                                                                                                                    be adopted in the
                                                                                                                                                    Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                                    of the General Plan
                                                                                                                                                    Update.
HE1.H Amend zoning for the Vidovich site (APN 009-180-034) from High Density                 Not implemented. City has received                     Delete
Residential to Agricultural Use.                                                             correspondence from the owner of this parcel that
                                                                                             the proposed re-zone is not something he is
                                                                                             interested in.
HE1.I Complete the Flood Protection Project. Complete land purchase and proceed              Completed.                                             Delete
with construction activity.
HE1.J Fast-track housing developments that meet lower income and special                     Completed. The City fast-tracked an application        Continue
housing needs. Ensure that housing development proposals that meet the needs of              for an 8-unit project at 1105 Pope Street that was
lower income households and special needs groups, such as seniors, people with               approved to provide 60% affordable units for
disabilities, farmworkers, and homeless families and individuals, receive the highest        lower income households.
priority and quickest turn-around possible in the development review process.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                    Page 13

HE1.K Explore possibility of an affordable housing overlay zone. Identify potential           Not implemented. The City has several high            Delete
sites suitable for an affordable housing overlay zone. Study possible incentives and a        density residential sites available to meet the
review process. Incentives to be considered include, but are not limited to, reduced or       housing needs of lower income households. The
waived development fees, reduced parking and/or other city standards, and an                  City also offers density bonuses and incentives to
additional density bonus.                                                                     all developments that include affordable units. As
                                                                                              a result, there is no need to designate an affordable
                                                                                              housing overlay zone.
HE1.L Improve and enhance the local preference policy to possibly include people              Not implemented. Staff will work with the City of     Continue
needed for work during city emergencies. The current local preference policy gives            Napa’s Housing Division, who assists the City of
weighted preference to local residents as regulated affordable housing units become           St Helena via a contract, with the management of
available. This benefit will be extended to persons employed in St. Helena that are           our regulated affordable units, to accomplish this
needed during city emergencies, such as firefighters and police officers.                     task.
HE1.M Explore a program to address the housing needs of “workforce” households,               Not implemented. The economic downturn that           Continue
which have incomes above 120 percent of AMI, but are still unable to afford market            occurred during the 2009-2014 Housing Element
rate housing. Conduct further study and define the upper income limit of workforce            Cycle resulted in a significant reduction in the
households. Provide incentives and assistance for new workforce housing                       volume of residential project development. This
developments. Such incentives may include, but are not limited to, relaxing site              resulted in reductions in staffing resources and
development standards and extending priority for water and sewer connections to               limited our ability to implement some programs.
such housing projects. Explore the feasibility of adding an above moderate-income
workforce housing component to the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance requirements.
HE1.N Implement a program to provide financial assistance for the development of              Not implemented.                                      Continue
second units in exchange for affordability restrictions that will provide workforce
housing. Target 5 second units for development during the Housing Element planning
period. Potential funding sources include, but are not limited to, Housing Trust Funds
and Transient Occupancy Tax revenues.
HE1.O Encourage development of co-housing, ecohousing, ‘green’ manufactured                   Completed. The City encouraged the potential          Continue
homes, and other ‘nontraditional’ forms of housing. Ensure these housing types are            development of modular housing at 1105 Pope
addressed in the development of design guidelines to streamline the approval process.         Street via impact fee waivers, density bonuses and
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 14

                                                                                             an expedited entitlement process. The City
                                                                                             encouraged modular housing development at 1752
                                                                                             Scott Street via an expedited entitlement process.
                                                                                             The City is also working with multiple modular
                                                                                             home manufacturers to develop affordable units on
                                                                                             the City owned parcel located at 684 McCorkle.
HE1.P Identify and remove barriers to the permitting of ‘green’ manufactured                 Completed. This was done as a component of the     Delete
housing units. Review the Municipal Code and ascertain if any local policies present         2013 Building Code adoption which mandated
barriers to this type of housing. Amend the Municipal Code accordingly.                      ‘green’ building practices.
HE1.Q Address unmet needs for emergency shelter. Amend the St. Helena                        Completed. The City adopted an ordinance to        Delete
Municipal Code to allow emergency shelters as a permitted use by right in the Service        allow emergency shelters as a permitted use in the
Commercial and Industrial zoning districts within one year of adoption of the                Service Commercial (SC) and Industrial (I) zoning
Housing Element.                                                                             districts.
HE1.R Amend the Zoning Ordinance for transitional and supportive housing.                    Completed. The City adopted an ordinance to        Delete
Amend the St. Helena Municipal Code to treat transitional housing, as defined in             amend the Municipal Code to treat transitional
Section 50675.2 of the Health and Safety Code, and supportive housing, as defined in         housing and supportive housing as residential uses
Section 50675.14 of the Health and Safety Code, as residential uses. Transitional and        subject to the same permitting process as other
supportive housing will be subject only to the same permitting process as other              similar residential types in the same zone.
similar residential uses in the same zone without undue special regulatory
requirements. For example, a proposed multifamily supportive housing project would
be subject to the same permitting process as any other similar multifamily
development in the same zoning district.
HE1.S Amend the Zoning Ordinance to define and permit single-room occupancy                  Completed. The City adopted an ordinance to        Delete
housing development types. Amend the St. Helena Municipal Code to treat single-              amend the zoning code to allow single-room
room occupancy developments as a permitted use within the High Density residential           occupancy housing development in the HR: High
zone, subject to the same permitting process and regulations as any other multifamily        Density Residential (HR) zoning district.
development.
HE2.A Provide incentives for higher density housing. Explore possible incentives             Completed. The City provided incentives for the    Continue
for building attached market rate housing units for rent and for sale. Incentives to be      following higher density housing projects:
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                    Page 15

explored include, but are not restricted to, fast tracking development applications,             1105 Pope Street – 8 units
deferred development fees, reduced parking and/or other city standards, and density
bonuses.
HE2.B Study potential modifications to the Zoning Ordinance to facilitate higher                 Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s General  Continue
density housing [and discourage construction of oversize homes]. Modify the Zoning               Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once adopted
Ordinance to encourage higher density developments [and restrict construction of                 the City will initiate an update of the Municipal
large single-family units], including current floor area ratios and yard and setback             Code. These modifications will be evaluated at
requirements.                                                                                    that time.
HE2.C Amend regulations to discourage exemptions from the minimum density                        Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s General  Continue
requirements. The City shall discourage exemptions for minimum density                           Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once adopted
requirements and establish mitigation measures for exemptions in the Zoning                      the City will initiate an update of the Municipal
Ordinance.                                                                                       Code. These modifications will be evaluated at
                                                                                                 that time.
HE2.D Modify section 17.100 of the Zoning Ordinance to rename the Mobilehome                     Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s General  Continue
Park Overlay District to “Manufactured Housing Overlay District.” Develop policies               Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once adopted
to streamline the review process for this overlay district on residential land for               the City will initiate an update of the Municipal
projects that create land-ownership opportunities for residents. Support giving                  Code. These modifications will be evaluated at
residents the right of first refusal if an existing park is to be sold.                          that time.
HE2.E Amend the “Subdivisions” section of the Municipal Code. The City will                      Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s General  Continue
amend Title 16 of the Municipal Code to prevent subdivision activity from effectively            Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once adopted
resulting in lower densities and a loss of potential housing units on the site.                  the City will initiate an update of the Municipal
                                                                                                 Code. These modifications will be evaluated at
                                                                                                 that time.
HE2.F Update the General Plan Land Use Element in consideration of the                           The City of St Helena’s General Plan Update has   Continue
established Housing Element land use goals and policies. Amend General Plan                      not yet been adopted. The Land Use Element will
Elements concurrent with adoption of the General Plan Update as needed to ensure                 be amended with the adoption of the 2015-2022
internal consistency.                                                                            Housing Element to ensure internal consistency.
HE2.G Promote both ‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ mixed-use. Encourage mixed-use                    Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s          Continue
developments that combine compatible uses on the same site, either in the same                   General Plan Update includes a recommendation
structure or adjacent structures. Amend the Zoning Ordinance accordingly.                        to introduce a “Mixed-Use” land use designation.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 16

Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance include permitting the FAR for the residential               Once adopted the City will initiate an update of the
component of a mixed-use development to be ‘additive’ rather than within the                    Municipal Code. The ‘Mixed-Use’ land use
established FAR for that zone, and allowing commercial and residential users to                 category will be established at that time.
‘share’ their parking, resulting in a lower overall parking requirement. Requirements
for covered parking should also be reconsidered.
HE2.H Explore the possibility of allowing mixed use and live/work units in non-                 Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s              Continue
residential zoning districts.                                                                   General Plan Update includes a recommendation
     • Explore modifications to non-residential Zones that would permit, either as              to introduce a “Mixed-Use” land use designation.
          of right or as a conditional use, residential uses including integrated               Once adopted the City will initiate an update of the
          live/work units.                                                                      Municipal Code. The ‘Mixed-Use’ land use
     • Analyze requirements that commercial projects provide housing for a portion
                                                                                                category will be established at that time.
          of the employment that will be generated on site. The City will study and
          determine what portion of employment generated will require housing,
          whether housing will be required on-site or allowed off-site, if pricing for the
          non-inclusionary units will be tied to anticipated salaries for employees in
          the commercial portion of the project, and if in-lieu fees will be permitted for
          smaller sized projects.
     • Explore development incentives such as higher density and height
          allowances, and a streamlined design review process.
HE2.I Review and revise development standards pertaining to second units. Ensure                Not implemented. However, the City continued to      Continue
that the development of second units is physically and financially feasible in targeted         provide significant incentives that encouraged the
areas. Give particular attention to parking standards, setbacks, and impact fees.               development of 37 market rate second units over
                                                                                                the 2007-2013 planning period. Incentives
                                                                                                included a 400 square foot floor area bonus for
                                                                                                single family dwellings and a 200 square foot
                                                                                                floor area exemption for a covered parking space
                                                                                                for single family dwellings.
HE2.J Provide financial incentives for second unit development. Incentives might                The City provided significant financial incentives   Continue
include low interest loans or fee waivers.                                                      that encouraged the development of 37 market
                                                                                                rate second units over the 2007-2013 planning
                                                                                                period. Incentives included a 400 square foot
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 17

                                                                                              floor area bonus for single family dwellings and a
                                                                                              200 square foot floor area exemption for a
                                                                                              covered parking space for single family dwellings
                                                                                              that included a second unit. In addition, the City
                                                                                              does not require separate water or sewer
                                                                                              connections for second units, nor charge
                                                                                              additional hook-up fees beyond impact fees
                                                                                              charged for all residential development on a per
                                                                                              square foot basis.
HE2.K Target specific areas for second unit incentives. Create incentives to                  Not implemented. However, the City provided        Continue
construct second units in the medium density areas near downtown. Incentives to be            significant financial incentives that encouraged
explored include, but are not restricted to, fast tracking development applications,          the development of 37 market rate second units
deferred development fees, and reduced parking and/or other city standards.                   over the 2007-2013 planning period. Incentives
                                                                                              included a 400 square foot floor area bonus for
                                                                                              single family dwellings and a 200 square foot
                                                                                              floor area exemption for a covered parking space
                                                                                              for single family dwellings that included a second
                                                                                              unit. In addition, the City does not require
                                                                                              separate water or sewer connections for second
                                                                                              units, nor charge additional hook-up fees beyond
                                                                                              impact fees charged for all residential
                                                                                              development on a per square foot basis.
HE2.L Provide public information regarding second units. Develop a guide for                  Completed. Planning staff promote the              Continue
homeowners explaining the benefits and procedures for adding a second unit.                   development of second units and regularly
                                                                                              forward information to potential applicants
                                                                                              regarding the benefits of second units.
HE2.M Link financial incentives and development standard variances to                         The City provides proposed housing                 Continue
affordability requirements for second units. Require that either the main house or the        developments with a minimum of 40 percent
second unit is used as a rental unit that is affordable to households with moderate- or       affordable units access to the supply of carryover
below- moderate incomes whenever the City assists in development through financial            residential building permits created through
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 18
incentives or by granting a variance.                                                          implementation of the City’s Residential Growth
                                                                                               Management. This resulted in the creation of 6
                                                                                               deed-restricted second units that are required to
                                                                                               be affordable to very-low income households.
HE2.N Respond to complaints regarding illegal units. The City will work with the               In 2011, the City abated two non-habitable        Continue
property owners to help bring illegal units up to code and to abate the use of non-            buildings on Pope Street. In 2013, the City
habitable buildings as living units.                                                           approved a project by Calistoga Affordable
                                                                                               Housing, a non-profit affordable housing
                                                                                               developer, to replace the dilapidated building at
                                                                                               1105 Pope Street with an 8 unit building. The
                                                                                               project was approved assuming all units will be
                                                                                               deed-restricted with affordable housing
                                                                                               requirements including 60 percent of the units to
                                                                                               be affordable to low and very low income
                                                                                               households.
HE2.O Identify appropriate ‘target’ areas for conversion of single-family homes to             See HE2.N. Note that in the case mentioned        Continue
multi-unit dwellings. Identify areas, zoning districts, or specific sites where                above the single-family residences were no
conversion would be appropriate or desirable.                                                  longer habitable due to neglect.
HE2.P Develop criteria and standards and provide public information regarding                  Not implemented. This type of project is          Delete
conversions of single-family homes to multi-unit dwellings. Identify criteria for              uncommon in St Helena. Further, as mentioned
reviewing potential conversion opportunities and standards, including parking                  above, if this type of project did occur it would
requirements, to ensure that conversions are carried out in a manner consistent with           most likely involve the demolition of an
the character and use of adjacent properties. Develop a guide for property owners              existing/neglected single-family residence and
explaining the conversion program and procedures.                                              replacement with new multi-family dwellings.
HE2.Q Develop a program to encourage affordable housing in clusters of 4-6 units               The City was awarded a Community                  Continue
on Infill parcels on west side of town. The City will post an inventory of potential           Development Block Grant (12-CDBG-8416) to
sites on the City’s web site. In addition the City will explore incentives to encourage        analyze the feasibility of developing small
affordable housing clusters, including, but not limited to priority permit processing,         affordable housing developments on six sites. On
reduced or waived development fees, reduced parking and/or other city standards, and           April 15, 2014, the State Department of Housing
an additional density bonus.                                                                   and Community Department cleared general
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                      Page 19

                                                                                              conditions for the grant and authorized the City to
                                                                                              enter into a contract with the selected contractor.
                                                                                              The City Council approved the contract in
                                                                                              January 2015. Additionally, the City explored the
                                                                                              feasibility of developing a parcel located at 1030
                                                                                              Fulton Lane.
HE3.A Restrict the conversion of rental units to condominiums. Current policy                 The City has continued to restrict the conversion   Continue
allows conversion to condominiums under certain circumstances when the vacancy                of rental units to condominiums.
rate is high. The presence of second homes within the community results in an
inflated vacancy rate. The policy should be further studied and revised to reflect a
general guiding principal of preserving the affordable housing stock while eliminating
the current linkage to vacancy rates.
HE3.B Charge an affordable housing impact fee whenever housing units are                      No such conversions have occurred during this       Continue
converted to other uses. Exempt conversion projects that create affordable for-sale           Housing Element cycle.
housing from this impact fee.
HE3.C Address the potential loss of assisted units. Identify assisted properties at risk      In 2013 the City worked with the owners of the      Delete the specific
of conversion to market rates and work with the property owners and/or other parties          Woodbridge Apartment Complex (727 Hunt Ave)         reference to
to ensure that they are conserved as affordable housing. Monitor the Woodbridge               and CalHFA to re-finance and renovate 50 units      Woodbridge
Apartments and establish a funding plan in anticipation of either preserving or               of affordable housing. Through this effort the      Apartments.
replacing the 50 units of affordable housing in 2018 when the Section 8 contract for          Woodbridge Apartment Complex will continue to
Woodbridge expires.                                                                           offer regulated affordable housing for the next 30
                                                                                              years.
HE3.D Continue to prohibit the conversion of market rate housing to vacation                  Faced with a number of illegal rental units, the    Modify
rentals. Abate the use of illegal vacation rentals, including time shares and fractional      City chose to implement a program to allow a
interests.                                                                                    limited number of vacation rentals for periods
                                                                                              less than 30 consecutive days. The ordinance,
                                                                                              adopted April 2012, allows a maximum of 25
                                                                                              permits for short-term rentals. In order to
                                                                                              preserve the affordable housing stock, short term
                                                                                              rentals are only permitted for single family
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 20
                                                                                              dwellings and are not permitted for second units.
HE3.E Review housing needs, conditions, achievements and challenges as part of                The General Plan Update has not yet been          Modify to include
the City’s regular General Plan review.                                                       adopted. The Planning Commission reviewed the     requirement to
                                                                                              Housing Element in early 2011.                    submit an annual
                                                                                                                                                report to HCD by
                                                                                                                                                April of each year.
HE4.A Review and possibly amend the inclusionary housing ordinance:                           Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s          Continue
     • Explore adjusting the inclusionary housing ordinance to require further                General Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once
          distribution of affordable units within the various income categories. For          adopted the City will initiate an update of the
          example, a project required to provide two low-income units under the               Municipal Code. These amendments will be
          current inclusionary housing ordinance could be required to provide one unit
                                                                                              evaluated at that time.
          affordable to households with incomes of up to 65 percent of area median
          income and one unit affordable to households with incomes of up to 80
          percent of area median income.
     • Explore eliminating the linkage fee option and requiring the construction of
          housing by larger commercial developments as well as increasing the linkage
          fees for small commercial development where requiring residential
          construction would not be feasible.
     • Explore the possibility of increasing residential construction in-lieu fees
          and/or creating a sliding scale for larger houses.
     • Explore the feasibility of adding an above moderate-income workforce
          housing component to the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance requirements.
HE4.B Generate Revenues for Affordable Housing through the Transient                          The City generated additional Transit Occupancy   Continue
Occupancy Tax. Either increase the Transient Occupancy Tax or increase the number             Tax revenue from the implementation of the
of transient occupancy rooms and apply the increased revenue to support affordable            Short-Term Rental Ordinance. In the first year,
housing.                                                                                      short-term rentals generated approximately
                                                                                              $40,000 in TOT revenue. Additionally, the City
                                                                                              has entitled two new hotels and approved the
                                                                                              expansion of two existing hotels which will
                                                                                              increase the TOT room count by over 100 rooms.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 21

                                                                                                  Due to on-going budget constraints, TOT
                                                                                                  revenues are not currently set aside to support
                                                                                                  affordable housing.
HE4.C Reduce, defer, or waive fees for affordable housing developments. The City                  The City reduced fees by up to $150,000 for an     Continue
will establish a set of criteria for project eligibility to have fees reduced, deferred, or       approved affordable housing project at 1105 Pope
waived. The City will explore higher incentives for affordable housing developments               Street. Fees are estimated at approximately
with units affordable to extremely low- and very low-income households.                           $172,000 (the developer has not yet applied for a
                                                                                                  building permit).
HE4.D Prioritize the use of Housing Trust Funds in support of the development and                 The City used Housing Trust Funds to purchase a    Continue
preservation of regulated affordable units for extremely low-income households.                   high density residential parcel located at 684
                                                                                                  McCorkle. This parcel is listed as a key
                                                                                                  opportunity site in the current housing element
                                                                                                  and will be developed with between 9-12
                                                                                                  modular affordable housing units. Units
                                                                                                  affordable to extremely low-income households
                                                                                                  will be included if feasible.
HE4.E Pursue mortgage revenue bonds and/or mortgage credit certificates. Promote                  Not implemented. The City of St Helena has not     Continue
affordable homeownership opportunities for moderate- and lower-income households.                 had revenue and/or staff to implement this
                                                                                                  program. With the economy improving and the
                                                                                                  development of recently entitled resort projects,
                                                                                                  the City will be in a better position to implement
                                                                                                  this program.
HE4.F Continue Section 8 rent subsidy certificates. Work with the City of Napa                    The City has continued to contract with the City   Continue
Housing Authority to provide continued rental assistance to low-, very low-, and                  of Napa’s Housing Division to assist with the
extremely low-income households.                                                                  management of new and existing affordable units.
HE4.G Explore the possibility of establishing a full-time, shared Housing                         Not implemented. The City of St Helena             Modify to clarify that
Coordinator for the up-valley communities. The position would serve all of the up-                currently contracts with the City of Napa’s        Housing
valley communities, including Napa County.                                                        Housing Division to assist in managing regulated   Coordinator’s role
                                                                                                  affordable units. This partnership has been        would be to pro-mote
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 22

                                                                                              working well.                                      the development of
                                                                                                                                                 new affordable
                                                                                                                                                 housing, not maintain
                                                                                                                                                 existing units.
HE4.H Collaborate with countywide efforts to address farmworker housing needs.                Napa County completed an extensive assessment      Continue
The City will contribute staff time and City resources, as appropriate, to countywide         of farmworker housing needs in a report entitled
farmworker housing efforts that may occur during the Housing Element planning                 “2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs
period.                                                                                       Assessment.” That report is utilized in the
                                                                                              assessment of farmworker housing needs in St.
                                                                                              Helena, as described in the 2015-2023 Housing
                                                                                              Element Update.
HE4.I Amend the Zoning Ordinance for farmworker housing. Amend the St.                        Completed. The City adopted an ordinance to        Delete
Helena Municipal Code to clearly state that agricultural employee housing for six or          amend the Municipal Code to allow agricultural
fewer employees is only subject to the regulations for other types of residential             employee housing for 6 or fewer employees as a
development and that agricultural employee housing for more than six employees,               permitted use in all residential zoning districts
with a maximum of 36 employees, shall be subject only to the regulations for other            and to allow employee housing for up to 36 beds
agricultural uses in accordance with California Health and Safety Codes 17021.5 and           or 12 units as a permitted use in the Agricultural
17021.6.                                                                                      (A-20), Agricultural Preserve (AP) and Winery
                                                                                              (W) zoning districts.
HE4.J Establish regulations requiring that a portion of units in all new                      Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s           Continue
developments meet the special housing needs of seniors and persons with disabilities.         General Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once
Target 20% of new housing units to meet senior household needs and 10% accessible             adopted the City will initiate an update of the
to persons with disabilities.                                                                 Municipal Code. These amendments will be
                                                                                              evaluated at that time.
HE4.K Reasonable Accommodation. The City shall amend its Municipal Code to                    Completed. The City adopted an ordinance to        Delete
provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies,            amend the Zoning Code to provide persons with
practices and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The         disabilities a process to pursue reasonable
purpose of this is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make             accommodation from various land use, zoning
requests for reasonable accommodation in regard to relief from the various land use,          and building regulations.
zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 23

Amendments to the Municipal Code will comply with State law and will consider
model ordinance language provided by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development.
HE4.L The City shall participate with mediation between property owners if needed             The City provided extensive staff resources and   Continue
to facilitate affordable housing. The City will provide staff resources and/or work           legal advice to facilitate the development
with affected parties along with an outside mediator if necessary to address issues           application for 1105 Pope Street.
raised by community members in response to affordable housing development
applications.
HE4.M Explore the potential of using Housing Trust Fund money to purchase                     The City used Housing Trust Funds to purchase a   Continue
existing housing for conversion to restricted affordable housing. Priority for use of         high density residential parcel located at 684
Housing Trust Fund monies will be given to the creation of housing affordable to              McCorkle. The parcel (a key opportunity site) is
extremely-low-income households.                                                              currently developed with a single-family
                                                                                              residence. Staff is working on plans to develop
                                                                                              between 9-12 modular affordable housing units.
                                                                                              The parcel is currently developed with a single-
                                                                                              family residence. Units affordable to extremely-
                                                                                              low income households will be included if
                                                                                              feasible.
HE5.A Adopt a Green Building Ordinance. The City shall adopt building code                    Completed. The City adopted the 2013 Green        Continue.
standards that meet or exceed the State’s Green Building Standards Code. The                  Building Code and adopted some additional
Planning and Building Department shall coordinate this effort with the Climate                measures related to reduction in cement use and
Protection Task Force.                                                                        requirements for wood roof, wall and subfloor
                                                                                              sheet goods. The City’s green building standards
                                                                                              apply to all newly constructed buildings over 400
                                                                                              square feet and require a 20 percent water
                                                                                              reduction for all new indoor plumbing fixtures
                                                                                              installed in additions or remodels of existing
                                                                                              structures.
HE5.B Encourage use of alternative energy technologies. Create incentives for the             The City continues to waive permit and            Continue
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 24

use of solar energy in new and rehabilitated housing. Incentives to be explored              inspection fees for all solar and electric vehicle
include, but are not restricted to, ensuring a streamlined review process for                charging stations.
applications, deferred fees, and reduced applicable city standards.
HE5.C Provide public information on alternative energy technologies for residential          Completed. Planning, Building, Finance and          Continue
developers, contractors, and property owners. The City will provide information on its       Public Works staff provide the public with
web site and/or at City Hall regarding alternative energy technology options, possible       information via the City web site, email and
sources of financing, and any applicable information regarding necessary local               verbally re: alternative energy technologies and
permits.                                                                                     how they relate to the permitting process.
HE5.D Require cost-effective energy conservation measures in all new and                     Completed. The City adopted the 2013 Green          Modify to apply to
rehabilitated housing to promote long-term affordability for occupants. The City will        Building Code and adopted some additional           subsequent revisions
adopt the State’s new Energy Efficiency Standards as part of the 2009 California             measures related to reduction in cement use and     of the State Building
Building Standards Code and ensure that all new housing units constructed in the City        requirements for wood roof, wall and subfloor       Code.
meet or exceed these standards.                                                              sheet goods. The City’s green building standards
                                                                                             apply to all newly constructed buildings over 400
                                                                                             square feet and require a 20 percent water
                                                                                             reduction for all new indoor plumbing fixtures
                                                                                             installed in additions or remodels of existing
                                                                                             structures.
HE5.E Provide low-interest loans for implementation of energy conservation                   Completed. In 2012, the City Council adopted a      Continue.
measures. The City will identify a source of loan funds to provide energy                    resolution approving the City’s participation in an
conservation assistance to homeowners and home-builders. The City will explore               AB811 program called CaliforniaFIRST. The
establishing a local AB-811 program as well as using state and federal sources of            program provides residential and commercial
funding to finance local energy conservation measures. Sources of state and federal          property owners the ability to finance renewable
funds include, but are not limited to, the California Energy Commission State Energy         energy, energy efficiency and water efficiency
Program and Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant Program, and the Low              improvements on their property. The City also
Income Home Energy Assistance Program.                                                       participates in a Property Assessed Clean Energy
                                                                                             (PACE) program known as HERO.
HE5.F Provide public information on energy conservation measures for                         Completed. The City has promoted energy saving      Continue
homeowners, tenants, developers, contractors and property owners. The City will              programs at City Hall, on its website and through
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                    Page 25

provide information on its web site and/or at City Hall regarding actions homeowners,        its E-News service. Programs include the City’s
tenants, developers, contractors, and property owners can take to conserve energy.           High-Efficiency Toilet Rebate, Clothes Washer
                                                                                             Rebate, and Smart Yard programs, as well as
                                                                                             countywide and regional programs such as
                                                                                             Energy Upgrade California, rebates for
                                                                                             fluorescent lighting, and energy audits for small
                                                                                             businesses.
HE5.G Require bicycle and pedestrian amenities and connectivity to surrounding               The City adopted its first bike plan in 2013. This    Continue
areas, in all new housing developments. Support programs to develop more local and           plan contains implementing actions, policies and
regional walking and biking trails. In addition to requiring bicycle and pedestrian          programs that will require new development to
connectivity in all new residential developments, the City will provide staff time in        support local and regional walking and biking
support of regional trail programs.                                                          trails as well as improve bicycle and pedestrian
                                                                                             connectivity between new and existing
                                                                                             development. The City continues to provide staff
                                                                                             support for the Napa Valley Vine Trail, a regional
                                                                                             trail connecting the City of Vallejo on the San
                                                                                             Francisco Bay to the City of Calistoga north of St
                                                                                             Helena.
HE5.H Continue to apply Municipal Code provisions pertaining to water resources.             The City continues to implement Water Use             Continue
The City will continue to require water-efficient landscaping for new residential and        Efficiency and Use Guidelines (SHMC Chapter
commercial construction, as well as implementing the Water Use Efficiency and Use            13.12).The City adopted a new Water Shortage
Guidelines.                                                                                  Emergencies Ordinance in October 2011 that
                                                                                             implements additional water use restrictions.
                                                                                             Under Phase I regulations, water customers are
                                                                                             prohibited from expanding or installing new
                                                                                             water-using appliances, plumbing, or
                                                                                             improvements, such as landscaping and pools,
                                                                                             unless the installation will result in no increase in
                                                                                             water use. Replacement fixtures must be water-
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                    Page 26

                                                                                               efficient.
HE5.I Promote passive natural heating and cooling opportunities in new                         Not implemented. The City of St Helena’s         Continue
development and insure that solar access is protected for existing development.                General Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once
Incentives to be explored include, but are not restricted to, ensuring a streamlined           adopted the City will initiate an update of the
review process for applications, deferred fees, and relaxing applicable city standards.        Municipal Code. Concepts which encourage
                                                                                               passive natural heating and cooling will be
                                                                                               explored at that time.
 HE5.J Explore feasibility of incorporating efficient on-site alternative wastewater           Partially implemented. The City of St Helena’s   Modify to reflect
facilities. The City will study options for on-site alternative wastewater facilities,         General Plan Update has yet to be adopted. Once  actions City has
including graywater reuse, recycling, and/or on-site treatment. The City will then             adopted the City will initiate an update of the  already taken to
ensure that the local Municipal Code does not include regulations that may                     Municipal Code. Concepts which encourage on-     participate in AB811
unnecessarily present barriers to implementing these technologies, amending the                site alternative wastewater facilities will be   programs.
Municipal Code as appropriate. The City will explore establishing a local AB-811               explored at that time.
program that will include water conservation technologies which contribute to energy
conservation efforts (see HE5.E).                                                              In 2012, the City Council adopted a resolution
                                                                                               approving the City’s participation in an AB811
                                                                                               program called CaliforniaFIRST. The program
                                                                                               provides residential and commercial property
                                                                                               owners the ability to finance renewable energy,
                                                                                               energy efficiency and water efficiency
                                                                                               improvements on their property. The City also
                                                                                               participates in a Property Assessed Clean Energy
                                                                                               Program (PACE) known as HERO.
HE5.K The City shall explore policies that give local preference in the procurement            Not implemented. Staff will work with the City   Continue
process when municipal funds may be used for housing.                                          of Napa’s Housing Division, who assists the City
                                                                                               of St Helena via a contract, with the management
                                                                                               of our regulated affordable units, to accomplish
                                                                                               this task.
HE6.A Provide educational materials at City Hall, through the press and directly to            Completed. The City of St Helena, through its    Continue
interested parties to educate real estate professionals, property owners and tenants on        partnership with Fair Housing Napa Valley,
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                      Page 27

their rights and responsibilities and the resources available to address fair housing         provides information to the public regarding
issues.                                                                                       rights and responsibilities and resources available
                                                                                              to address fair housing issues.
HE6.B Continue to utilize and support Fair Housing Napa Valley for implementing               The City continues to provide funding and is        Continue
fair housing programs, receiving complaints, and providing referrals to available             responsive to all referrals from Fair Housing
resources when necessary.                                                                     Napa Valley.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 28
Demographic and Economic Trends
In order to understand the current housing needs of St. Helena residents, this section examines
historic, current, and projected population, household, and employment trends. The figures for St.
Helena are compared with the equivalent figures for Napa County and the Bay Area, to frame the
                                                                  5
St. Helena figures within the trends of the greater region.
The data for the analysis of population, household characteristics, and employment come from the
1990, 2000 and 2010 Censuses, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), the 2010 Census
Transportation Planning Package (CTPP), the California Department of Finance (DoF), and the
California Employment Development Department (EDD). The Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG) supplied the growth projection data.
Population and Employment Characteristics
This section presents information regarding population, household, and employment trends
between 2000 and 2010, with some additional analysis for the period between 1990 and 2000.
Population Trends
Table 3 compares the population counts from 1990, 2000, and 2010 in St. Helena, Napa County,
and the Bay Area. St. Helena averaged a 1.8 percent annual growth rate from 1990 to 2000,
increasing from 4,990 to 5,950 persons. Then, from 2000 to 2010, St. Helena experienced a slight
decrease of 0.2 percent in population, dropping by people to 5,814 persons in 2010.
In comparison, between 1990 and 2000, Napa County and the Bay Area both grew at an annual rate
of 1.2 percent between the two Censuses. Napa County maintained a similar annual growth rate
from 2000 to 2010 of 0.9 percent, and the growth rate of the Bay Area registered significantly
lower, at 0.5 percent annually.
Household Trends
As shown in Table 3, between 1990 and 2000, the number of households in St. Helena increased
slightly, by 1.1 percent annually. This closely corresponds to both Napa County and the Bay Area,
which both averaged 0.9 percent annual household growth from 1990 to 2000.
    5
      For the purposes of this Housing Needs Assessment, the Bay Area is defined to include the following counties
    in the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG): Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco,
    San Mateo, Santa Clara, Sonoma, and Solano.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 29
Between 2000 and 2010, the number of households in St. Helena increased by only 0.1 percent
annually, or about 21 households. Table 3 shows that the number of households in the City is
approximately 2,400 in 2010. In contrast, the number of Napa County households grew by 0.7
percent annually, to 48,900 households in 2010. Napa County’s growth rate represents an increase
of about 3,500 households. The number of Bay Area households grew by 0.6 percent annually
from 2000 to 2010.
Average Household Size
Average household size is a function of the number of people living in households divided by the
number of occupied housing units in a given area. In general, a decline or increase in average
household size signals that the population and the number of households are growing at different
rates. Overall, the average household size in St. Helena was slightly smaller than in Napa County
in 1990, 2000, and 2010. With the number of households growing, and a slight drop in population
in St. Helena between 2000 and 2010, average household sizes fell from 2.48 to 2.38 persons per
household, possibly reflecting a trend towards smaller retiree and empty nester households
purchasing homes in the area. In contrast, the population in Napa County increased more rapidly
than the number of households, leading to increases in the average household size from 2.62 to
2.69 persons per household in Napa County. The average household size remained approximately
the same at 2.69 in the Bay Area between 2000 and 2010.
Households by Type
Figures reported in Table 3 reveal that the percentage of households with children in 1990 was
about 27 percent in St. Helena and 33 percent in both Napa County and the Bay Area. Then, from
1990 to 2000, the percentage of households with at least one member under the age of 18 rose to
nearly 33 percent in St. Helena and around 34 percent in Napa County and the Bay Area. Between
2000 and 2010, the percentage of households with children fell slightly, dropping back to 1990
levels in Napa County and the Bay Area, and to 29 percent in St. Helena.
Household Tenure
As shown in Table 3, homeownership levels in St. Helena declined slightly between 1990 and 2000
and then dropped again between 2000 and 2010, falling from 60 to 56 percent, and then to 55
percent. Relative to the County and the Bay Area, where 63 percent and 56 percent of households,
respectively, own their homes in 2010, St. Helena has a lower percentage of homeowners.
Age Distribution
Based on data reported in Table 4, in 1990, 2000, and 2010, the median age of the St. Helena
population increased from around 41 years of age in 1990, to almost 43 by 2010. Similarly, the
median age of Napa County’s population increased slightly, from just over 36 years in 1990 to
almost 40 years in 2010. Though the median age in St. Helena was higher than in Napa County in
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 30

1990, 2000, and 2010, the age gap between the two areas diminished during that time period.
Furthermore, the median age in the Bay Area continually rose from about 33.6 in 1990 to 35.6 in
2000 and, finally, 38.9 in 2010.
Of all age groups, the 55 to 64 age category grew most markedly in St. Helena between 1990 and
2010. The number of people between the ages of 55 and 64 increased by approximately 450,
raising the share of the total population in this age category from 7.5 to 14 percent. As in St.
Helena, between 1990 and 2010, the 55 to 64 age category grew from nearly 9 to 13 percent of the
total population in Napa County, and from around 8 to 12 percent in the Bay Area.
In St. Helena, the categories of persons under the age of 18, and between 45 to 54 years
experienced high levels of growth between 1990 and 2000, but then the number of persons in each
category decreased, albeit by a slightly lesser degree, from 2000 to 2010. By 2010, the percentage
of persons under the age of 18 represented 22 percent of the total population and those between 45
and 54 constituted nearly 14 percent of St. Helena residents. Similarly, in 2010, persons under 18
equaled 23 percent of the total population and the share of persons aged 45 to 54 was almost 15
percent of the population in Napa County. Persons under 18 equaled 22 percent of the total
population and the share of persons aged 45 to 54 was 15 percent of the population in the Bay
Area.
The number of persons between 18 and 24 years rose by approximately 128 persons in St. Helena,
increasing this category’s share of the total population from about 7 to 8 percent from 1990 to
2010. In Napa County, the 18 to 24 age bracket increased in absolute numbers, but the share of the
total population in 1990 (9 percent) was nearly identical to the share in 2010. The age category 65
and over increased in numbers from 1990 to 2000, and then again between 2000 and 2010. The
number of persons over 65 in St. Helena stood at 1,250 in 1990 before falling to about 1,028 in
2000, and then rebounding to about 1,121 persons in 2010. The net effect of these changes was
that the St. Helena median age increased by nearly two years between 1990 and 2010, while the
median age in Napa County and the Bay Area rose by about three years and five years,
respectively.
Household Income Distribution
Table 5 summarizes the distribution of household incomes in 2000 and 2012. From 2000 to 2012,
the median household income in St. Helena, adjusted for inflation, decreased from $81,831 to
$71,118, or by over $10,700. In 2012, the City of St. Helena median household income is higher
than the median household income of Napa County, but lower than that of the Bay Area. The Bay
Area showed an inflation-adjusted decline in median income, of just over $8,500 from about
$87,400 in 2000 to $78,900 in 2012.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 31

Around 40 percent of St. Helena households had incomes of $100,000 or more in 2012. This
compares to around 22 percent twelve years earlier. In addition, the percent of households in each
of the income categories below $100,000 decreased between 2000 and 2012 in the City. A similar
income distribution trend occurred in Napa County between 2000 and 2012, though not to the same
degree as in St. Helena. In Napa County, the percent of total households with incomes above
$100,000 increased from 19 percent in 2000 to 34 percent in 2012. While the share of total
households fell in each of the income categories below $75,000. In comparison, between 2008 and
2012 the percentage of households in the Bay Area with incomes above $100,000 rose from around
27 percent, to 40 percent. In the Bay Area, the share of total households fell in each of the income
categories below $100,000, and the absolute number of households also fell in each of these
income categories.
Household Income Categories
Table 6 presents figures from the HUD 2000 2006-2010 Comprehensive Housing Affordability
Strategy (CHAS) data set. This table illustrates the distribution of households among various
income categories by tenure. The Department of Housing and Urban Development defines income
categories as a percentage of the Area Median Family Income (AMFI). Households whose income
equals 30 percent or less of the AMFI are considered extremely low-income; households with
incomes between 30 and 50 percent of the AMFI are classified as very low-income; those between
50 and 80 percent of the AFMI are low-income. The CHAS data set also provides information on
households earning between 80 and 100 percent of the AMFI and households with incomes above
100 percent of the AMFI.
In 2010, a higher percentage of households in St. Helena had incomes in the moderate income and
the above median-income categories compared to Napa County. In St. Helena, approximately 54
percent of households had incomes in the above median income category, compared to around 50
percent for Napa County. Furthermore, 14 percent of St. Helena households had moderate-
incomes compared to 11 percent in Napa County. In addition, the percentages of households with
low, very low, and extremely low incomes in St. Helena were lower compared to Napa County; 15
to 17 percent, 8 to 12 percent, and 9 to 11 percent. This suggests that St. Helena overall has a
higher level of income relative to Napa County.
Examination of the distribution of owner and renter households indicates that owner households
exhibited a lower percentage of extremely low-, very low, low and moderate incomes and a higher
percentage of above median-incomes than renter households in St. Helena. In addition, St. Helena
had a lower percentage of owner households in the extremely low-, very low-, and low-income
categories, compared to Napa County. Approximately 10 percent of owner households in Napa
County fell in the moderate-income category and approximately 61 percent of owner households in
Napa County fell in the above median-income category, compared to 13 percent and 68 percent in
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 32
St. Helena, respectively.
Renter households in St. Helena exhibited a more even distribution among the income categories
relative to owner households, with 13 percent of renter households in the extremely low-income
category, 13 percent in the very low-income category, 22 percent in the low-income category, 15
percent in the moderate-income category, and 37 percent in the above median-income category.
The higher concentration of renter households in the moderate-income categories and below,
compared to owner households, is attributable to the fact that market rate housing in St. Helena
typically requires households to have incomes above the moderate level.
Employment Trends
Labor Force
As presented in Table 7, the unemployment rates in St. Helena were higher than Napa County and
the Bay Area in 2007, higher than Napa County in 2012, and the same as the Bay Area in 2012. St.
Helena exhibited a small increase of 100 employed residents between 2007 and 2012 (almost 3
percent), while the number of unemployed residents also increased by 100. In comparison, Napa
County and the Bay Area experienced an increase of employed residents of 12 percent.
Note that the preceding discussion refers to employed residents, or the number of local area
residents who are currently working. This does not equate to the number of jobs in the local area,
which is discussed in the following section.
The unemployment rate in St. Helena between 2007 and 2012 followed a similar pattern in Napa
County and the Bay Area over the same time period; increasing in all three areas. The
unemployment rate in St. Helena increased from about 5.6 percent to 8.4 percent, increased in
Napa County from 4.2 percent to 7.8 percent, and rose in the Bay Area from 4.5 percent to 8.4
percent.
Jobs by Industry
Table 8 presents 2000 and 2010 ABAG estimates of the number of jobs by industry sector in both
St. Helena and Napa County. According to ABAG, the number of jobs in St. Helena decreased 4.5
percent, or 264 jobs, between 2000 and 2010. Over the same period of time, the number of Napa
County jobs grew by almost 7 percent, but in the Bay Area the number of jobs decreased by nearly
10 percent. The distribution of jobs shifted among industries.
In St. Helena, Napa County, and the Bay Area, ABAG estimated that nearly all sectors experienced
a loss of jobs between 2000 and 2010. Employment in the “Health, Educational, and Recreational
Housing Element Needs Assessment                          City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                             Page 33

Services” sector decreased by the greatest number of jobs in both St. Helena and Napa County,
declining by 383 and 3,360 jobs, respectively. This ABAG-defined industry sector includes jobs in
the arts and entertainment, recreation, accommodation, and food service industries, as well as the
education, health care, and social services sectors. This industry sector held the highest job
concentration in Napa County, with 36 percent of the total in 2000 and 29 percent of the total in
2010. However, in St. Helena, the “Health, Educational, and Recreational Services” sector
comprised only 26 percent of total jobs in both 2000 and 20 percent of total jobs in 2010.
In St. Helena, the greatest concentration of jobs was in the “Manufacturing, Wholesale, and
Transportation” sector, with 27 percent of total jobs in 2000 and 22 percent of total jobs in 2010.
This sector, which includes the manufacturing operations of the wine industry, decreased by 353
jobs in the City between 2000 and 2010. Napa County lost approximately 160 jobs, and the Bay
Area lost around 304,538 in this sector for the same time period. In Napa County, this sector
remained relatively steady, representing 22 percent of total jobs in 2000 and 21 percent of total jobs
in 2010. However, this sector accounted for the highest decrease in jobs in the Bay Area, from
about 23 percent of total jobs in 2000 to 17 percent of total jobs in 2010.
In addition to the “Manufacturing, Wholesale, and Transportation” sector, St. Helena demonstrated
slightly higher concentrations of jobs relative to Napa County and the Bay Area in the “Agriculture
and Natural Resources” and “Retail” sectors. In 2010, approximately 16 percent of St. Helena jobs
compared to 8 percent in Napa County and 1percent in the Bay Area were in the sector
“Agriculture and Natural Resources.” The same pattern appeared in the “Retail” sector in 2010
with the percentage of total jobs equaling about 15 percent in St. Helena, 9 percent in Napa
County, and 10 percent in the Bay Area.
Table 9 shows average annual salaries for various occupations in Napa County. Average salaries
range from approximately $25,400 for food preparation and serving-related occupations to
$113,000 for management occupations. The average for all occupations is $48,876.
Commuting Patterns
Tables 10 and 11show the commuting patterns for the St. Helena workforce as well as the number
of employed City residents as reported by the Census 2006-2010 Transportation Planning Package
(CTPP). As summarized in Table 10, 78 percent of the local workforce commuted into the City
from residence locations elsewhere, while employees who also resided in St. Helena filled only 22
percent of local jobs. Approximately 56 percent of St. Helena workers lived elsewhere in Napa
County, with over half of those workers living in the City of Napa. In addition, nearly 9 percent of
St. Helena workers lived in Sonoma County, 4 percent resided in Lake County, and almost 6
percent commuted in from Solano County.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 34

Table 11 provides further detail regarding the commuting patterns of employed St. Helena
residents. About 47 percent of local residents worked in St. Helena in 2010, and nearly 53 percent
of employed St. Helena residents commuted out of St. Helena for work each day. Most of the out-
commuters worked elsewhere in Napa County, primarily in the City of Napa. An additional 15
percent of employed St. Helena residents worked outside Napa County.
Ratio of Jobs to Employed Residents
Table 12 shows that St. Helena has a significantly higher proportion of jobs to employed residents
as compared to other incorporated cities in Napa County. Countywide, there was just over one job
per employed resident in 2000 and in 2010. However, the ratio of jobs to employed residents in St.
Helena during this time period was nearly double the County ratio, with two jobs per employed
resident. This means that even if all employed residents worked in St. Helena, the City would still
be reliant upon in-commuters to fill approximately half of the local jobs. No other Napa County
community exhibited a higher ratio of jobs to employed residents in 2000 and in 2010. While
Yountville’s ratio of jobs to employed residents approached St. Helena’s ratio, this community had
a smaller share of employed residents relative to the total population, 0.31, compared to 0.48
countywide and in St. Helena. In addition, other communities, such as American Canyon and the
City of Napa had ratios of less than one job per employed resident.
Our Town St. Helena is community-based, non-profit organization working to bring housing
opportunities for all members of the people vital to St. Helena. Three goals outlined in the
organization’s mission statement are to “advocate for low- and moderate-priced housing in St.
Helena; partner with others to create that housing; and create a clearinghouse to share information
about local housing opportunities.” The group uses the analogy of a tree to explain the widespread
need for housing in St. Helena, whereby the roots of the tree represent unskilled labor like
farmworkers who can only afford rental housing which is very scarce in town, the trunk is
comprised of skilled labor such as winery managers, and finally the branches are the professionals
in the community who cannot find affordable market- rate housing in St. Helena. Our Town St.
Helena believes the City of St. Helena needs a coordinated effort to provide housing at all three
levels to maintain the small town character and vitality of the community. They believe that some
housing is feasible in smaller in-fill properties, but to provide an economically feasible low-income
rental option, a larger project like the Stonebridge and Hunt’s Grove apartment complexes is
             6
necessary.
Population, Household and Employment Projections, 2010-2035
Table 13 reports ABAG projections of the total population, number of households, and number of
6
  Personal Communication, Mary Stephenson, Our Town St. Helena. February 24, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                   Page 35

employed residents. These projections provide information on St. Helena, Napa County, and the
Bay Area from 2010 to 2035.
Population
ABAG projects an annual average growth rate of 0.3 percent for St. Helena’s population between
2010 and 2035, as shown in Table 13. This low growth rate translates into an anticipated net
population increase of only 386 persons over this time period. ABAG projects a 0.6 percent annual
average population growth rate for Napa County, which translates to approximately 21,900 new
County residents between 2010 and 2035. For the Bay Area, ABAG projects a higher annual
average growth rate of 0.9 percent with a net population increase of 1.7 million between 2010 and
2035.
The California Department of Finance (DoF) projects the increase in the population by age and sex
in Napa County as a whole in ten-year increments from 2010 to 2060. While the total population
of Napa County is expected to increase by about 59,400 persons (a 43 percent increase over the 50
year period, or a 0.7 percent average annual increase), the increase in the total population over the
age of 64 is expected to outpace that of the total population. The DoF projects the number of
people aged 65 to74 will increase 82 percent over the period, the number of people aged 75 to 84
                                                                                              7
will increase 121 percent, and the number of seniors over 85 will increase 221 percent. St. Helena
can expect to feel the impact of this aging trend as well.
Households
ABAG also anticipates a 0.2 percent annual average growth rate for households in St. Helena
between 2010 and 2035. Assuming a similar income distribution of households in St. Helena in
2035 as in 2010, it is projected that approximately 9 percent, or about 220 households, of the total
2,500 households in St. Helena would be extremely low-income households. Another
approximately 210 would be very low-income and 385 would be low-income households.
As reported in Table 13, ABAG projects the number of St. Helena households will rise from 2,400
in 2010 to 2,500 in 2035, a net increase of 100 households. The disparity between ABAG’s
population and household projection figures for St. Helena indicates an anticipation that, on
average, households in the City will increase slightly in size from the present average. In Napa
County, ABAG projects the number of households will rise at an annual average growth rate of 0.5
percent, which is 0.1 percentage points higher than the projected population growth, for a total
6,174 new households by 2035. In the Bay Area, ABAG projects an annual average increase in
7
  California Department of Finance, Demographic Research Unit, Report P-1 (Age): State and County
Population Projections by Major Age Groups, 2010-2060 (by decade), January 31, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 36

households of 0.8 percent, which is also 0.1 percentage points higher than the projected population
growth, for a total of approximately 580,300 new households by 2035.
Jobs
ABAG projects that the annual average job growth rate for St. Helena, reported in Table 13, will
slightly exceed the City’s projected population and household growth rates, meaning that the City’s
                                                                                         8
already high ratio of jobs to employed residents may well increase further. With an expected 0.5
percent annual average growth rate in employment, the number of jobs will increase by
approximately 770 between 2010 and 2035. The greatest increases in jobs are projected in the
“Health, Educational, and Recreational Services” sector, with 230 new jobs by 2035, and the
“Financial and Professional Services” sector with 194 jobs by 2035.
In Napa County, ABAG projects an annual average employment growth rate of 0.8 percent, or
approximately 16,220 new jobs between 2010 and 2035. The greatest employment increase for the
County is anticipated in three areas: the “Professional and Managerial Services” sector, with 4,040
new jobs; the “Health and Educational Services” sector, with 3,260 new jobs; and the “Arts,
Recreation, and Other Services” sector, with 2,560 new jobs. In addition, the “Transportation and
Utilities” sector is anticipated to have an annual average percentage increase in employment of 2.2
percent, or an increase of approximately 1,210 new jobs between 2010 and 2035. In contrast,
ABAG expects that employment in the “Manufacturing and Wholesale” sector in Napa County will
grow by only 30 jobs, and employment in the “Manufacturing, Wholesale, and Transportation”
sector in St. Helena will grow by a mere 11 jobs between 2005 and 2035.
The projected Bay Area employment growth rate also exceeds the projected population and
household growth rates, indicating a possible regional increase in the ratio of jobs to employed
residents. The largest employment increases are expected in the “Construction,” “Professional and
Managerial Services,” and “Health and Educational Services” sectors through 2035.
Summary
Between 2000 and 2010, St. Helena experienced a small loss in population and slight increase in
household growth, with the local population decreasing by 0.2 percent and the number of
households increasing by 0.1 percent. This is in contrast to the nearly 1.8 percent and 1.1 percent
increase in population and households, respectively, seen in St. Helena from 1990 to 2000. In
    8
      ABAG utilizes the Subarea Allocation Model (SAM) to allocate job projections to the 1,405 Census tracts in
    the region. According to ABAG’s website: “Employment is distributed to Census tracts according to a
    weighted combination of a tract's share of employment potential and its previous share of its zone's
    employment. Employment potential is indicated by the amount of land available for development as
    determined in the ABAG’s land use database.”
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 37

Napa County and the Bay Area from 1990 to 2000, and 2000 to 2010, the population and
households continually increased. St. Helena’s decrease in population may reflect a trend in
purchase of St. Helena homes for use as second homes.
The size of households in St. Helena rose from 1990 to 2000, before dropping between 2000 and
2010, while in both Napa County and the Bay Area the household size rose over both time periods.
St. Helena’s homeownership rate fell between 2000 and 2008, placing St. Helena further behind
Napa County and the Bay Area.
By 2010, increases in the median age in St. Helena, Napa County and the Bay Area, resulted in a
three to four year difference between the median age in St. Helena (42.9) and the median age in
Napa County and the Bay Area (39.7 and 38.9, respectively). St. Helena maintained higher shares
of residents in the 55 to 64, and 65 and Over age categories than both Napa County and the Bay
Area in 2000 and 2010. However, the share and number of residents age 65 and over decreased in
St. Helena between 1990 and 2010. Furthermore, the City of St. Helena had a lower percentage of
residents in the 25 to 34 and 35 to 44 age categories than both Napa County and the Bay Area.
The percentage of St. Helena residents who have incomes of $100,000 or more by 2012 is close to
38 percent, while only 34 percent of Napa County, and 40 percent of Bay Area households have
incomes of $100,000 or more. In addition, the percentage of St. Helena households with incomes of
less than $25,000 fell from about 19 percent in 2000 to 13 percent in 2012. St. Helena’s median
income of $71,100 in 2012 exceeds that of Napa County by $69,000, and is less than the Bay Area
at $78,900.
In 2007 and 2012, St. Helena had a higher unemployment rate than Napa County, a higher
unemployment rate than the Bay Area in 2007, and the same unemployment rate as the Bay Area in
2012. The greatest job concentration in St. Helena was in the “Manufacturing, Wholesale, and
Transportation” sector, in both 2000 and 2010, even though this sector experienced large job losses
over the ten-year period. However, the largest decrease in jobs within the City between 2000 and
2010 occurred in the “Health, Educational, and Recreational Services” sector, which was nearly as
large a decrease in jobs as the “Manufacturing, Wholesale, and Transportation” employment
category in St. Helena.
According to the Census 2006-2010 Transportation Planning Package (CTPP), most people who
work in St. Helena commuted in from residences located outside of the City. Furthermore, 53
percent of employed St. Helena residents commuted to jobs outside of the City. The ratio of jobs
to employed residents confirms that St. Helena had approximately two jobs per employed resident
in 2010. Therefore, even if all employed St. Helena residents worked in St. Helena, the City would
still need in-commuters to fill approximately half of the local jobs. ABAG projects that the number
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 38

of residents, households, and jobs in St. Helena will continue to grow at a conservative rate through
2035, with the annual average job growth rate slightly outpacing population and household growth
rates.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 39
Table 3: Population and Household Trends, 1990, 2000, and 2010
                                                                                     Average            Average
                                                                                 Annual Grow th      Annual Grow th       Percent Change   Percent Change
City of St. Helena                  1990           2000             2010             1990-2000          2000-2010            1990-2000        2000-2010
Population                             4,990          5,950              5,814               1.8%               -0.2%                19.2%           -2.3%
Households                             2,138          2,380              2,401               1.1%                0.1%                11.3%            0.9%
Average Household Size                  2.31           2.48                2.38              0.7%               -0.4%                 7.4%           -4.0%
Household Type
   HH w ith Children (a)              26.9%          32.6%              28.9%
   HH w ithout Children               73.1%          67.4%              71.1%
Tenure
   Homeow ners                        60.3%          56.0%              55.4%
   Renters                            39.7%          44.0%              44.6%
                                                                                      Average            Average
                                                                                 Annual Grow th      Annual Grow th       Percent Change   Percent Change
Napa County                         1990           2000             2010             1990-2000          2000-2010            1990-2000        2000-2010
Population                          110,765        124,279             136,484               1.2%                0.9%                12.2%            9.8%
Households                           41,312          45,402             48,876               0.9%                0.7%                 9.9%            7.7%
Average Household Size                  2.54           2.62                2.69              0.3%                0.3%                 3.0%            2.7%
Household Type
   HH w ith Children (a)              33.3%          34.4%              33.8%
   HH w ithout Children               66.7%          65.6%              66.2%
Tenure
   Homeow ners                        64.5%          65.1%              62.6%
   Renters                            35.5%          34.9%              37.4%
                                                                                      Average            Average
                                                                                 Annual Grow th      Annual Grow th       Percent Change   Percent Change
Bay Area (b)                        1990           2000             2010             1990-2000          2000-2010            1990-2000        2000-2010
Population                        6,023,577      6,783,760           7,150,739               1.2%                0.5%                12.6%            5.4%
Households                        2,246,242      2,466,019           2,608,023               0.9%                0.6%                 9.8%            5.8%
Average Household Size                  2.61           2.69 (c)            2.69              0.3%                0.0%                 2.9%           -0.2%
Household Type
   HH w ith Children (a)              33.4%          34.7%              33.4%
   HH w ithout Children               66.6%          65.3%              66.6%
Tenure
   Homeow ners                        56.4%          57.7%              56.2%
   Renters                            43.6%          42.3%              43.8%
Notes:
(a) Households w ith children have at least one member under the age of 18.
(b) The Bay Area includes the follow ing nine counties encompassed by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG): Alameda, Contra
Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano, and Sonoma.
(c) The 2000 average household size for the Bay Area is a Claritas estimate.
Sources: Census 1990, 2000, and 2010.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                             Page 40
Table 4: Age Distribution, 1990, 2000, and 2010
                                                            City of St. Helena
                                 1990                              2000                            2010
                                        Percent                           Percent                         Percent
Age Distribution       Number           of Total        Number            of Total         Number         of Total
Under 18                    1,065           21.3%             1,494           25.1%            1,280          22.0%
18-24                         325            6.5%               383            6.4%              453           7.8%
25-34                         659           13.2%               685           11.5%              629          10.8%
35-44                         773           15.5%               877           14.7%              704          12.1%
45-54                         546           10.9%               917           15.4%              805         13.8%
55-64                         372            7.5%               566            9.5%              822          14.1%
65 and Over                 1,250           25.1%             1,028           17.3%            1,121          19.3%
Total                       4,990            100%             5,950            100%            5,814           100%
Median Age                   40.8 (a)                          39.9                             42.9
                                                              Napa County
                                 1990                              2000                            2010
                                        Percent                           Percent                         Percent
Age Distribution       Number           of Total        Number            of Total         Number         of Total
Under 18                   25,720           23.2%            29,998           24.1%           31,486          23.1%
18-24                      10,244            9.2%            10,510            8.5%           12,023           8.8%
25-34                      16,830           15.2%            15,562           12.5%           16,755          12.3%
35-44                      17,697           16.0%            18,884           15.2%           17,851          13.1%
45-54                      12,145           11.0%            18,392           14.8%           19,932          14.6%
55-64                       9,790            8.8%            11,847            9.5%           17,843          13.1%
65 and Over                18,339           16.6%            19,086           15.4%           20,594          15.1%
Total                     110,765            100%           124,279            100%          136,484           100%
Median Age                   36.4 (a)                          38.3                             39.7
                                                                 Bay Area
                                 1990                              2000                            2010
                                        Percent                           Percent                         Percent
Age Distribution       Number           of Total        Number            of Total         Number         of Total
Under 18                1,387,341           23.0%         1,601,858           23.6%        1,589,673          22.2%
18-24                     620,499           10.3%           595,173            8.8%          641,008           9.0%
25-34                   1,177,834           19.6%         1,120,919           16.5%        1,052,669          14.7%
35-44                   1,040,415           17.3%         1,172,570           17.3%        1,065,647          14.9%
45-54                     656,003           10.9%           964,638           14.2%        1,072,222          15.0%
55-64                     476,007            7.9%           571,095            8.4%          851,291          11.9%
65 and Over               665,478           11.0%           757,507           11.2%          878,229          12.3%
Total                   6,023,577            100%         6,783,760            100%        7,150,739           100%
Median Age                   33.6 (a)                          35.6 (a)                         38.9 (b)
Notes:
(a) 1990 median age estimates for the City of St. Helena, Napa County and the Bay Area, and the 2000 median age
estimate for the Bay Area are Claritas estimates.
(b) 2010 median age for the Bay Area is an average of each county's median age.
Sources: Census 1990, and 2010 Census 2000, Claritas.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 41
Table 5: Household Income Distribution, 2000 and 2012
                                 City of St. Helena                                Napa County                      Bay Area             Bay Area
                         2000 (est) (a)         2012 (est) (b)         2000 (est) (a)        2012 (est) (b)       2000 (est) (a)       2012 (est) (b)
                                  Percent                Percent                Percent               Percent              Percent              Percent
Incom e Range          Number     of Total Number        of Total    Number of Total Number           of Total Number      of Total  Number     of Total
Less than $24,999            457   19.2%          346      12.8%        9,222    20.3%       7,483     15.2%    436,554       17.7% 410,176 15.8%
$25,000 - $49,999            572   24.1%          550      20.3%      12,578     27.7%      10,180     20.7%    537,483       21.8% 439,090 16.9%
$50,000 - $74,999            432   18.2%          481      17.7%        9,147    20.1%       8,750     17.8%    482,228       19.5% 401,028 15.5%
$75,000 - $99,999            386   16.2%          306      11.3%        6,022    13.3%       6,189     12.6%    347,356       14.1% 317,256 12.2%
$100,000 or more             531   22.3%        1,029      37.9%        8,426    18.6%      16,607     33.7%    664,403       26.9% 1,024,595 39.5%
Total Households          2,378 100.0%         2,712        100%     45,395 100.0% 49,209               100% 2,468,024      100.0% 2,592,145      100%
Median Household
Incom e (c)            $81,831              $71,118                 $71,878                $69,571              $87,428 (d)           $78,908 (d)
Notes:
(a) 2000 figures are based on US Census Bureau, 2000 Decennial Census Counts.
(b) 2012 figures are based on American Community Survey 5-year estimates for 2008-2012 and include income and benefits.
(c) 2000 median household income is reported in inflation-adjusted 2012 dollars.
(d) Median income for the Bay Area is a w eighted average of the median household income of each of the nine counties.
Sources: 2000 Census; American Community Survey, 2008-2012.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                   Page 42
Table 6: Household Income Categories, City of St. Helena, 2010
                                              City of St. Helena                                                   Napa County
                           Ow ner Occupied     Renter Occupied        Total Households         Ow ner Occupied    Renter Occupied     Total Households
                                     Percent              Percent                Percent                Percent            Percent              Percent
Incom e Categories        Number     of Total Number      of Total   Number       of Total    Number    of Total Number    of Total Number      of Total
Extremely Low Income
(Less than 30% of AMFI)        70       5.1%      155      12.9%          225        8.8%       2,310      7.2%    3,290    19.1%      5,600     11.4%
Very Low Income
(30% to 50% of AMFI)           60       4.4%      155      12.9%          215        8.4%       2,490      7.8%    3,180    18.5%      5,670     11.5%
Low Income
(50% to 80% of AMFI)          130       9.5%      265      22.1%          395      15.4%        4,605     14.4%    3,620    21.1%      8,225     16.7%
Moderate Income
80% to 100% of AMFI)          170      12.5%      180      15.0%          350      13.6%        3,120      9.8%    2,075    12.1%      5,195     10.6%
Above Median Income
(Over 100% of AMFI)           930      68.1%      445      37.1%        1,375      53.6%       19,470     60.9%    5,015    29.2%     24,485     49.8%
Total Households            1,365       100%    1,200       100%        2,565       100%       31,995      100%   17,185     100%     49,180      100%
Note: Numbers may not add due to rounding.
Source: 2006-2010 CHAS dataset.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                      Page 43
Table 7: Labor Force Trends, 2007 and 2012
                                City of St. Helena               Napa County                         Bay Area
                               2007            2012          2007               2012           2007           2,012
Em ployed Residents              3,400            3,500       70,400              71,800     3,419,600      3,471,600
Unem ployed Residents              200              300         3,100              6,100       161,300         315,200
Labor Force (a)                  3,600            3,800       73,300              77,800     3,581,000      3,766,600
Unem ploym ent Rate (b)           5.6%             8.4%           4.2%              7.8%           4.5%           8.4%
Notes:
(a) The labor force consists of the employed and unemployed residents combined.
(b) The unemployment rate is the percentage of the labor force that is unemployed.
Sources: EDD, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                    Page 44
Table 8: Jobs by Industry, 2000 and 2010
                                                                  City of St. Helena                                  Napa County                                       Bay Area
                                                               2000                   2010                     2000                   2010                      2000                 2010
                                                       Employed Percent       Employed Percent         Employed    Percent    Employed     Percent     Employed     Percent   Employed    Percent
Industry (a)                                            Workers   of Total     Workers     of Total     Workers    of Total    Workers     of Total     Workers     of Total   Workers    of Total
Agriculture and Natural Resources Jobs (b)                  364     6.5%            859     16.1%          3,088      4.7%        5,790       8.2%        24,468      0.7%       24,650     0.7%
Manufacturing, Wholesale, and Transportation Jobs (       1,517    27.1%          1,164     21.8%         14,688     22.1%      14,848      21.0%        863,410     23.0%      558,872    16.5%
Retail Jobs (d)                                             644    11.5%            805     15.1%          7,019     10.6%        6,415       9.1%       402,657     10.7%      335,934     9.9%
Financial and Professional Service Jobs (e)                 881    15.7%            806     15.1%          8,632     13.0%        8,061     11.4%        851,630     22.7%      782,792    23.1%
Health, Educational, and Recreational Service Jobs (f     1,469    26.2%          1,086     20.3%         24,148     36.4%      20,788      29.4%      1,055,978     28.1%      920,656    27.2%
Other Jobs (g)                                              728    13.0%            619     11.6%          8,778     13.2%      14,750      20.9%        555,207     14.8%      762,396    22.5%
Total                                                     5,603     100%          5,339      100%         66,353   100.0%       70,651     100.0%      3,753,323      100%    3,385,300     100%
Notes:
(a) Industry employment figures report the number of jobs in each geography, not the number of employed residents.
(b) Includes North American Industrial Classification System sectors 11 and 21: Agriculture, Fishing, Forestry, and Mining.
(c) Includes North American Industrial Classification System sectors 22, 31-33, 42, and 48-49: Utilities, Manufacturing, Wholesale, Transportation, and Warehousing.
(d) Includes North American Industrial Classification System sectors 44 and 45: Retail Trade.
(e) Includes North American Industrial Classification System sectors 52-56: Finance, and Insurance; Real Estate and Rental and Leasing; Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services;
and Management of Companies and Enterprises, as w ell as Administrative Supports, Waste Management, and Remediation Services.
(f) Includes North American Industrial Classification System sectors 61, 62, 71, 72, and 81: Educational Services, Health Care and Social Assistance; Arts, Entertainment,
and Recreation; Accommodation and Food Services; and Other Services.
(g) Includes North American Industrial Classification System sectors 23, 51 and 92: Construction, Information, and Public Administration.
Source: ABAG Sustainable Communities Strategy Preferred Scenario, v20, May 24, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                  Page 45
Table 9: Wages by Occupation, Napa County, First Quarter 2013
                                                                         Average Annual
Occupation                                                               Wage
Food Preparation and Serving-Related Occupations                             $25,411
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations                    $31,273
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations                                   $28,094
Personal Care and Service Occupations                                        $28,865
Healthcare Support Occupations                                               $35,876
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations                               $34,028
Office and Administrative Support Occupations                                $40,858
Sales and Related Occupations                                                $43,076
Production Occupations                                                       $37,848
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations                   $51,270
Protective Service Occupations                                               $44,014
Community and Social Services Occupations                                    $51,668
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations                            $50,092
Construction and Extraction Occupations                                      $54,140
Education, Training, and Library Occupations                                 $58,016
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations                           $94,920
Architecture and Engineering Occupations                                     $80,844
Computer and Mathematical Occupations                                        $75,089
Business and Financial Operations Occupations                                $72,746
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations                               $77,865
Legal Occupations                                                            $71,648
Management Occupations                                                       $112,951
Average all Occupations                                                      $48,876
Sources: California Employment Development Department, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 46
Table 10: St. Helena Workers by Place of Residence, 2010
                                           Num ber of w orkers           Percent
Workers Em ployed in St. Helena (a)                        5,605              100.0%
Workers Com m uting
into St. Helena                                            4,375                78.1%
Detailed Place of Residence for Workers Commuting Into St. Helena
                                                                        Percent of
                                                                         w orkers
                                                                      Em ployed in
                                           Num ber of w orkers          St. Helena
Live in Napa County                                        4,345                77.5%
   St. Helena                                              1,230               21.9%
   Napa                                                    1,690               30.2%
   Calistoga                                                 255                 4.5%
   Angwin                                                    165                 2.9%
   Yountville                                                  65                1.2%
   Remainder of County                                       940               16.8%
Live in Sonom a County                                       475                 8.5%
   Santa Rosa                                                175                3.1%
   Remainder of County                                       300                5.4%
Live in Lake County                                          230                 4.1%
   Hidden Valley Lake                                        110                2.0%
   Remainder of County                                       120                2.1%
Live in Solano County                                        325                 5.8%
   Vallejo                                                    70                1.2%
   Remainder of County                                       255                4.5%
Live Elsew here in California                                230                 4.1%
Note:
(a) Table excludes a small number of w orkers w ho commute into St. Helena from out
of the state.
Sources: Census 2006-2010 Transportation Planning Package, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 47
Table 11: St. Helena Residents by Place of Work, 2010
                                       Num ber         Percent
Em ployed St. Helena Residents (a)          2,591          100.0%
Workers Com m uting
out of St. Helena                           1,361           52.5%
Detailed Place of Work for Workers Commuting Out of St. Helena
                                                      Percent of
                                                      Em ployed
                                                      St. Helena
                                       Num ber        Residents
Work in Napa County                         2,209            85.3%
  St. Helena                                1,230           47.5%
  Remainder of County                         724           27.9%
  Angwin                                        30           1.2%
  Napa                                        150            5.8%
  Calistoga                                     45           1.7%
  Yountville                                    30           1.2%
Worked Outside Napa County                    382            14.7%
Worked Outside California                     -               0.0%
Sources: 2006-2010 American Community Survey 5-Year
Estimates; Census 2006-2010 Transportation Planning Package.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                      Page 48
Table 12: Ratio of Jobs to Employed Residents, 2000 and 2010
                                                    2000                                                                      2010
                                                  Employed                                                    Percent            Percent
                                   Employed      Residents/                 Jobs/Employed                     Change             Change   Employed   Jobs/Empoyed
Com m unity         Population     Residents     Population      Jobs          Residents        Population   2000-2010 Jobs     2000-2010 Residents    Residents
Napa County           124,279          59,886          0.48       66,353               1.11         136,484       9.8% 70,651        6.5%     58,927          1.20
  American Canyon       9,846           4,339          0.44        1,933              0.45           19,454      97.6%  2,918       51.0%      5,300         0.55
  Calistoga             5,190           2,431          0.47        2,712              1.12            5,155      -0.7%  2,218      -18.2%      2,176         1.02
  Napa City            72,964         35,341           0.48      32,950               0.93           76,915       5.4% 33,949        3.0%     34,689         0.98
  St. Helena            5,951           2,864          0.48        5,603              1.96            5,814      -2.3%  5,339       -4.7%      2,806         1.90
  Yountville            3,297           1,015          0.31        1,897              1.87            2,933     -11.0%  1,602      -15.6%        911         1.76
  Unincorporated       27,031         13,896           0.51      21,259               1.53           26,213      -3.0% 24,627       15.8%     13,046         1.89
Source: ABAG Sustainable Communities Strategy Preferred Scenario, v20, May 24, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 49
Table 13: ABAG Population, Household, and Employment Projections
                                                                                                                                              Average Annual
                                                                                                                                              Percent Change
                                                          2010          2015          2020            2025          2030           2035          2010-2035
City of St. Helena
  Population                                                5,814         5,900         6,000           6,100         6,100           6,200        0.3%
  Households                                                2,401         2,420         2,450           2,480         2,490           2,500        0.2%
  Employment                                                5,339         5,590         5,860           5,910         5,970           6,110        0.5%
     Agriculture and Natural Resources                        859           878           896             901            905            946        0.4%
     Manufacturing, Wholesale and Transportation            1,164         1,200         1,237           1,212         1,188           1,175        0.0%
     Retail                                                   805           833           862             865            868            877        0.3%
     Financial and Professional Services                      806           860           918             942            968          1,000        0.9%
     Health, Education and Recreational Services            1,086         1,149         1,215           1,245         1,276           1,316        0.8%
     Other jobs (a)                                           619           671           727             742            756            777        0.9%
Napa County
  Population                                              136,484       140,300       144,200         148,600       153,100        158,400         0.6%
  Households                                               48,876        50,100        51,370          52,560        53,840         55,050         0.5%
  Employment                                               70,660        75,700        81,240          82,740        84,300         86,880         0.8%
     Agriculture and Natural Resources                      5,790         5,920         6,050           6,070         6,090           6,380        0.4%
     Construction                                           2,730         3,750         4,930           5,160         5,400           5,710
     Manufacturing and Wholesale                           13,210        13,600        13,960          13,680        13,400         13,240         0.0%
     Retail                                                 6,410         6,710         7,020           7,060         7,090           7,180        0.5%
     Transportation and Utilities                           1,650         2,090         2,600           2,670         2,740           2,860        2.2%
     Information                                              660           660           660             660            660            660        0.0%
     Financial and Leasing                                  2,410         2,510         2,580           2,590         2,590           2,600        0.3%
     Professional and Managerial Services                   5,650         6,660         7,870           8,410         8,980           9,690        2.2%
     Health and Educational Services                        9,110         9,890        10,770          11,250        11,750         12,370         1.2%
     Arts , Recreation and Other Services                  11,680        12,420        13,220          13,520        13,830         14,240         0.8%
     Government                                            11,360        11,490        11,580          11,670        11,770         11,950         0.2%
Bay Area
  Population                                            7,150,739     7,461,400     7,786,800       8,134,000     8,496,800      8,889,000         0.9%
  Households                                            2,608,023     2,720,410     2,837,680       2,952,910     3,072,920      3,188,330         0.8%
  Employment                                            3,385,300     3,669,990     3,987,150       4,089,320     4,196,580      4,346,820         1.0%
     Agriculture and Natural Resources                     24,640        25,180        25,690          24,800        23,940         23,330         -0.2%
     Construction                                         142,350       168,380       197,560         203,280       209,150        217,080          1.7%
     Manufacturing and Wholesale                          460,170       473,360       486,720         476,580       467,010        461,330          0.0%
     Retail                                               335,930       352,550       370,260         372,210       374,060        379,210          0.5%
     Transportation and Utilities                          98,710       108,320       119,080         120,650       122,090        124,760          0.9%
     Information                                          121,070       134,550       149,640         150,890       152,130        154,720          1.0%
     Financial and Leasing                                186,070       204,730       225,520         226,770       227,680        230,880          0.9%
     Professional and Managerial Services                 596,740       678,230       771,560         814,300       859,260        914,710          1.7%
     Health and Educational Services                      447,720       497,070       553,680         584,230       616,620        656,290          1.5%
     Arts , Recreation and Other Services                 472,930       519,020       570,160         589,000       608,420        633,960          1.2%
     Government                                           498,970       508,600       517,280         526,610       536,220        550,550          0.4%
Notes:
(a) Includes North American Industrial Classification System sectors 23, 51 and 92: Construction, Information, and Public Administration.
Source: ABAG Plan Bay Area Projections 2013; ABAG Sustainable Communities Strategy Preferred Scenario, v20, May 24, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                                City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                                Page 50
Housing Conditions
The following section details the housing conditions in St. Helena and, where available, compares
the data to Napa County and the Bay Area. Data sources include the 2000 Census, 2008 - 2012
American Community Survey, California Department of Finance (DoF), U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) including the Comprehensive Housing Affordability
Strategy (CHAS) dataset, and the California Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD). Property owners and managers of local residential apartment complexes were also
interviewed for information regarding residential rental market conditions.
Existing Housing Conditions
Housing Stock Characteristics
Table 14 reports the distribution of housing units by type for St. Helena, Napa County, and the Bay
Area. In St. Helena between 2000 and 2010, the total number of detached single-family units
increased by approximately 133 units, while the number of attached single-family units decline by
63. Overall, St. Helena had about 68 more units in 2010 than in 2000, due to an increase in
detached single family homes. The overall increase in housing units represents a 3 percent increase
in the quantity of housing in St. Helena between 2000 and 2010. In Napa County and the Bay
Area, the number of housing units increased by 13 percent (6,302 units) and 9 percent (235,448
units), respectively, over the same time period, greatly surpassing the housing growth rate in St.
Helena.
St. Helena and Napa County have a higher share of single-family homes relative to the Bay Area,
about 70 percent and 74 percent of total units, respectively, in 2010 to the Bay Area’s 63 percent,
and a higher share of mobile homes, around 6 to 7 percent compared to 2 percent. Overall, St.
Helena and the County have a smaller proportion of multifamily units than the County. However,
St. Helena exhibits a higher proportion of multifamily units in structures with five or more units
(19 percent in 2010) compared to the County’s 12 percent. This percentage was still low by
regional standards, with 25 percent of Bay Area housing stock in structures with five or more units.
Age of Housing Stock
Based on data from the 2008-2012 American Community Survey reported in Table 15, the Bay
Area has a slightly older housing stock relative to St. Helena and Napa County. Approximately 38
percent of St. Helena and Napa County’s housing units were built after 1980, which surpassed the
31 percent in the Bay Area. In addition, approximately 45 percent of the housing stock in Napa
County and 47 percent in the Bay Area were constructed between 1950 and 1979. In St. Helena,
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 51

only 38 percent of the housing units were built in that time period. St. Helena and the Bay Area
had slightly higher proportions of historic homes, with 24 and 23 percent of housing units in both
areas built prior to 1950, respectively, compared to 16 percent in Napa County.
Occupancy Rates
In St. Helena, the overall housing vacancy rate reached 7.8 percent in 2012 according to the 2008-
2012 American Community Survey (ACS) and as shown in Table 16. Homes kept for seasonal,
recreational, or occasional use accounted for about 97 units, or about 45 percent of total vacant
units. These units for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use also represented over 4 3 percent of
                                   9
all housing units in the City. In Napa County, units for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use
represented approximately 5 percent of total housing units, nearly one-half of residential vacancies.
In the Bay Area, the vacancy rate was significantly lower, at 6.9 percent, with one percent of
homes vacant because of seasonal, recreational, or occasional use. Overall, after excluding
vacancies due to seasonal, recreational, or occasional uses, the vacancy rate in St. Helena was 4.5
percent. This was lower than in Napa County or the Bay Area, where the comparable figures were
6 percent for both areas.
Vacant for-sale units represented 2.4 percent of total units in St. Helena, which was higher than
vacant for-rent units at approximately 1.2 percent of total units. These percentages represent 34
vacant rental units and 72 vacant for-sale units in St. Helena. These figures compare to 97 vacant
units in the City for seasonal, recreational or occasional use. Based on anecdotal information, the
number of housing units within St. Helena used for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use may be
considerably higher than reported by the American Community Survey.
A comparison of 2012 ACS data with 2000 Census data revealed that the overall vacancy rate in
2000 was 12 percent, which is about four percent higher than in 2012. One of the major reasons
for the higher overall vacancy rate is that in 2000 St. Helena had 152 vacant units for seasonal,
recreational, or occasional use, but by 2012, the number had fallen to 97 vacant units.
In the real estate industry, a five percent residential vacancy rate is considered an indicator of a
healthy housing market, with a reasonable balance between supply and demand. The 2012 data
indicate that, after setting aside the units held vacant for seasonal or vacation use, St. Helena’s
vacancy rate was at industry standards for a balanced market.
9
  The census defines seasonal, recreational or occasional use as “housing units including vacant units used or intended for
use only in certain seasons, for weekends, or other occasional use throughout the year. Interval ownership units,
sometimes called shared ownership or timesharing condominiums are included in this category.”
http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2000/dp1/2kh00.pdf . Accessed February 7, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 52

Overcrowding
                                                                                                                            10
The U.S. Census defines overcrowding as more than one person per room in a given housing unit,
and Table 17 details overcrowding by income category and tenure. The 2006-2010 CHAS dataset
provides the information on persons per room. As of 2010, more than 95 percent of St. Helena
housing units had less than one person per room, leaving slightly less than 5 percent of the units
with overcrowded conditions. Of the 125 households living in overcrowded conditions, only 30
were owner households and the remainder were renters.
Among extremely low-income and very low-income households, there were no households living
in overcrowded conditions. In the low-income category, owner and renter households endured
overcrowded conditions, with 20 owner households (5.6 percent of total households) and 50 renter
households (13.9 percent of total households) having more than one person per room. Finally, the
moderate and above income category had a total of 10 owner households (0.6 percent of total
households) and 44 renter households (2.9 percent of total households) living in overcrowded
conditions.
Housing Cost Burden
Table 18 presents household income limits, as defined by HUD, and estimates of housing cost
burden based on the 2006-2010 CHAS database from HUD. Income limits are defined relative to
the Area Median Family Income (AMFI) for Napa County. In addition, housing cost burden refers
to the share of a household’s income spent on housing costs. All households experience some level
of housing cost burden, but households paying between 30 and 50 percent of their income for
housing experience “excessive” housing cost burden. The housing cost burden qualifies as
                                                                          11
“severe” at levels above 50 percent of household income.
In 2010, St. Helena households with a housing cost burden of less than 30 percent of their income
represented around 62 percent of all households in St. Helena, meaning these households had a
manageable housing cost burden. Of the remaining households, approximately 17 percent had
excessive cost burdens and 21 percent had severe housing cost burdens. Overall, the incidence of
excessive and severe housing cost burdens was greater among renter households, but the severity of
the housing cost burden varied by income level and among owners versus renters.
     10
        According to the U.S. Census, a room includes all “whole rooms used for living purposes…including living
     rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, bedrooms, finished recreation rooms, enclosed porches suitable for year-round
     use, and lodgers' rooms. Excluded are strips or pullman kitchens, bathrooms, open porches, balconies, halls or
     foyers, half-rooms, utility rooms, unfinished attics or basements, or other unfinished space used for storage. A
     partially divided room is a separate room only if there is a partition from floor to ceiling, but not if the partition
     consists solely of shelves or cabinets.”
     11
        U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Policy Development and Research.
     “Affordable Housing Needs: A Report to Congress on the Significant Need for Housing.” 2003.
     http://www.huduser.org/Publications/pdf/AffhsgNeedsRpt2003.pdf, Accessed February 7, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                          City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                               Page 53

Of the 230 extremely low-income households (less than 30 percent AMFI) in St. Helena, around 4
percent of renter-occupied households have a housing cost burden less than 30 percent, but 7
percent and 57 percent of renter-occupied households, respectively, have excessive and severe
housing cost burdens. Notably, in the extremely low-income category, the total number of owner-
occupied households (70) experienced severe housing cost burdens. Of all of the income
categories, extremely low-income households are the most likely among renters to experience
severe housing cost burden (130 households).
In the case of very low-income households (30 to 50 percent of AMFI), a much higher percentage
of households (26 percent), had housing cost burdens of less than 30 percent of household income
compared to extremely low-income households. In addition, 42 percent and 35 percent of
households had excessive and severe housing cost burdens, respectively. More very low-income
renter households (115 households) than owner households (50 households) had excessive or
severe housing cost burdens.
Among low-income households (50 to 80 percent of AMFI), 43 percent of households had housing
cost burdens of less than 30 percent. In 2010, there were 155 low-income renter households and 70
low-income owner households with excessive or severe housing cost burdens.
For households in the moderate and above category, about 80 percent had housing cost burdens of
less than 30 percent. While the percentage of renter households with severe or excessive housing
cost burdens equaled about 8 percent of all moderate and above income households, the percentage
of owners with severe or excessive housing cost burdens totaled almost 13 percent of this income
category. Thus, smaller number of this income category’s renter households had excessive (80) or
severe (50) housing cost burdens, but among owner households, significantly higher numbers had
excessive (165) and severe (55) housing cost burdens.
Overall, as the income category rises from extremely low-income to moderate-income and above,
the numbers and percentages of renter households that experienced excessive or severe housing
cost burdens varied. Extremely low income renters had the highest share of excessive housing
costs, while very low income renters had the highest share of severe housing cost burdens. Among
owner households, the highest incidence of excessive housing cost burdens occurred in households
with extremely low incomes. Therefore, rental subsidies and owner assistance are most crucial for
St. Helena households with the lowest incomes.
Physical Housing Conditions
In general, the condition of the housing stock in St. Helena is good. This is primarily due the high
value of residential property, recent new construction, and minor to extensive remodeling which
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 54

has been performed within the last ten years. Property owners are motivated to keep housing in
good condition because of the high value of houses and rents.
There are scattered areas where housing condition can be an issue. City staff estimates
approximately 2 percent of the single family houses and 1 percent of multi-family units are in need
of replacement. These units have improvement costs that exceed the estimated replacement cost.
Approximately 4 percent of single family houses and 2 percent of multifamily units are in need of
significant rehabilitation, which is defined as having major deficiencies that may require immediate
repair. About 5 percent of the housing stock is in need of limited rehabilitation. These structures
exhibit minor repair need and are not considered to have major safety issues. Housing conditions
are quantified in Table 19.
“At Risk” Units
State law requires an analysis of the risk of conversion of affordable housing to market-rate
housing within the next ten years. The 2009 Housing Element identified one affordable housing
complex, the Woodbridge Apartments, as at-risk for losing its federal subsidies. In 2013, the City
worked with the property owners and CalHFA to re-finance and renovate 50 units of affordable
housing. Through this effort the Woodbridge Apartment Complex will continue to offer regulated
affordable housing through November 2032.
The California Housing Partnership (CHPC) provides information on affordable housing
developments subsidized through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), the U.S Department of Agriculture, the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program, and
public housing. CHPC does not identify any affordable housing developments with subsidies
                                      12
expiring over the next ten years.
    12
       California Housing Partnership website, http://www.chpc.net/preservation/MappingWidget.html. Accessed
    April 14, 2015.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 55

Table 14: Housing Stock Characteristics, 2000 and 2010
                                        St. Helena                              Napa County                                   Bay Area
                                2000                  2010                 2000                2010                   2000                  2010
                         Number Percent        Number Percent       Number Percent      Number Percent       Number      Percent     Number      Percent
Units in Structure       of Units   of Total   of Units  of Total   of Units  of Total  of Units  of Total   of Units    of Total    of Units    of Total
Detached Single Family     1,644     60.7%       1,777    64.0%      32,569    67.1%     37,509    68.5%    1,376,911     53.9%     1,496,701     53.8%
Attached Single Family       215      7.9%         152      5.5%      3,215     6.6%      2,827     5.2%      224,837       8.8%      256,951      9.2%
2 to 4 units                 210      7.8%         169      6.1%      3,637     7.5%      4,084     7.5%      266,321     10.4%       277,705     10.0%
5 or more units              478     17.7%         525    18.9%       5,204    10.7%      6,558    12.0%      623,345     24.4%       692,915     24.9%
Mobile Homes                 161      5.9%         153      5.5%      3,832     7.9%      3,781     6.9%       57,129       2.2%       59,719      2.1%
Total Units                2,708      100%       2,776     100%      48,457     100%     54,759     100%    2,548,543      100%     2,783,991      100%
Sources: Census 2000, Department of Finance, 2010.
Table 15: Housing Stock by Year Built, 2012
                                               St. Helena                            Napa County                              Bay Area
                                      Number               Percent             Number             Percent             Number             Percent
Year Structure Built                  of Units             of Total            of Units           of Total            of Units           of Total
2010 or later                                     0             0.0%                   114             0.2%                4,939               0.2%
2000 to 2009                                   258              8.8%                7,157             13.1%             245,284                8.8%
1990 to 1999                                   484             16.5%                6,354             11.6%             252,259                9.1%
1980 to 1989                                   379             12.9%                7,441             13.6%             345,715               12.4%
1970 to 1979                                   623             21.2%              10,119              18.5%             500,314               18.0%
1960 to 1969                                   217              7.4%                7,163             13.1%             404,333               14.5%
1950 to 1959                                   263              8.9%                7,538             13.8%             395,715               14.2%
1940 to 1949                                   124              4.2%                3,673              6.7%             206,016                7.4%
1939 or earlier                                592             20.1%                5,080              9.3%             428,782               15.4%
Total Units                                  2,940              100%              54,639               100%           2,783,357                100%
Source: 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5-year estimates.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                          City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                      Page 56
Table 16: Housing Occupancy and Vacancy Status, 2012
                                                                     St. Helena                   Napa County                        Bay Area
                                                                 Number       Percent          Number Percent                 Number        Percent
Housing Units                                                    of Units     of Total         of Units      of Total         of Units       of Total
Occupied Housing Units                                             2,712        92.2%           49,209        90.1%          2,592,145        93.1%
Vacant Housing Units                                                 228         7.8%             5,430         9.9%            191,212        6.9%
    For rent                                                          34         1.2%            1,127         2.1%              50,767        1.8%
    Rented, not occupied                                                0        0.0%               105        0.2%              10,600        0.4%
    For sale only                                                     72         2.4%               898        1.6%              25,361        0.9%
    Sold, not occupied                                                  0        0.0%               254        0.5%               8,689        0.3%
    For seasonal, recreational or occasional use                      97         3.3%            2,480         4.5%              34,963        1.3%
    Migrant Labor Housing                                               0        0.0%                  0       0.0%                 249        0.0%
    Other Vacant (a)                                                  25         0.9%               566        1.0%                 566        0.0%
Total Units                                                        2,940         100%           54,639         100%          2,783,357         100%
Notes:
(a) If a vacant unit does not fall into any of the classifications specified above, it is classified as "other vacant." For example,
this category includes units held for occupancy by a caretaker or janitor, and units held by the ow ner for personal reasons.
Source: 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5-year estimates.
Table 17: Overcrowding by Income Category and Tenure, St. Helena, 2010
                                     All Incom e      Extrem ely Low Incom e Very Low Incom e                  Low Incom e          Moderate and Above
                                       Levels         Less than 30% of AMF (30% to 50% of AMFI)           (50% to 80% of AMFI)       (Over 80% of AMFI)
                                            Percent                 Percent                   Percent                  Percent                  Percent
                                             of Total               of Total                  of Total                 of Total                 of Total
Persons Per Room (a)           Number      Households Number      Households Number         Households    Number     Households     Number    Households
Ow ner Occupied
   1.00 Person or less           1,340          52.3%       70         27.5%          60         28.6%        110         30.6%       1,090        69.7%
   1.01 - 1.50 Persons              20           0.8%        0           0.0%          0           0.0%         20          5.6%          0          0.0%
   1.51 Persons or More             10           0.4%        0           0.0%          0           0.0%          0          0.0%         10          0.6%
Subtotal: Ow ner-Occupied        1,365            53%       80          31.4%         85          40.5%       160          44.6%      1,010         64.6%
Renter Occupied
   1.00 Person or less           1,100          43.0%      155         60.8%         155         73.8%        215         59.9%         580        37.1%
   1.01 - 1.50 Persons              15           0.6%        0           0.0%          0           0.0%         10          2.8%          4          0.3%
   1.51 Persons or More             80           3.1%        0           0.0%          0           0.0%         40        11.1%          40          2.6%
Subtotal: Renter Occupied        1,195            47%      175          68.6%        125          59.5%       199          55.4%        554         35.4%
Total Households                 2,560           100%      255           100%        210        100.0%        359        100.0%       1,564       100.0%
Notes:
(a) Overcrow ding is defined as more than one person per room. Sever overcrow ding is defined as more than 1.5 persons per room.
(b) Numbers may not add up dur to HUD rounding.
Source: 2006-2010 CHAS dataset.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                       Page 57
Table 18: Housing Cost Burden, City of St. Helena, 2010
                                                   All Incom e        Extrem ely Low -Incom e Very Low -Incom e             Low -Incom e          Moderate and Above
                                                      Levels         (Less than 30% of AMFI) (30% to 50% of AMFI) (50% to 80% of AMFI) (Over 80% of AMFI)
                                                            Percent                  Percent                 Percent                   Percent                  Percent
Ow ner Households                               Number of Total         Number       of Total      Number     of Total   Number        of Total    Number       of Total
   With 0% to 30% Housing Cost Burden               950      37.0%             0         0.0%           15       7.0%         60         15.2%          875       50.7%
   With 30% to 50% Housing Cost Burden              220       8.6%             0         0.0%           20       9.3%         25          6.3%          165        9.6%
   With 50% or Greater Housing Cost Burden          195       7.6%            70       30.4%            30     14.0%          45         11.4%           55        3.2%
Subtotal: Ow ner-Occupied Households 1,365                   53.2%            70        30.4%           60     30.2%         130         32.9%        1,100       63.5%
Renter Households
   With 0% to 30% Housing Cost Burden               645      25.1%            10         4.3%           40     18.6%         110         27.8%          500       29.0%
   With 30% to 50% Housing Cost Burden              205       8.0%            15         6.5%           70     32.6%          40         10.1%           80        4.6%
   With 50% or Greater Housing Cost Burden          345      13.5%           130       56.5%            45     20.9%         115         29.1%           50        2.9%
Subtotal: Renter-Occupied Households              1,200      46.6%           155        67.4%          155     72.1%         265         67.1%          625       36.5%
Total Households                                  2,565       100%           230          98%          215      102%         395          100%        1,725        100%
(a) Figures reported above are based on the HUD-published CHAS data, dervied from the 2006-2010 American Community Survey. CHAS household income
categories reflect HUD-defined household income limits in HUD-specified geographic areas. Cost burden is the ratio of housing costs to household income. A
household is considered cost-burdened if monthly housing costs (including utilities) exceed 30% of monthly income. For renters, housing cost is gross rent
(contract rent plus utilities). For ow ners, housing cost is "select monthly ow ner costs" w hich includes mortgage payment; utilities; association fees; insurance;
and real estate taxes. Numbers may not add up due to HUD rounding of published data.
Sources: CHAS 2006-2010, huduser.org, 2013.
Table 19: Housing Conditions Survey Results for St. Helena, February 2014
                                                                                                                       Need for
                                                                                       Need for                     Significant             Need for Limited
 Housing Type                                 Existing Units (a)              Replacement (b)              Rehabilitation (c)              Rehabilitation (d)
 Single Family Units                                          2,372                             47                           95                              142
 Multi-family Units                                             568                              6                           11                               17
 Total                                                        2,940                             53                          106                              159
 % of Total Units                                             100%                             2%                           4%                               5%
 Notes:
 (a) 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates. Single family units include attached and detached units and
 mobile homes.
 (b) Replacement need is defined as having improvement cost that exceeds estimated replacement cost.
 (c) Significant rehabilitation is defined as having major deficiencies that may require immediate repair.
 (d) Limited rehabilitation is defined as structures exhibiting minor repair need and are not considered to exhibit major safety
 issues.
 Sources: 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5 Year Estimates; City of St. Helena, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                 Page 58
Housing Market Conditions
This section provides information on the private housing market in St. Helena and assesses the
market’s ability to accommodate the housing needs of local residents. Data on recent home sales
and rental rates form the basis of an analysis of the level of income required to afford housing in St.
Helena.
For-Sale Housing
Table 20 supplies detailed information on recent single-family home sales in St. Helena, as well as
estimates of household income levels required to afford units at the reported minimum sales prices.
Of the 77 reported single family sales in 2013, 36 (about 47 percent) involved sale prices over
$1,000,000. Furthermore, only 5 single family homes sold for a price below $600,000 during that
time period. Overall, the median single family housing price over the past year was $960,000 in St.
Helena.
Table 21 shows similar data for single condominium sales in St. Helena in 2013. There were 11
condominium sales, ranging in sales price from a low of $369,000 to a maximum of $825,000, with
a median sales price of $420,000. Five of the condominiums were three-bedroom units, five were
two-bedroom units, and one was a one-bedroom unit.
Table 20 also shows that in order to afford the lowest-priced single family home in St. Helena, a
household must typically have a minimum income of approximately $83,000. Table 21 shows that
a household income of approximately $79,000 is required to buy the lowest-priced condominium.
This is more than the St. Helena median income in 2012 of $71,118 reported in Table 5. The
necessary household income to afford the lowest-priced home also requires, in most cases, two
annual salaries, as reported in Table 8. The minimum annual household income requirement
estimates are based on the assumption of a standard 30-year fixed rate mortgage with a 20 percent
downpayment, a 4.6 percent interest rate, annual property tax rate of 1.08 percent, and an annual
hazard insurance cost of 0.20 percent of the home value. These values represent the market
conditions at one given point in time and will change as local and national economic conditions
           13
fluctuate.
Affordable Home Purchase Prices
Table 22 examines affordability in a different way. Instead of presenting the income required to
buy a market rate house in St. Helena, Table 22 examines how much very low, low, and moderate
income households in St. Helena could afford to pay for housing, along with the corresponding
maximum affordable home price. The assumptions align with those from Tables 20 and 21 except
    13
       Assumptions used for this analysis were collected to represent conditions for a property in the City of St.
    Helena specifically. This analysis allows for a maximum of 30 percent of income to be allocated to housing
    costs, to be consistent with the definition of affordability used in State housing element guidelines.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                         City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                            Page 59

for the down payment percentage, which is 10 percent, modeling a situation that is more typical of
first-time homebuyers who have not amassed sufficient financial resources to make a larger
downpayment. These buyers are more likely to be in need of affordable housing options than the
typical buyers of market rate housing in St. Helena. The lower downpayment amount requires the
owner to buy mortgage insurance.
Given this set of assumptions, in the case of a three-person household, the affordable home price
varies from approximately $156,500 for very low-income, to $240,500 for low-income, and
$376,000 for moderate-income households. The income limits increase with household size, and a
five-person household with very low, low, or moderate income can afford to buy a home priced at
$188,000, $288,500, and $451,500, respectively. Therefore, home prices that are significantly
lower than current market levels would be necessary for lower-income St. Helena households to
purchase a home, while moderate-income households can purchase some condominium and single
family homes at market prices.
Rental Housing
Table 23contains a list of rental complexes containing 509 rental apartments in St. Helena. This
includes substantially all of the existing multifamily complexes within the City. Table 23 then
provides a list of the current apartment rental rates for two of the larger market rate apartment
buildings and various other rental units, including second units, in St. Helena. Rents ranged from
$750 to $1,250 for a studio, $985 to $1,485 for a one bedroom unit, and $700 to $1,750 for a two
bedroom unit. Due to the small sampling size, the analysis also includes data for average apartment
rents in Napa County form RealFacts, a research firm that surveys rental properties with 50 or more
units. RealFacts reports average rents in Napa County in 2013 were $850 for a studio, $1,317 for a
one bedroom, one bathroom unit, and $1,474 for a two bedroom, one bathroom unit.
In addition to apartment complexes, there are also single-family homes for rent in St. Helena.
Craigslist listed three single-family homes for rent in St. Helena in March 2014, with rents
averaging $3,800 per month. A three-bedroom home was listed for $3,100 per month, and a four-
bedroom home for $3,850 per month. A fully furnished, two-bedroom, two-bath house was listed
for $4,500 per month.
Affordable Rental Rates
Based on Napa County 2014 income limits published by HCD, Table 25 calculates affordable
rental rates for households in each income category by household size. These estimates take into
account utility costs provided by the Housing Authority of the City of Napa. Affordable monthly
rents for extremely low-income households are a maximum of $417 for a studio unit, $464 for a
one-bedroom, and $509 for a two-bedroom unit, while affordable rents for very low-income
households are a maximum of $718 for a studio, $807 for a one-bedroom unit, and $895 for a two-
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 60
bedroom unit. Maximum affordable rents for low-income households are $1,118 for a studio,
$1,265 for a one-bedroom, and $1,410 for a two-bedroom unit.
While the studio, one-bedroom, and some of the two-bedroom market rate apartments in St. Helena
are affordable to low-income and a portion of very low-income households, they are in limited
supply. Average apartment rents throughout Napa County are only affordable to low-income
households. In addition, single-family rental units are significantly more expensive and are
affordable only to above moderate-income households.
Affordable Housing Complexes
Table 26 lists affordable housing complexes and units in St. Helena. These include four rental
complexes and four for-sale subdivisions that increase the supply of housing and focus on meeting
the housing needs unmet by the private housing market. The four rental complexes, Hunt’s Grove,
Stonebridge, Woodbridge and Magnolia Oaks, provide 202 units of affordable housing to St.
Helena residents. Hunt’s Grove Apartments currently has 55 families on the wait list and is
                         14
accepting applications. Stonebridge also currently has a significant waiting list with 53 families
waiting for a one-bedroom unit, 36 families for a two-bedroom unit, 12 families for a three-
                                                              15
bedroom unit, and 4 families for a four-bedroom unit. Woodbridge Apartments has 41 families on
                                                                 16
the waiting list at present, and the waiting list is closed. In addition to these complexes, there are
3 regulated affordable apartments.
The four for-sale subdivisions (Marietta Townhomes, Wallis Subdivision, Vintner’s Court, and
Magnolia Oaks) provide 33 affordable for-sale units with deed restrictions. The City of St. Helena
contributed funds to the Marietta townhomes in 1997, including $130,000 in silent second
mortgages and $12,500 in building fees.
In addition, mobile home parks like Vineyard Valley, although not officially regulated as
affordable housing, do represent a housing option in St. Helena that is affordable to moderate
income households.
Summary
The number of housing units in St. Helena increased by an estimated 230 units between 2000 and
2012, driven by an increase in the number of single-family units. Single-family units constituted
74 percent of the total housing units in St. Helena, followed by complexes containing five or more
    14
       Personal communication. Yesenia Guitron, Resident Manager, Hunts Grove Apartments, February 18, 2015.
    15
       Personal communication. Caterina Sanchez, Stonebridge Apartments, February 28, 2014.
    16
       Personal communication. Rachel Fox, Woodbridge Apartments, March 5, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 61

units, which represent approximately 13 percent of total units. The housing stock in St. Helena is
relatively new with a higher percentage of homes built after 1980 than in the Bay Area.
The housing market in St. Helena exhibited an above average vacancy rate. The high rate is
partially attributable to the inclusion of homes held vacant for seasonal, recreational, and
occasional use. After excluding such homes, the vacancy rate in 2012 was about 4.5 percent, which
is lower than in Napa County or the Bay Area. Of occupied homes, almost 5 percent were
overcrowded while the majority of incidences of overcrowding occurred among renter households.
The incidence of excessive or severe housing cost burdens varies among owner and renter
households. For renters, the share of households with excessive or severe housing cost burden was
higher in the lower income categories. However, significant portions of owner households in all
income categories faced high housing cost burdens.
The current market conditions in St. Helena enable only above moderate-income households to
purchase homes. The median price of a St. Helena single family home in 2013 was $960,000,
while the median price of a condominium was $420,000. While some of the market rate apartment
units are affordable to low-income and a portion of very-low income households, the limited
supply of market rate units affordable to very low-income households and below means that
affordable units are necessary to meet the needs households at the lowest income levels. Three
affordable rental and three for-sale housing complexes in St. Helena provide 238 units of
affordable housing.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 62
Table 20: Single-Family Housing Sales Prices, St. Helena, 2013
                              Units (a)              Minim um                         Annual                                   Total    Minim um Annual
                                      Percent           Unit         Dow n        Principal &      Property     Property      Annual   Household Incom e
Unit Sales Price         Number         Total          Price       Paym ent          Interest     Insurance      Taxes      Paym ent    Requirem ent (b)
Under $600,000                   5        6.5%        $400,000       $80,000           $19,935         $643       $4,384       $24,963           $83,209
$600,000 - $649,999              4        5.2%        $600,000      $120,000           $29,903         $965       $6,558       $37,426          $124,752
$650,000 - $699,999              6        7.8%        $650,000      $130,000           $32,395        $1,045      $7,101       $40,541          $135,138
$700,000 - $749,999              7        9.1%        $700,000      $140,000           $34,887        $1,126      $7,645       $43,657          $145,523
$750,000 - $799,999              7        9.1%        $750,000      $150,000           $37,378        $1,206      $8,188       $46,773          $155,909
$800,000 - $849,999              5        6.5%        $800,000      $160,000           $39,870        $1,287      $8,731       $49,888          $166,295
$850,000 - $899,999              3        3.9%        $850,000      $170,000           $42,362        $1,367      $9,275       $53,004          $176,681
$900,000 - $949,999              1        1.3%        $900,000      $180,000           $44,854        $1,448      $9,818       $56,120          $187,066
$950,000 - $999,999              3        3.9%         $950,000     $190,000           $47,346        $1,528     $10,362       $59,236          $197,452
Over $1,000,000                36        46.8%       $1,000,000     $200,000           $49,838        $1,608     $10,905       $62,351          $207,838
Total                          77         100%
Median Single-Fam ily Hom e Price                      $960,000
Notes:
(a) Number of single-family units sold in St. Helena betw een January 1, 2013 and December 30, 2013.
(b) Based upon the minimum unit price w ith the follow ing ow nership cost assumptions:
         Percent of Income for Housing Costs
          (Principal, Interest, Taxes, and Insurance)                    30%       of gross annual income
         Mortgage Terms
           Dow n Payment                                                 20%       of home value
           Annual Interest Rate                                       4.625%       fixed
           Loan Term                                                      30       years
         Annual Property Tax Rate                                   1.0868%        of home value plus        $37
         Annual Hazard Insurance                                       0.20%       of home value (c)
(c) Hazard Insurance includes the basic premium for hazard insurance plus an additional payment for flood insurance.
Sources: Gina Elliot, Pacific Uniton International, 2013; State Farm Insurance, 2008; w w w .bankrate.com, 2013; Wells Fargo, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                          City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                              Page 63
Table 21: Condominium Sales Prices, St. Helena, 2013
                              Units (a)              Minim um                        Annual                                    Total    Minim um Annual
                                      Percent            Unit        Dow n        Principal &     Property     Property       Annual   Household Incom e
Unit Sales Price         Number         Total           Price      Paym ent         Interest     Insurance      Taxes       Paym ent    Requirem ent (b)
Under $400,000                   3       27.3%         $369,000      $73,800          $18,390        $1,357      $4,047        $23,794           $79,313
$400,000 - $449,999              4       36.4%         $600,000     $120,000          $29,903        $2,206      $6,558        $38,666          $128,888
$450,000 - $499,999              1        9.1%         $650,000     $130,000          $32,395        $2,390      $7,101        $41,885          $139,618
$500,000 - $549,999              0        0.0%         $700,000     $140,000          $34,887        $2,573      $7,645        $45,105          $150,348
$550,000 - $599,999              1        9.1%         $750,000     $150,000          $37,378        $2,757      $8,188        $48,324          $161,079
$600,000 - $649,999              0        0.0%         $800,000     $160,000          $39,870        $2,941      $8,731        $51,543          $171,809
$650,000 - $699,999              0        0.0%         $850,000     $170,000          $42,362        $3,125      $9,275        $54,762          $182,539
$700,000 - $749,999              1        9.1%         $900,000     $180,000          $44,854        $3,309      $9,818        $57,981          $193,270
$750,000 - $799,999              0        0.0%         $950,000     $190,000          $47,346        $3,492     $10,362        $61,200          $204,000
Over $800,000                    1        9.1%       $1,000,000     $200,000          $49,838        $3,676     $10,905        $64,419          $214,731
Total                          11         100%
Median Condom inium Price             $420,000
Notes:
(a) Number of single-family units sold in St. Helena betw een January 1, 2013 and December 30, 2013.
(b) Based upon the minimum unit price w ith the follow ing ow nership cost assumptions:
         Percent of Income for Housing Costs
          (Principal, Interest, Taxes, and Insurance)                    30%      of gross annual income
         Mortgage Terms
           Dow n Payment                                                 20%      of home value
           Annual Interest Rate                                       4.625%      fixed
           Loan Term                                                      30      years
         Annual Property Tax Rate                                   1.0868%       of home value plus        $37
         Annual Hazard Insurance                                       0.46%      of home value (c)
(c) Hazard Insurance includes the basic premium for hazard insurance plus an additional payment for flood insurance.
Sources: Gina Elliot, Pacific Uniton International, 2013; State Farm Insurance, 2008; w w w .bankrate.com, 2013; Wells Fargo, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                          City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                             Page 64
Table 22: Affordable For-Sale Housing Prices, Napa County, 2014
                                  Household Size      Household Size Household Size
2014 Incom e Lim its (a)             3-Persons          4-Persons          5-Persons
Very Low -Income                            $38,750           $43,050           $46,500
Low -Income                                 $59,350           $65,900           $71,200
Moderate-Income                             $92,950          $103,300         $111,550
                                                                                                                                                   Maxim um
                                  Am ount Avail.        Principal &         Property         Property     Mortgage  Total Monthly        Dow n-   Affordable
3-Person Household                  for Housing           Interest         Insurance          Taxes      Insurance    Paym ent         Paym ent   Hom e Price
 Very Low -Income                             $969               $724               $26          $145          $70          $966          $15,650    $156,500
 Low -Income                                $1,484            $1,113                $40          $221         $108        $1,482          $24,050    $240,500
 Moderate-Income                            $2,324            $1,740                $63          $344         $169        $2,316          $37,600    $376,000
                                                                                                                                                   Maxim um
                                  Am ount Avail.        Principal &         Property         Property     Mortgage  Total Monthly        Dow n-   Affordable
4-Person Household                  for Housing           Interest         Insurance          Taxes      Insurance    Paym ent         Paym ent   Hom e Price
 Very Low -Income                           $1,076               $805               $29          $161          $78        $1,073          $17,400    $174,000
 Low -Income                                $1,648            $1,238                $45          $245         $120        $1,648          $26,750    $267,500
 Moderate-Income                            $2,583            $1,934                $70          $382         $188        $2,574          $41,800    $418,000
                                                                                                                                                   Maxim um
                                  Am ount Avail.        Principal &         Property         Property     Mortgage  Total Monthly        Dow n-   Affordable
5-Person Household                  for Housing           Interest         Insurance          Taxes      Insurance    Paym ent         Paym ent   Hom e Price
 Very Low -Income                           $1,163               $870               $31          $173          $85        $1,159          $18,800    $188,000
 Low -Income                                $1,780            $1,335                $48          $264         $130        $1,777          $28,850    $288,500
 Moderate-Income                            $2,789            $2,089                $76          $412         $203        $2,780          $45,150    $451,500
Ow nership Cost Assum ptions
% of Income for Housing Costs                                     30% of gross annual income
Mortgage Terms
 Dow n Payment                                                    10% of home value
 Annual Interest Rate                                         4.625%  fixed
 Loan Term                                                         30 years
Annual Mortgage Insurance                                       0.60% of mortgage
Annual property tax rate                                     1.0868%  of home value plus          $37
Annual Hazard Insurance                                         0.20% of home value
Note:
(a) Income limits defined by the California Department of Housing and Community Development for Napa County.
Sources: HCD, 2013; State Farm Insurance, 2008; Wells Fargo, 2013; w w w .bankrate.com, 2013; Napa County Treasurer-Tax Collector, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                Page 65
Table 23: Multi-Family Housing Survey Results for St. Helena, February 2014
                                                     Year Built/       Num ber
     Com plex Nam e                Address           Renovated         of Units       Zoning (a)
Affordable Housing Units
Stonebridge Apartments         990 College Ave      1993                   80         HR
Hunts Grove Apartments         548 Hunt St.         1992                   56         HR
Woodbridge Apts.               727 Hunt Ave         1980/2013              50         HR
Wydow n Hotetl                 1421 Railroad Avenue                         1         CB
Magnolia Oaks                                       2013                   10         HR
Hunt St. Apts.                 957 Hunt                                     2         MR
SUBTOTAL UNITS                                                            199
Market Rate Apartments
Unknow n                       957 Hunt             1880                    6         MR
Christine Apartments           723 Hunt             1971                    4         MR
Unknow n                       933 Brow n St.       Unknow n                4         HR
Cottages at Southbridge        1000 Brow n St       1997                   17         HR
Charter House                  1026 Charter Oak     Unknow n                5         MR
Unknow n                       1332 Main St.        Unknow n               12         CB
Tripoli Court Apartments       1600 Main St.        Unknow n               18         MR
Unknow n                       1520/1536 Main St.   1976                    8         MR
Unknow n                       1650 Main            Unknow n                5         MR
Unknow n                       1095 Crinella        1972                    7         MR
Unknow n                       825 Allison          Unknow n                4         MR
Unknow n                       1018 Allison         1965                   12         HR
Silverado Orchards             601 Pope             Unknow n               94         HR
Unknow n                       911 Pope             Unknow n                5         MR
Ogletree Apartments            1005 Pope            Unknow n                5         HR
Ogletree Apartments            999 Pope             Unknow n              28          HR
Unknow n                       1043 Pope            Unknow n                5         MR
Unknow n                       1112 Edw ards        1940                    4         MR
Unknow n                       1133 Edw ards        1888                    5         MR
Unknow n                       1145 Edw ards        Unknow n                4         MR
Unknow n                       1313 Monte Vista     1969                    6         MR
Unknow n                       1327 Monte Vista     Unknow n                6         MR
Unknow n                       1328 Monte Vista     1980                    4         MR
Unknow n                       1336 Monte Vista     Unknow n                6         MR
Unknow n                       1337 Monte Vista     1973                    8         MR
Unknow n                       1346 Monte Vista     Unknow n                4         MR
Unknow n                       1347 Monte Vista     1972                    6         MR
Unknow n                       1356 Monte Vista     Unknow n                6         MR
Unknow n                       1357 Monte Vista     1972                    6         MR
Unknow n                       1366 Monte Vista     1972                    6         MR
SUBTOTAL UNITS                                                            310
TOTAL UNITS                                                               509
(a) MR = Medium Density Residential, HR = High Density Residential, CB = Central Business.
Source: City of St. Helena, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 66
Table 24: Market-Rate Apartment Rental Rates, St. Helena, 2014
 Developm ent/Address                           Units        Studio     1 Bedroom       2 Bedroom s
 Tripoli Court/1600 Main Street                       18                                         $700
 Cottages at Southbridge/1000 Brow n St.              17                                $1,450-$1,650
 1133 Edw ards St.                                     5                      $1,385          $1,650
                                                                                 $985
                                                                              $1,285
                                                                              $1,485
 1145 Edw ards St.                                     4                                      $1,550
                                                                                              $1,200
                                                                                              $1,685
                                                                                              $1,725
 957 Hunt                                              6                      $1,295
 630 Sunnyside Road (a)                                1       $1,150
 Rosebud Lane (a)                                      1                                      $1,750
 Pratt Avenue (a)                                      1       $1,250
 Monte Vista (a)                                       1                                      $1,595
 Second unit; address not available (a)                1         $750
 Second unit; address not available (a)                1       $1,150
 Second unit; address not available (a)                1                      $1,350
 Unit in 5-Plex Building (a)                           1                      $1,150
 Average Rent, Napa County (b)                                   $850         $1,317          $1,425 (c)
                                                                                              $1,474 (d)
                                                                                              $1,736 (e)
 (a) Rents as advertised on Criaglist, February-March 2014.
 (b) Average rents for 2013 for Napa County as reported by RealFacts.
 (c) Tw o bedroom tow nhouse.
 (d) Tw o bedroom, one bathroom unit.
 (e) Tw o bedroom, tw o bathroom unit.
 Source: RealFacts, 2013; Craigslist, 2014; Christine O'Rourke Community Planning, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 67
Table 25: Affordable Rents, Napa County, 2014
                                                                               Incom e Lim its/Household Size
Year/Incom e Category (a)           1 Person         2 Person         3 Person       4 Person       5 Person        6 Person   7 Person          8 Person
2014: Median $86,100
   Extremely Low -Income                $18,100        $20,700          $23,300        $25,850        $27,950          $30,000    $32,100          $34,150
   Very Low -Income                     $30,150        $34,450          $38,750        $43,050        $46,500          $49,950    $53,400          $56,850
   Low -Income                          $46,150        $52,750          $59,350        $65,900        $71,200          $76,450    $81,750          $87,000
   Median Income                        $60,250        $68,900          $77,500        $86,100        $93,000          $99,900   $106,750         $113,650
   Moderate-Income                      $72,300        $82,650          $92,950       $103,300       $111,550        $119,850    $128,100         $136,350
                                                                             Unit Size
Affordable Rents (b)                   Studio       1-Bedroom       2-Bedroom       3-Bedroom      4-Bedroom
Extrem ely Low -Incom e
   1-Person                                $417
   2-Person                                                $464
   3-Person                                                                $509
   4-Person                                                                               $554
   5-Person                                                                                               $587
Very Low -Incom e
   1-Person                                $718
   2-Person                                                $807
   3-Person                                                                $895
   4-Person                                                                               $984
   5-Person                                                                                            $1,051
Low -Incom e
   1-Person                              $1,118
   2-Person                                              $1,265
   3-Person                                                              $1,410
   4-Person                                                                             $1,556
   5-Person                                                                                            $1,668
Moderate-Incom e
   1-Person                              $1,772
   2-Person                                              $2,012
   3-Person                                                              $2,250
   4-Person                                                                             $2,491
   5-Person                                                                                            $2,677
Included Utilities (c)                      $83             $84             $93           $102            $110
Notes:
(a) Income limits are 2014 California Department of Housing and Community Development income limits for Napa County.
(b) Affordable rents equal 30 percent of gross monthly income minus a utility allow ance derived from figures released by the Housing Authority of the City
of Napa for 2013. Allow ances include electricity for heating, cooking, w ater heating and other electric. Househeold size approirate for unit size as defined
by California Health and Safety Code 50052.5(h).
(c) Included utilities represents utility costs normally included in rent. These are w ater, sew er and trash collection.
Sources: HCD, 2014; City of Napa Housing Division, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                              City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                        Page 68
Table 26: Affordable Housing Developments, St. Helena
                                                                     Bedroom s/
                                              Affordable             Bathroom s          Special    Current                                                     Affordability
Project Nam e                 Address             Units                  Units           Needs       Ow ner                Funding Sources             Status  Requirem ent
Rental Housing
  Hunts Grove             548 Hunt Ave.             56          14- 1 Bdr/ 1 Bath        n.a.      Bridge       9% Tax Credit Equity; Residential      Active Low and
                                                                28 - 2 Bdr/1 Bath                  Housing      Housing Construction Program; Bank            Very Low
                                                                 14 - 3 Bdr/2 Bath                              of America, First Nationw ide Bank,           Income
                                                                                                                City of St. Helena, First Financial           Households
                                                                                                                Management.
  Stonebridge Apts.       990 College Ave.          80          8 - 1 Bdr/1Bath          n.a.      EAH          9% Tax Credit Equity; HCD; Residential Active Low and
                                                                36 - 2 Bdr/1 Bath                  Nonprofit    Housing Construction Program; City            Very Low
                                                                28 - 3 Bdr/2 Bath                  Housing      of St. Helena; Federal Home Loan              Income
                                                                8 - 4 Bdr/2 Bath                   Corporation  Bank, Affordable Housing Program.             Households
  Woodbridge Apts.        727 Hunt Ave.             50          48-1 Bdr/1 Bath          Senior    Woodbridge   CHFA, Section 8                        Active Very
                                                                2 - 2Bdr/1 Bath          Citizens  RAL                                                        Low Income
                                                                     Bedroom s/
  Magnolia Oaks           Rose Street               10          2 Bdr Apartments         n.a       n.a.         Developer Financed                     Active Low (4) and Mod.
                                                     6          1 Bdr Second Units                                                                            Income (6);
                                                                                                   Wydow n
 Wydow n Hotel            1421 Railroad Ave.         1          1 Bdr                              Hotel        Developer Financed                     Active Very Low Income
  Hunt St. Apts.          957 Hunt Street            2          Studio                   n.a.      Jack Ibrahim Ow ner Financed                        Active Very Low Income
For-Sale
  Wallis Subdivision      Voorhees Circle           19          2 Bdr/2 Bath             n.a.      n.a.         Developer Financed                     Active Moderate Income
  Marietta Tow nhomes     Voorhees Circle           11          Unknow n                 n.a.      n.a.         Napa Valley Community; City of St.     Active Moderate Income
                                                                                                                Helena
  Sherw in                1012 Allison Ave.          1          4 Bdr Single Family      n.a.      n.a.         Developer Financed                     Active Moderate Income
  Magnolia Oaks           Rosebud Lane               2          3 Bdr Single Family      n.a       n.a          Developer Financed                     Active Moderate Income
Sources: City of St. Helena, Planning Department, 2014; City of Napa Housing Division, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                        Page 69
Special Needs Populations
California Government Code Section 65583 (a) (7) requires an analysis of any special housing
needs, “such as those of the elderly, persons with disabilities, large families, farm workers, families
                                                                                                          17
with female heads of household, and families and persons in need of emergency shelter.” This
section provides estimates of the prevalence of each of these special needs populations, discusses
special housing concerns, and analyzes their housing cost burdens within St. Helena to the extent
that available data allows. Data sources include the 2000 Census, the 2012 American Community
Survey, the California Department of Finance (DoF), the HUD CHAS dataset, California
Employment Development Department (EDD), and the Napa County Continuum of Care.
Persons with Disabilities
Disabilities can take many forms and have numerous implications for housing needs. Many
disabled people can live in conventional housing without any modifications, or with only minor
modifications, while some disabled people require substantial modifications and/or on-site care to
facilitate everyday living. Accessible units can be more expensive to build, due to features such as
ramps, extra wide doors, handrails, lowered counters, raised toilets, and a variety of other
accessibility elements. Compared to the general population, disabled persons are more likely to
                                               18
live alone, earn less, and be homeless.
Table 27 presents data on the estimated number of disabled persons in St. Helena, Napa County,
and the Bay Area. The 2012 estimates are 5-year estimates based on the 2008-2012 American
Community Survey. Around 640 disabled persons over the age of five lived in St. Helena in 2012.
This includes approximately 30 persons between the ages of 5 and 17, 196 between the ages of 18
and 64, and 411 persons age 65 and older. St. Helena and Napa County have almost the same
percentage of disabled persons (around 11 to 12 percent of the total population), which is slightly
higher than the Bay Area disabled population of approximately 10 percent of the total population.
In St. Helena and Napa County, a higher concentration of disabled persons exists among persons in
the age 65 and over category, relative to the Bay Area. About 11 percent of the population over the
age of 18 in St. Helena and Napa County are disabled, compared to 9 percent in the Bay Area. In
St. Helena, the age 65 and over group features a concentration of sensory disabilities and cognitive,
ambulatory and independent living difficulties. Furthermore, high rates of hearing, vision, and
ambulatory difficulties account for a large part of the 18 to 64 disabled population.
     17
        California Government Code Section 65583 (a) (7) at http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-
     bin/displaycode?section=gov&group=65001-66000&file=65580-65589.8, Accessed February 7, 2014.
     18
        Tootelian, Dennis, and Gaedeke, Ralph. “The Impact of Housing Availability, Accessibility, and
     Affordability on People with Disabilities”. Sacramento, CA: State Independent Living Council. April, 1999.
     As cited in the Analysis of Senate Bill 1025.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 70

There are a number of organizations that provide information and services to disabled people in St.
Helena. The Disability Services and Legal Center provides information about no-cost installation
of ramps, lifts, grab-bars, and other devices to assist disabled people to have access in their homes.
Buckelew Programs assists people with serious mental illness to live as independently as possible,
and Catholic Charities helps to find shelter, counseling, and services for those with chronic
disabilities. Family Service of Napa Valley and Progress Foundation provide supportive housing
and services for mentally disabled adults. The North Bay Housing Coalition provides information,
support, and affordable housing to persons with developmental disabilities. Becoming Independent
provides services to assist people with developmental disabilities who wish to live on their own.
Additional resources may be found on the Fair Housing Napa Valley website.
Residential care facilities for the elderly in St. Helena include the Vintage Chalet, Crinella Home
Care, Rosehaven, and St. Helena Home Care. These facilities provide a total of 52 beds.
Persons Living with Developmental Disabilities
A person with a developmental disability has a substantial disability that originates during
childhood and can be expected to continue through adulthood. Developmental disabilities include
mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional
housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment
where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional
environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental
disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally
disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of
independence as an adult.
The State Department of Developmental Services currently provides community-based services to
approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities through a statewide system of
facilities. The North Bay Regional Center provides point of entry to services for people with
developmental disabilities in Napa, Sonoma and Solano counties. The center is a private, non-profit
community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to
individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. The Center reports that there are a
total of 31 individuals with developmental disabilities in the 94574 zip code area, distributed
among age groups as follows: 15 children aged 14 years and under; 5 persons aged 15 to 22 years;
11 adults aged 23-65 years; and no adults aged 65.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 71

There are a number of housing types appropriate for people living with a development disability:
rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary housing, Section
8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB 962 homes. The design of
housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity to services and transit, and the availability of
group living opportunities represent some of the types of considerations that are important in
serving this need group. Incorporating ‘barrier-free’ design in all, new multifamily housing (as
required by California and Federal Fair Housing laws) is especially important to provide the widest
range of choices for disabled residents. Special consideration should also be given to the
affordability of housing, as people with disabilities may be living on a fixed income.
Elderly
The elderly population often requires special housing to accommodate part-time or full time care.
Meanwhile, the elderly are also more likely to have lower incomes than the population in general.
Other requirements can include modifications to doors and steps to improve accessibility and
installation of hand rails and grab bars to make bathing, toileting, and other daily activities safer.
Housing types such as apartments or condominiums that do not entail high maintenance
requirements can also be beneficial as the elderly continue to age and become less able to perform
extensive home maintenance work on their own. The elderly are also commonly on fixed incomes
while expending more of their income on medical care, which can result in a need for affordable
housing.
Elderly Households
Table 28 presents data for 2000 and 2012 for age of householder. Table 28 is different from Table
4 in that Table 4 presents the age of all residents while Table 28 presents the age of the person
whose name the unit is owned or rented under.
St. Helena, similar to Napa County, had a higher percentage of residents over the age of 65
compared to the Bay Area. Around 35 percent of St. Helena households, 26 percent in Napa
County, and 20 percent of Bay Area households had heads of households over the age of 65 in
2012. Across all three jurisdictions, more elderly households owned rather than rented their
homes.
In 2012, among owner-occupied St. Helena households there are 372 households (about 14 percent
of total households) with a head of household between the ages of 65 and 74, and 305 households
(11 percent of total households) with a householder age 75 and older. A smaller number of elderly
households in St. Helena live in rental units, with 76 households (almost 3 percent of total
households) having a householder between ages 65 and 74, and about 190 households (7 percent of
total households) with a head of household age 75 and older. Napa County had a lower percentage
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 72

of elderly owner-occupied households, with nearly 10.5 percent of total households with a head of
household between the ages of 65 and 74, and 10 percent of total households headed by an
individual age 75 or older. Napa County also had a lower percentage of elderly renter households,
with 2.5 percent and 2.9 percent of total households headed by a householder aged 65 to 74 or age
75 and older, respectively. The Bay Area had lower percentages of both owner-occupied
households with householders aged 65 to 74 (about 8 percent of total households), with
householders age 75 or older (nearly 7 percent of total households) as compared to St. Helena and
Napa. For renter households, 2.6 percent of total Bay Area households had a head of household
between the ages of 65 and 74, and 2.7 percent were headed by a person age 75 or older.
Additional data from the 2010 Census reveal that St. Helena has a somewhat disproportionate
number of females over the age of 64. In 2010, there were about 440 males (about 8 percent of the
total population) and 680 females (approximately 12 percent of the total population) over the age of
64. In Napa, the population over age 64 is comprised of the 9,200 males (about 7 percent of the
total population) and 11,400 females (just over 8 percent of the total population). Therefore, the
percentage of females over the age of 64 is slightly higher in St. Helena than in Napa.
Elderly Housing Cost Burden
Table 29 contains information from the 2010 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
(CHAS) database. Elderly households, which the CHAS database defines as households with at
least one person over the age of 62, are again much more likely to be owner households (71 percent
of total elderly households) than renter households (29 percent of total elderly households). The
majority of elderly households (58 percent) have affordable housing costs, which is defined as
housing cost burdens of less than 30 percent. Twelve percent of elderly households have excessive
housing costs (defined as paying more than 30 percent but less than 50 percent of household
income for housing costs), while 28 percent have severe housing cost burdens and pay more than
50 percent of their household income on housing costs.
In comparison to Table 18, which shows the number of total households in St. Helena with high
housing cost burdens, approximately 45 percent of all households with housing cost burdens are
elderly. All of the extremely low and very low income owner households in St. Helena with
excessive or severe housing cost burdens are elderly, while approximately 37 percent of the
extremely low and very low income renter households are elderly.
Among low income households with excessive or severe housing cost burdens, 57 percent of owner
households and 26 percent of renter households are elderly. Among moderate and above income
households with excessive or severe housing cost burdens, 32 percent of owner households with
excessive are elderly, while half of renter households are elderly.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 73
Additional Elderly Housing Needs
Given the high proportion of the St. Helena households that are elderly, especially elderly age 75
and older, it is important to work to address their housing needs. In her work with the Area
Agency on Aging serving Napa and Solano Counties, planner Terry Leeanne Martinson identified
a number of needs of the elderly in St. Helena that are currently being met as well as those needs
                                                                                             19
which St. Helena could help meet during this Housing Element planning period. Ms. Martinson
cited the work of the Rianda house, which provides seniors with a meeting place and valuable
information on topics ranging from housing and income-assistance to medical referrals, as a
welcome and positive resource for the elderly in St. Helena.
There are still many needs of the elderly that are not being met, however, and changes to St.
Helena’s housing policies could make it easier for the elderly to age in place. Often, when the
elderly persons are released from a hospital stay and return to their own homes, they have trouble
navigating inside the home and getting to neighborhood services like the grocery store and doctor’s
office. Two possible ways to help remedy this situation within the scope of the Housing Element
would be for the City of St. Helena to consider the proximity to public transportation, paratransit
routes, and local services when approving senior housing, and to adopt design standards for new
residential construction that would ensure accessibility.
Certain design strategies incorporated into the City’s policies and programs concerning new and
existing housing can help prevent falls. For example, incorporating features detailed in AB 1400
can help reduce falls and accommodate the needs of people of all ages and abilities. Examples
include:
·      zero-step entrances                              ·       grab bars near toilets and bath/shower
·      accessible first floor bathrooms                 ·       reinforced handrails on stairs and ramps
·      wider doorways                                   ·       accessible kitchen appliances, shelving
·      no step bathtubs and showers                     ·       more energy efficient, brighter lighting
Additional policies and programs that the City should consider include zoning that encourages
families to use options such as Accessory Dwelling Units to accommodate their aging relatives or
caregivers. Such policies could also provide for more elder-friendly neighborhoods, improved
lighting to increase visibility, and safe sidewalks and walking paths. For example, sidewalks that
allow for safe tree root growth, such as sidewalk materials made of rubber (used in Santa Barbara
and other communities) would help improve pedestrian safety.
    19
       Personal Communication. Leeanne Martinson, Planner, Area Agency on Aging. February 26, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 74

Large Households
The U.S. Census defines a large family as one containing five or more related members. The
California Department of Housing and Community Development recommends using this definition
                     20
of a large family. As displayed in Table 30, all large households in St. Helena are family
households, and there were 120 large family households in 2012, representing just over 4 percent
of all households.
As of 2000, St. Helena had about 255 large households, including only one non-family large
household, representing close to 11 percent of the total households in St. Helena. By 2012, the
numbers of large households fell by nearly half. This decrease in large families was offset
primarily by an increase in two-person family households, which increased by 51 percent. This led
the percent of large family households to increase to nearly 12 percent in 2008. The share of large
households in St. Helena in 2012 is much smaller than that of Napa County (just over 12 percent)
and the Bay Area (about 11 percent).
Large Family Housing Cost Burden
Table 31 presents the housing cost burdens for large family households in St. Helena by tenure.
The total number of large family households in Table 30 (190 households) derived from HUD-
published 2010 CHAS data is higher than the estimate presented in Table 28 (120 households),
which is derived from 2012 American Community Survey estimates. Across all income levels, the
majority of large households (53 percent of large family households) have affordable housing
costs.
About 45 percent of large households have excessive housing cost burdens, while no large
households experience severe housing cost burdens. Moreover, there are no large households with
extremely low-incomes in St. Helena, and no large households with very low income households
who own their own home. On the other hand, all of the very-low income large households who
rent their homes (15 households) and all of the low-income large households (40 households) have
excessive housing costs burdens. The majority of large households with moderate and above
incomes have affordable housing costs, while approximately 22 percent of these households have
excessive housing cost burdens.
A comparison of all the housing cost burdens for all households in St. Helena from Table 18 with
the housing cost burdens of large families indicates that a disproportionate share of low-income
households with excessive cost burdens are large households. Half of low-income renter
    20
       California Department of Housing and Community Development. Building Blocks for an Effective Housing
    Element: Special Needs, Large and Female-Headed Households.
    http://hcd.ca.gov/hpd/housing_element2/SHN_lfhhouses.php. Accessed on February 7, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                   Page 75
households and 80 percent of low-income owner households with excessive housing costs are large
households.
Single Female-Headed Households with Children
Single female-headed households with children tend to have a higher need for affordable housing
compared to family households in general. In 2012, the poverty rate of female-householder
families nationally 31.8 percent, which was still significantly above the poverty rate of all families
                                                  21
(11.8 percent) and married couples (5.8 percent). In addition, single female-headed households
with children are more likely to need childcare since the mother is often the sole source of income
and the sole caregiver for children within the family.
The information provided in Table 32 is from the 2000 Census and the 2012 American Community
Survey. In 2012, the percent of single-female headed households with children in St. Helena (4.7
percent of total households) was slightly less than the percentages calculated in both Napa County
(4.9 percent) and the Bay Area (5.4 percent). The total number of households in the City of St.
Helena rose by 332 households between 2000 and 2012, while the number of single female-headed
households declined by 27 households.
Among St. Helena single-female households in 2012, the entire share of households were renter
households (127 households). Napa County and the Bay Area have a higher percentage of owner
households (1.7 and 1.8 percent of total households, respectively) and a lower percentage of renter
households (3.2 and 3.7 percent of total households, respectively) compared to St. Helena.
Farmworkers
Vineyards in and around St. Helena employ both full-time and seasonal farmworkers. According
to the 2013 American Community Survey, there are approximately 162 people employed in the
agriculture forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining industries in St. Helena. Of these workers,
approximately 107 people are employed in natural resources, construction and maintenance
occupations. Therefore, the City estimates the resident farmworker population in St. Helena as 107
people. The Department of Education reports there are 55 children of migrant farmworkers
attending St. Helena schools.
While the City does not have information on the number of farmworkers who work in St. Helena,
the Association of Bay Area Governments estimates 878 people hold agriculture and natural
resource jobs in St. Helena. Extrapolating from countywide data, the City estimates there are
     21
        2012 American Community Survey.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 76
approximately 700 farmworker jobs in St. Helena, and about 175 of these jobs are held by migrant
farmworkers.
Data on the conditions of farmworkers specifically residing in St. Helena are not available;
therefore, information regarding farmworkers in Napa County is used to examine the conditions in
St. Helena. The housing needs of full-time, permanent farmworkers is very similar to those of
other low-income households, however the additional seasonal workers who are only employed
during harvest time need short-term affordable housing options.
Four data sources provide statistics on the number of farmworkers in Napa County: the California
Employment Development Department (EDD), a 2007 study by the California Institute for Rural
Studies, a 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment, and the U. S. Department
of Agriculture 2012 Census of Agriculture. The EDD provided the information presented in Table
32. Over the 15 19 years from 1993 through 2012, Table 33 indicates that Napa County farm
employment continually fluctuated, but overall farm employment has risen by 1,400 jobs over the
period. In 1993, farm employment was 3,400 and farm employment peaked at 5,300 in 2002.
Since 2001, it remained relatively consistent, registering employment of 4,800 in 2012. The U.S.
Department of Agriculture reports significantly higher numbers of farmworkers in Napa County; in
2012, the Department estimates there were 9,857 farmworkers in Napa, and 2,676 of these were
migrant farmworkers, or approximately 27 percent.
Napa County completed an extensive assessment of farmworker housing needs in Napa County in
2012. Table 34 presents an estimate of the total farmworkers in Napa County from the assessment.
Workers are categorized by employment period. A “regular worker” works seven months or more
a year, a “seasonal worker” between three and six months a year, and a “harvest worker” less than
three months a year. As of 2012, Napa County employed 4,800 farmworkers, including 2,400
regular workers, 1,200 seasonal workers, and 1,200 harvest workers.
The California Institute for Rural Studies completed an extensive assessment of farmworker
housing needs in Napa County in 2007. The Institute completed a survey of agricultural
employers, interviewed farmworkers and others with knowledge of farmworker housing needs,
conducted focus groups, and gathered additional data from secondary data sources. The Institute’s
face-to-face interviews with farmworkers revealed that during the week, 46 percent of farmworkers
stay in apartments, 40 percent in homes, 5 percent in labor centers, 4 percent in garages, 3 percent
                                                     22
in motels, and the final 2 percent in trailers. The interview questions also covered the amount of
money that farmworkers spend on housing and Table 35 summarizes the results. The majority of
farmworkers (87 percent) rent housing units. Accompanied farmworkers, those with a spouse
    22
       California Institute for Rural Studies “An Assessment of the Demand for Farm Worker Housing in Napa
    County” March, 2007. (Pg. 15).
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 77

and/or children, reported paying $319 per adult for rental housing compared to $218 per adult for
                              23
unaccompanied adults. Among survey respondents living in Napa County, the rent rises to $345
for accompanied and $254 for unaccompanied farmworkers. In addition to the rental costs listed
above, 55 percent of respondents who live in apartments indicated that they had to pay extra money
to cover utilities, which averaged $66 dollars per month. Those farmworkers who own their own
homes (11 percent of survey respondents) reported average monthly mortgage costs of $2,167 plus
an additional $225 for utilities.
The 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment found that the monthly rent paid
by farmworkers and the family members with whom they live ranges from $100 to $4,200, with an
average of $648.
Table 35 provides information on the income of farmworkers, to assess the affordability of housing
units. This data also comes from the 2007 California Institute for Rural Studies report. The
average income is categorized by farmworker occupation with general laborers annually earning
$15,745, specialized laborers $26,317, and foremen or supervisors $37,000. These income levels
rise when taking into account the income of other members of farmworker households, with
general laborers, specialized laborers, and foremen or supervisors’ reporting average household
incomes of $19,122, $33,268, and $50,294, respectively. Given these levels of income, the
Institute study calculated “that housing costs represent 23 percent of gross annual income.
Nonetheless, rental costs are 35% of income when remittances are subtracted from gross household
            24
income.” This suggests that, at least among the sample of farmworkers surveyed, housing costs
are at or above the affordability levels, indicating continued need for additional affordable housing
for farmworkers or for other types of assistance to farmworker households.
Five different kinds of housing exist for farmworkers in Napa County: farmworker centers, owned
and operated by the Napa County Housing Authority (NCHA); private accommodations designated
for agriculture employees that accommodate five or more employees and are monitored by the
Department of Environmental Management; private accommodations designated as farm labor
dwellings accommodating less than five residents, private apartments or other housing rented or
owned by farmworkers; and affordable housing projects subsidized by the County and by
incorporated cities, some of which have units set aside specifically for farmworker households.
The NCHA currently owns three public farmworker centers in Napa County: Calistoga, River
Ranch, and Mondavi. The Calistoga Farm Labor Center is located approximately halfway between
     23
        California Institute for Rural Studies “An Assessment of the Demand for Farm Worker Housing in Napa
     County” March, 2007. (Pg. 16).
     24
        California Institute for Rural Studies “An Assessment of the Demand for Farm Worker Housing in Napa
     County” March, 2007. (Pg. 26).
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 78

Calistoga and St. Helena, River Ranch Farm Labor Center is located just south of St. Helena, and
Mondavi Farm Labor Center is located southeast of Yountville. Only unaccompanied persons can
live at the three public farm labor centers; they are designed to serve short-term male residents and
are not designed to address the housing needs of year round residents. Each center has 60 beds (two
beds per room), for a total of 180 beds. These public farmworker centers charge $12 per night,
which includes lodging and three meals per day. None of these centers is open year round; each is
closed for portions of the period from November to February, when the demand for labor goes
down. However, the months during which they close are staggered, such that at least one of the
centers is open during any given month of the year. On average, between 2007 and 2012, the
Calistoga center has been closed for 52 days/year, the River Ranch center has been closed for 42
                                                                                        25
days/year, and the Mondavi center has been closed for 86 days per year.
The 2007 California Institute for Rural Studies report indicated that the existing farm labor centers
addressed the needs of about five percent of the farmworkers in the County. Across the three
centers, the occupancy rate did not reach 100 percent in fiscal year 2004-2005, and the occupancy
                                                                             26
rate was below 50 percent in many of the non-summer months. However, the results of the 2012
Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment (the 2012 assessment) indicate that the
occupancy rates achieved by these farmworker centers between 2007 and 2012, factoring in the
months that centers are closed, ranged between 53 percent and 69 percent, exhibiting a tendency
toward higher occupancy rates in recent years. The 2012 assessment also indicates that peak
demand occurs between May and October, during which time occupancy rates tend to exceed 70
percent and surpassed 90 percent in 2012. Interviews with center managers found that the River
Ranch center, located closest to St. Helena, often achieves full occupancy and has had to turn away
individuals on certain occasions during peak months. Center managers found that the River Ranch
center also tends to have a higher proportion of such “year round” residents than the other two
          27
centers.
Interviews conducted in the 2012 assessment point to a perceived increase in the number of
farmworkers who work in Napa County year-round from 50 percent to approximately 75 percent in
                28
recent years. Napa County vineyard workers earn 30 percent more per hour and are more likely to
     25
        BAE Urban Economics “Final Report: 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment” March,
     2013. (Pg. 27).
     26
        California Institute for Rural Studies “An Assessment of the Demand for Farm Worker Housing in Napa
     County” March, 2007. (Pg. 4).
     27
        BAE Urban Economics “Final Report: 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment” March,
     2013. (Pg. 29).
     28
        BAE Urban Economics “Final Report: 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment” March,
     2013. (Pg. 13).
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 79

                                                                                                     29
be employed full time than the average agricultural worker in other areas of the state. Demand
for year-round housing options is likely to be particularly strong for the higher skilled and higher
paid farmworkers. An increasing number of farmworkers are choosing to reside in Napa County on
a permanent or semi-permanent basis, which increases the need for farmworker household types
that are local and affordable and that are not only available for single men. Stakeholders
interviewed also concluded that between 50 and 80 percent of Napa County’s farm labor force has
                                                                                           30
a permanent place of residence outside of Napa County but inside California.
The City of St. Helena Housing Committee conducted a survey of individuals who work within the
City, seeking to learn about their current housing situation and preferences. The survey results
indicate that only 1 in 4 of the survey respondents who work in St. Helena also live within the City
limits. Importantly, 3 out of 4 of the respondents would prefer to live within the City. In addition,
local Latino workers who responded to the survey were more likely to be renters, live down valley
or outside Napa County, have less income, and live in larger households. Though it is likely that
few farmworkers live in the City of St. Helena, the survey findings confirm the trend of lower
                                                                                                         31
income Latino workers choosing longer commutes in order to secure affordable housing.
Of the employer providers of private unlicensed farm labor dwellings, only 30 percent of the 2012
assessment survey respondents indicated that they provided housing for at least some of their
employees. They also indicated that their worker housing is usually totally occupied during both
                                   32
peak season and off-season.           In Napa County, 3 of the 7 employer-provided private licensed farm
                                                                           33
labor dwellings are located in St. Helena, for a total of 39 beds. Recent research on statewide
farmworker housing trends has found that one of the most significant changes in the farm labor
housing market has been the precipitous decline in the number of employer-owned centers, a
                                                                         34
finding that is consistent with the experience of Napa County. Many survey respondents who
     29
        Yetman, Robert. March 2009. Napa Valley Wine Industry Wages & Benefits. Prepared for the Napa Valley
     Grape Growers Association.
     30
        BAE Urban Economics “Final Report: 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment” March,
     2013. (Pg. 22).
     31
        City of St. Helena, Housing Committee. January 2012. Housing Survey. PowerPoint Presentation.
     32
        BAE Urban Economics “Final Report: 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment” March,
     2013. (Pg. 32).
     33
        Ibid.
     34
         Villarejo, D. December 2010. “The Challenge of Housing California’s Hired Farm Laborers.” Rural Housing,
       Exurbanization, and Amenity-Driven Development. Edited by D Marcouiller, M Lapping, and O Furuseth. P.193-
       207.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 80

choose not to provide farmworker housing cited the burdens of regulatory compliance and liability
                                                                     35
and their decision to hire farm labor through labor contractors. This reliance on labor contractors
explains in part why many farmworkers live outside Napa County. However, several employers
indicated that farmworkers are not interested in worker housing, due to the physical isolation of
agricultural properties, the lack of community and the associated amenities of higher density living
                                                                                                       36
(such as proximity to childcare and schools), and the desire to ultimately become homeowners.
When asked what the ideal situation would be for themselves and their families, nearly 38 percent
of respondents indicated a preference for family housing at or near their work sites. Only slightly
fewer (34 percent) expressed preference for family housing in a city/town in Napa County.
Importantly, less common was the preference for solo housing at or near the work site (17 percent),
solo housing in a city/town in Napa County (9 percent), and family housing outside of Napa
                     37
County (4 percent).
Napa Valley Community Housing provides subsidized housing in Napa County, managing 406
units in 13 developments located in the City of Napa, St. Helena, and Yountville. Of these,
approximately 105 units are occupied by self-identified farmworker households. The average
                                                                                                          38
income of these farmworker households is $43,500, and the average household size is 5 persons.
The majority of respondents in the 2012 assessment cited affordability concerns and the need for
more year-round housing options; 50 percent noted that there is not enough housing appropriate for
families. In addition, the cost of market rate rentals can exceed farmworker household incomes and
may result in overcrowding.
Families and Persons in Need of Emergency Shelters
Data are not available on the homeless population of St. Helena specifically. Consequently, data
for Napa County inform a discussion of families and persons in need of emergency shelter in St.
Helena. The two main sources of data on homeless in Napa County are 2006 Ten Year Plan to End
    35
       BAE Urban Economics “Final Report: 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment” March,
    2013. (Pg. 32).
    36
       Ibid.
    37
       BAE Urban Economics “Final Report: 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment” March,
    2013. (Pg. 46).
    38
       BAE Urban Economics “Final Report: 2012 Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment” March,
    2013. (Pg. 35).
Housing Element Needs Assessment                               City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                  Page 81

Homelessness and the 2013 Point-In-Time Count completed by the Napa County Health and
Human Service Agency.
The point-in-time survey is a census of homeless individuals in Napa County on one night during
the last week of January who are living in emergency shelters, transitional housing, and public
places not meant for human habitation. The survey was last conducted on January 28, 2013. This
is not an annual estimate of homeless needs throughout the year, but rather an estimate of the needs
of the homeless in Napa County on one particular day. There are no data presently available
documenting the increased level of demand for shelter in Napa County during particular times of
the year. Due to the relatively mild climate, the only time of year when increased demand appears
to be a factor is during the winter months (December to March). The biannual homeless count
takes place in January, which is a period when demand for shelter typically is at its highest. The
City therefore bases its year-round estimate on the homeless population on this survey.
The point-in-time survey indicates there are 68 unsheltered persons in Napa County. Since the
count does not include a breakdown of the homeless population by jurisdiction, the City estimates
its homeless population based on the St. Helena’s share of the countywide population, which is 4.3
percent of the population, or approximately 3 homeless persons.
The point-in-time survey shows that there were 119 persons in emergency shelter beds and 58
persons in transitional housing on the day of the count, for a total of 245 sheltered and unsheltered
homeless persons. Of all sheltered and unsheltered persons, 37 were reported as chronically
homeless, 19 were veterans, 39 were severely mentally ill, 72 had chronic substance abuse, and 19
were victims of domestic violence. Forty-six were under 18 years.
The St. Helena Community Food Pantry, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit agency, facilitates food distribution
to needy families at the Seventh Day Adventist Church. In 2013, the Food Pantry served around
200 households with 700 individuals. Sixty-six percent of these households accessed the Food
Pantry on a monthly basis, which indicates that households’ need is based not on an emergency of
crisis but due to ongoing food insecurity. The Food Pantry documented that 71 percent of the
clients visiting the Food Pantry were Hispanic, 37 percent were children under the age of 18, and
16 percent were seniors. The agency also reports that 20 percent of the clients they served were
unemployed, and 9 percent consisted of individuals living in a multi-family household. In 2013, the
                                                                39
Food Pantry received applications from 37 households.
Given the documented need for emergency shelters in Napa County, St. Helena is subject to
Government Code Section 65583(a) (4). This code section, which became effective as of January
     39
        Personal Communication. Shirley King, Program Director, St. Helena Food Pantry. March 13, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                      Page 82

1, 2008, requires jurisdictions to designate zoning districts adequate for facilities to accommodate
the identified need for emergency shelters, wherein emergency shelters must be allowed without a
                                                      40 41
conditional use or other discretionary permit.              In January 2015, the City amended the Zoning
Code to allow emergency shelters as a permitted use by right in the Service Commercial and
Industrial zoning districts. The designated emergency shelter areas in St. Helena have adequate
capacity to accommodate a year-round emergency shelter that could provide temporary lodging for
the City’s share of the countywide homeless population, which is estimated to be 3 individuals in
2013.
Summary
The disabled population of St. Helena equals around 12 percent of the total population ages five
years and above. Napa County has a similar percentage, while the Bay Area as a whole about 10
percent of the total population has disabilities. In St. Helena, people in the 65 and older age
category represent the greatest number of people with disabilities.
Elderly households represent a higher percentage of the total households in St. Helena, at about
35percent as compared to approximately26 percent in Napa County and 20 percent in the Bay
Area. Elderly owner households are more likely to have high housing cost burdens compared to all
St. Helena households.
Large family households in St. Helena constitute about 4 percent of total households, which is
much lower than the rates in Napa County and the Bay Area. All of the 55 lower-income large
families have excessive housing cost burdens.
Single female-headed households with children represent around 5 percent of total St. Helena
households. Although the number of single female-headed households is small, it is likely that a
higher percentage of these types of households relative to the general household population in St.
Helena have incomes below the poverty line.
St. Helena addresses the needs of both farmworker and homeless needs through countywide
cooperation. The Napa County Farmworker Housing Needs Assessment concluded that farm labor
centers only meet the needs of a small subsection of farmworkers. The majority of farmworkers
cited a need for more year-round, affordable family housing located close to work sites. There is a
     40
        Building Block for Effective Housing Elements, “Adequate Sites Inventory and Analysis: Zoning for
     Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing”.
     http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/housing_element2/SIA_variety.php. Accessed February 14, 2014.
     41
        Senate Bill 2, Chapter 633. Amendment to Acts 655582, 65583 and 65589.5. Approved by Governor on
     October 13, 2007. Effective January 1, 2008. Accessed February 17, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 83

significant need for farmworker housing in St. Helena, and the Housing Element contains programs
to specifically address farmworker housing needs as well as support affordable housing programs
that also serve farmworkers and their families.
The current supply of emergency shelters, transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing
does not meet the demand for each of these housing types. To meet its share of the homeless
population’s housing needs, St. Helena has designated zoning districts adequate to accommodate
an emergency shelters for at least 3 homeless individuals. These districts allow emergency shelters
without a conditional use permit.
In addition, the City amended the Municipal Code to treat transitional housing and supportive
housing as residential uses. As required by state law, transitional and supportive housing are
subject only to the same permitting process as other similar residential uses in the same zone
without undue special regulatory requirements. For example, a proposed multifamily supportive
housing project is subject to the same permitting process as any other similar multifamily
development in the same zoning district.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 84

Table 27: Civilian Non-Institutionalized Population with Disabilities, 2012
                                   City of St. Helena         Napa County               Bay Area
                                           2012                    2012                    2012
                                                Percent                 Percent                 Percent
Age Range and Disability Type     Population    of Total Population     of Total   Population   of Total
Age 5-17                                  30        0.5%         756        0.6%      37,943       0.6%
  Hearing Disability                       0       0.0%         122        0.1%        5,069      0.1%
  Vision Difficulty                      11        0.2%         124        0.1%        6,087      0.1%
  Cognitive Difficulty                   24        0.4%         550        0.4%       26,707      0.4%
  Ambulatory Difficulty                    0       0.0%           53       0.0%        5,832      0.1%
  Self-Care Difficulty                     0       0.0%           76       0.1%        8,993      0.1%
Age 18-64                               196         3.6%       6,269        5.0%     308,097       4.6%
  Hearing Disability                     83        1.5%       1,314        1.0%       58,754      0.9%
  Vision Difficulty                      47        0.9%         893        0.7%       49,048      0.7%
  Cognitive Difficulty                   14        0.3%       2,892        2.3%     133,208       2.0%
  Ambulatory Difficulty                  83        1.5%       2,769        2.2%     143,630       2.2%
  Self-Care Difficulty                     0       0.0%       1,404        1.1%       57,066      0.9%
  Independent Living Difficulty            0       0.0%       2,397        1.9%     113,163       1.7%
Age 65 and Over                         411         7.5%       7,254        5.7%     299,738       4.5%
  Hearing Disability                   182         3.3%       3,275        2.6%     116,201       1.7%
  Vision Difficulty                      53        1.0%       1,206        1.0%       52,207      0.8%
  Cognitive Difficulty                 119         2.2%       1,786        1.4%       82,959      1.2%
  Ambulatory Difficulty                179         3.3%       4,597        3.6%     191,446       2.9%
  Self-Care Difficulty                   64        1.2%       1,794        1.4%       83,225      1.3%
  Independent Living Difficulty        163         3.0%       2,956        2.3%     152,367       2.3%
Total Disabled Population               637       11.7%     14,279        11.3%      645,778       9.7%
Total Population 5 Years and Over     5,464                126,434                 6,650,852
Source: 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5-year estimates.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                   Page 85
Table 28: Household Tenure by Age of Householder, 2000 and 2012
                                           City of St. Helena                                Napa County                                     Bay Area
                                    2000 (a)              2012 (est.)               2000 (a)            2012 (est.)               2000 (a)             2012 (est.)
                                          Percent                  Percent                Percent              Percent                  Percent                  Percent
Age of Householder             Number     of Total     Number      of Total   Number      of Total  Number     of Total    Number       of Total    Number        of Total
Ow ner-Occupied
   15-24                             9       0.4%             0       0.0%         152       0.3%        78       0.2%         8,496       0.3%        5,632         0.2%
   25-34                            25       1.1%             8       0.3%       1,943       4.3%     1,777       3.6%       134,030       5.4%      104,156         4.0%
   35-54                           542     22.8%            329     12.1%      12,934      28.5%     11,339     23.0%        695,711     28.2%       639,903       24.7%
   55-64                           301     12.7%            399     14.7%        5,365     11.8%      7,168     14.6%        245,606     10.0%       333,925       12.9%
   65-74                           221       9.3%           372     13.7%        4,426       9.7%     5,158     10.5%        174,781       7.1%      203,998         7.9%
   75 and older                    233       9.8%           305     11.2%        4,734     10.4%      4,935     10.0%        165,335       6.7%      179,493         6.9%
Subtotal: Ow ner-Occupied        1,332        56%         1,413        55%     29,554         65%    30,455        63%     1,423,958        58%    1,467,107          56%
Renter-Occupied
   15-24                            21       0.9%           114       4.2%       1,030       2.3%     1,085       2.2%        78,151       3.2%       71,707         2.8%
   25-34                           241     10.1%            160       5.9%       3,927       8.7%     4,763       9.7%       316,675     12.8%       308,589       11.9%
   35-54                           489     20.5%            606     22.3%        7,083     15.6%      7,433     15.1%        437,577     17.7%       465,017       17.9%
   55-64                            93       3.9%           153       5.6%       1,369       3.0%     2,845       5.8%        83,920       3.4%      140,586         5.4%
   65-74                            48       2.0%            76       2.8%         799       1.8%     1,208       2.5%        56,975       2.3%       67,929         2.6%
   75 and older                    157       6.6%           190       7.0%       1,640       3.6%     1,420       2.9%        68,763       2.8%       71,210         2.7%
Subtotal: Renter-Occupied        1,048        44%         1,299        45%     15,848         35%    18,754        37%     1,042,061        42%    1,125,038          44%
Total Households                 2,380       100%         2,712      100%      45,402        100%    49,209      100%      2,466,019       100%    2,592,145        100%
Notes:
(a) 2000 figures w ere derived using Census Summary File 1 total household figures, and Census Summary File 3 households by age of householder and tenure distribution figures.
Sources: Census 2000; 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5-year estimates.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                          City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                              Page 86
Table 29: Elderly Households and Housing Cost Burden, City of St. Helena, 2010
                                                      All Incom e       Extrem ely Low -Incom e      Very Low -Incom e          Low -Incom e        Moderate and Above
                                                        Levels         (Less than 30% of AMFI)      (30% to 50% of AMFI)   (50% to 80% of AMFI)       (Over 80% of AMFI)
                                                             Percent                   Percent                  Percent                 Percent                   Percent
Ow ner Households                                  Number     of Total   Number        of Total     Number      of Total   Number        of Total   Number        of Total
   With 0% to 30% Housing Cost Burden                 515      48.8%            0           0.0%        15         13.6%        35          26.9%       465          69.9%
   With 30% to 50% Housing Cost Burden                100        9.5%           0           0.0%        20         18.2%        25          19.2%        55           8.3%
   With 50% or Greater Housing Cost Burden            130      12.3%          70           46.7%        30         27.3%        15          11.5%        15           2.3%
Subtotal: Ow ner-Occupied Households                  745      70.6%          70           46.7%        65         59.1%        75          57.7%       535          80.5%
Renter Households
   With 0% to 30% Housing Cost Burden                 100        9.5%          10           6.7%        15         13.6%        10           7.7%        65           9.8%
   With 30% to 50% Housing Cost Burden                 30        2.8%         15           10.0%          0         0.0%          0          0.0%        15           2.3%
   With 50% or Greater Housing Cost Burden            170      16.1%          55           36.7%        25         22.7%        40          30.8%        50           7.5%
Subtotal: Renter-Occupied Households                  310      29.4%           80          53.3%        45         40.9%        55          42.3%       130          19.5%
Total Households                                    1,055       100%         150            100%       110          100%       130           100%       665           100%
Note:
(a) Figures reported above are based on the HUD-published CHAS data, dervied from the 2006-2010 American Community Survey. CHAS household income categories reflect
HUD-defined household income limits in HUD-specified geographic areas. HUD defines elderly as age 62 and up. Numbers may not add up due to HUD rounding of published data.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 87
Table 30: Family and Non-Family Households by Size, 2000 and 2012
                                                  City of St. Helena                           Napa County                                        Bay Area
                                              2000                2012 (est.)             2000              2012 (est.)                   2000               2012 (est.)
                                                  Percent                Percent             Percent                Percent                  Percent                   Percent
Household Type and Size                Number of Total        Number of Total      Number of Total      Number of Total          Number       of Total    Number        of Total
Fam ily Households (a)
   2-person Household                      652     27.4%          987     36.4%     13,309    29.3%      14,838      30.2%        593,764      24.1%       641,784       24.8%
   3-person Household                      281     11.8%          285     10.5%      6,323    13.9%       6,050      12.3%        362,953      14.7%       398,478       15.4%
   4-person Household                      294     12.4%          210      7.7%      5,785    12.7%       6,739      13.7%        335,693      13.6%       372,015       14.4%
   5+ -person Household                    255     10.7%          120      4.4%      5,277    11.6%       5,969      12.1%        302,060      12.2%       271,553       10.5%
Subtotal: Fam ily Households            1,482        62%        1,602       59%     30,694      68%      33,596        68%      1,594,470        65%     1,683,830         65%
Non-Fam ily Households (a)
   1-person Household                      752     31.6%          914     33.7%     11,733    25.8%      12,211      24.8%        637,575      25.9%       698,815       27.0%
   2-person Household                      126      5.3%          145      5.3%      2,384     5.3%       2,742       5.6%        179,385       7.3%       164,960        6.4%
   3-person Household                       17      0.7%           51      1.9%        373     0.8%         356       0.7%         34,379       1.4%        27,980        1.1%
   4-person Household                        2      0.1%            0      0.0%        105     0.2%         217       0.4%         12,364       0.5%        11,460        0.4%
   5+ -person Household                      1      0.0%            0      0.0%        113     0.2%          87       0.2%           7,846      0.3%         5,100        0.2%
Subtotal: Non-Fam ily Households           898       38%        1,110       41%     14,708      32%      15,613        32%        871,549        35%       908,315         35%
Total Households                        2,380       100%        2,712      100%     45,402     100%      49,209       100%      2,466,019       100%     2,592,145        100%
Notes:
(a) A “family” household is tw o or more related people living together. Non-family households are single people living alone, or tw o or more unrelated people living together.
Sources: Census 2000; 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5-year estimates.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                              City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                    Page 88

Table 31: Large Family Households and Housing Cost Burden, City of St. Helena, 2010
                                                 All Incom e       Extrem ely Low -Incom e        Very Low -Incom e             Low -Incom e       Moderate and Above
                                                   Levels          (Less than 30% of AMFI)      (30% to 50% of AMFI)        (50% to 80% of AMFI)     (Over 80% of AMFI)
                                                         Percent                  Percent                     Percent                   Percent                 Percent
Ow ner Households                             Number     of Total  Number         of Total      Number         of Total     Number      of Total    Number      of Total
   With 0% to 30% Housing Cost Burden             75      39.5%           0           -                0           0.0%           0          0.0%       75         55.6%
   With 30% to 50% Housing Cost Burden            40      21.1%           0           -                0           0.0%          20        50.0%        20         14.8%
   With 50% or Greater Housing Cost Burden          0       0.0%          0           -                0           0.0%           0          0.0%        0           0.0%
Subtotal: Ow ner-Occupied Households             120      60.5%           0           -                0            0.0%         20         50.0%      100          70.4%
Renter Households
   With 0% to 30% Housing Cost Burden             25      13.2%           0           -                0           0.0%           0          0.0%       25         18.5%
   With 30% to 50% Housing Cost Burden            45      23.7%           0           -              15          100.0%          20        50.0%        10           7.4%
   With 50% or Greater Housing Cost Burden          0       0.0%          0           -                0           0.0%           0          0.0%        0           0.0%
Subtotal: Renter-Occupied Households              70      36.8%           0           -              15          100.0%          20         50.0%       35          25.9%
Total Households                                 190         97%          0           -              15            100%          40          100%      135            96%
Note:
(a) Figures reported above are based on the HUD-published CHAS data, dervied from the 2006-2010 American Community Survey. CHAS household income categories
reflect HUD-defined household income limits in HUD-specified geographic areas. HUD defines large families as those w ith 5 or more persons. Numbers may not add up due to
HUD rounding of published data.
Sources: 2006-2010 CHAS, huduser.org, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                   Page 89
Table 32: Single Female-Headed Households with Children, 2000 and 2012
                                                                   City of St. Helena                     Napa County                               Bay Area
                                                               2000 (a)          2012 (est.)        2000 (a)         2012 (est.)           2000 (a)           2012 (est.)
                                                                    Percent            Percent          Percent            Percent             Percent                Percent
Single Fem ale-Headed Households w ith Children (b) Number of Total Number of Total Number of Total Number of Total                  Number     of Total   Number     of Total
   Ow ner                                                       71     3.0%         0    0.0%      771     1.7%       751    1.7%      44,170     1.8%       40,876      1.8%
   Renter                                                       83     3.5%       127    4.7%    1,468     3.2%     1,662    3.2%      90,138     3.7%      101,674      3.7%
Total: Single Fem ale-Headed Households w ith Childr          154      6.5%       127    4.7%    2,239     4.9%     2,427    4.9%     134,308     5.4%      141,177      5.4%
Total Households                                            2,380               2,712           45,402            49,209            2,466,019             2,592,145
Notes:
(a) 2000 figures w ere derived using Census 2000 Summary File 1 total households estimates and Summary File 3 single female-headed households by tenure distribution estimates.
(b) Family household w ith a female head of household, no husband present, and one or more household members under the age of 18, as defined by the U.S. Census.
Sources: Census 2000; 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5-year estimates.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                               City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                     Page 90
Table 33: Farm Employment, Napa County, 1993 - 2012
                      Annual          Annual
                       Farm           Percent
     Year         Em ploym ent        Change
     1993              3,400            n.a.
     1994              3,300           -2.9%
     1995              3,600            9.1%
     1996              3,800            5.6%
     1997              4,200           10.5%
     1998              4,400            4.8%
     1999              4,400            0.0%
     2000              4,900           11.4%
     2001              5,300            8.2%
     2002              5,300            0.0%
     2003              4,900           -7.5%
     2004              4,700           -4.1%
     2005              4,600           -2.1%
     2006              4,700            2.2%
     2007              4,900            4.3%
     2008              4,900            0.0%
     2009              4,900            0.0%
     2010              4,700           -4.1%
     2011              4,800            2.1%
     2012              4,800            0.0%
Total Change
1993 - 2012           1,400            41.2%
Note:
(a) These figures reflect the total numers of employees reported to be w orking in
the farm industry, defined as NAICS Codes 111000-113200 and 114000-115000.
These figures do not include self-employed farm ow ners or their relatvies, w inery
or w ine production employees, or employees w ho do not receive unemployment
insureance through their employer ("informal w orkers"). Farmw orkers hired
through contracting or management companies based outside Napa County may
not be reported in these figures.
Source: California Employment Development Division, Industry Employment -
Official Monthly Estimates (CES), 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 91
Table 34: Farmworkers, Napa County, 2012
                                                                     Total Farm w orker
Em ploym ent Period                                                       Estim ates
Regular Workers (w orked more than 7 months a year)                                2,400
Seasonal Workers (w orked betw een 3 and 6 months a year)                          1,200
Harvest Only Workers (w orked less than 3 months a year)                           1,200
Total Farm w orkers                                                                4,800
Note:
(a) Research consultants surveyed 350 Napa farmw orkers about their employment situations and
housing needs. Results from the survey indicate that the farm labor w orkforce is currently evenly
split among w orkers employed less than three months per year, those employed betw een three and
six months, those employed betw een seven and ten months, and those employed more than ten
months.
Source: 2012 Napa County Farmw orker Housing Needs Assessment, BAE Urban Economics for
Napa County Housing and Intergovernmental Affiars, March 29, 2013.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 92
Table 35: Farmworker Rents and Incomes, Napa County, 2005
                                                 Surveyed        Farm w orkers Residing
         Monthly Housing Costs (b)             Farm w orkers          in Napa County
Renters
Average Rent per Adult                                   $252                            n.a.
   Respondents w ith a spouse and/or children            $319                           $345
   Respondents, unaccompanied                            $218                           $254
Utilities (c)                                             $66                            n.a.
Hom eow ners
Average Mortgage Payment                               $2,167                            n.a.
Utilities                                                $225                            n.a.
                                                 Surveyed             Reported Mean            Total Household
          Farm w orker Occupations             Farm w orkers          Annual Earnings              Incom e
General Laborers                                          159                      $15,745             $19,122
Specialized Laborers                                        19                     $26,317             $33,268
Foreman or Supervisor                                       11                     $37,000             $50,294
Notes:
(a) The data reported above are from a farmw orker survey of 189 respondents w ho w orked in any part of Napa County betw een
September and November 2006. The interview ees w ere selected based on place of employment. A stratified random sample came
from registered farm labor contractors, vineyard properties w ith unique site identification assigned by the Napa County Agricultural
commissioner, and one large nursery farm. Three w orkers from each selected crew w ere interview ed.
(b) 87 percent of survey respondents rent, 11 percent ow n, and the remaining tw o percent report receiving free housing from their
employer.
(c) Only 55 percent of renter respondents reported paying for utilities, w ith $66 being the average reported by respondents w ho pay
rent.
Sources: An Assessment of the Demand for Farm Worker Housing in Napa County, California Institute for Rural Studies, March, 2007;
BAE, 2008.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                      Page 93
Non-governmental and Governmental
Constraints
Constraints on the development of housing are divided into non-governmental constraints and
governmental constraints. Non-governmental constraints include the price of land, cost of
construction, availability of financing, and overall housing production costs. Governmental
constraints include land use controls, codes and enforcements, on and off site improvements, fees
and exactions, processing and permit procedures, and regulations affecting housing for persons
with disabilities.
Non-governmental Constraints
Price of Land
According to Realtor.com, an on-line resource operated by the Nation Association of Realtors,
there were approximately seven sales of vacant land between September 2013 and March 2014 in
the St. Helena area. Sales are reported between $80,000 and $6,500,000 for properties ranging in
size from 3,250 square feet to 83 acres. Several of the properties have large vineyards. A one-acre
flat parcel sold with a planted vineyard and potential for one new residence sold for $965,000. An
8.5 acre lot property with a vineyard at 851 Silverado Trail sold for $860,000. A 3,250 square foot
lot in downtown St. Helena, with potential to build a small cottage, sold for $207,000.
In addition to these sales, the City of St. Helena purchased a high density residential parcel located
at 684 McCorkle Place in 2013. The half-acre parcel sold for $700,000. The City intends to
develop 9 to 12 affordable units on the property. In 2012, a 9,525 square foot parcel at 1105 Pope
Street was purchased for $375,000 and subsequently donated to Calistoga Affordable Housing
(CAH). The City approved an 8-unit affordable housing project at 1105 Pope Street in 2013.
Cost of Construction
Construction costs include both hard costs, such as labor and materials, and soft costs, including
architectural and engineering services and development fees. According to local contractors and
realtors, construction costs in St. Helena vary between $200 and $250 per square foot for average
construction and can go up to $500 per square foot for a high-end, custom-built single family
house. Soft costs (including architectural and engineering fees, property taxes during construction,
city and utility fees, and construction loan interest and fees) typically increase these costs by
approximately 35 to 40 percent. Construction costs can be higher if lots require substantial site
work due to steep slopes, unstable soils, waterways, and other environmental concerns.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 94
According to local developers, hard construction costs (including site improvements) for a typical
two or three-story multi-family development averages $175-$195 per square foot. Soft costs
typically add 45 to 50 percent to this base cost.
A pro-forma budget developed for the Calistoga Affordable Housing 8-unit project at 1105 Pope
Street estimates hard construction costs at $1.4 million and soft costs at $625,000 for a total of
$2,025,000, or approximately $300 per square foot and $253,000 per unit.
Overall Housing Production Costs
Based upon the cost estimates discussed above, overall multifamily production costs are estimated
at between $260,000 and $300,000 per unit for a prototype project on a 0.5 acre site with 16
multifamily rental units averaging 850 square feet. This estimate assumes land costs of $750,000,
construction costs of $250 to 300 per square foot (including all hard and soft costs), and
conservative assumptions regarding financing costs.
The rental rate required to cover the overall production cost of these units is approximately $1,950
per month, assuming a cap rate of 6.5 percent, a 5 percent vacancy rate, and annual operating
expenses of $4,000 per unit. A rental rate of approximately $1,950 per month for a 1-bedroom unit
is affordable to 2-person moderate-income households and those households with above moderate
incomes. To make the units affordable to lower income households, a subsidy may be necessary.
The overall production costs of single-family housing units would be more expensive than
multifamily housing because of the higher cost of land per unit constructed due to the low density
associated with single-family development. These high costs make single-family housing units
unaffordable to very low-income, low-income, and moderate-income households. Therefore, a
subsidy would most likely be necessary to make single-family housing units affordable to
moderate-income households and below.
Availability of Financing
St. Helena is affected by the conditions in the national credit market. High national foreclosure
rates, climbing interest rates, and failing banks have tightened the credit market and made it hard
for developers to obtain construction and permanent loans to build units. The credit crisis has
seriously curtailed the availability of nontraditional mortgage products like adjustable rate
mortgages and subprime mortgages.
Quality credit scores, documentable income, and a significant down payment are now crucial to
obtaining a home loan, thereby limiting the number of households able to obtain financing to
purchase homes. This will exclude certain households who previously could have qualified to buy
homes forcing them into the rental market. The high overall production costs coupled with the
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 95
decrease in the availability of credit indicates that St. Helena may have to increase the number of
rental units available to provide these households displaced from the for-sale market households
with adequate rental housing options.
In addition, current market conditions make it difficult to obtain financing for new housing
developments. Capital availability is very limited and reserved only for projects that pose the least
risk and the highest chance of return.
Flooding
The Napa Valley near the Napa River and along some of its tributaries is prone to flooding. The
Napa River flows are largely influenced by precipitation. The peak flows generally occur in
January and February. Some of the worst flooding in the immediate area of St. Helena has occurred
in December and April, especially in and around Vineyard Valley, which is near the confluence of
Sulphur Creek and the Napa River. Flood hazards also exist in the York Creek and Sulphur Creek
Watersheds in St. Helena.
Significant flood control improvements consisting of levees and flood walls have been constructed
along the Napa River at a cost of approximately $15 million since the 2009 Housing Element was
prepared. These flood control improvements have removed approximately 70 acres of land that is
zoned for medium density housing from the 100-year flood plain.
All new construction and substantial improvements in special flood hazard areas as defined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency are required to comply with the provisions of Municipal
Code Chapter 15.52 “Flood Damage Prevention.” The development standards are intended to
meet, if not exceed, minimum National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) criteria for requirements
for floodplain management regulations. New development in these areas are required to assure that
proposed development: 1) is designed or modified and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement of the structure; 3) uses construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage; and 4) uses construction methods that minimize flood damage. In
addition, projects must be elevated 18 inches above the base flood elevation.
Governmental Constraints
Local government can directly influence housing production cost through land use controls,
building codes, on and off site improvement standards, fees and exactions, processing and permit
procedures, regulations affecting housing for persons with disabilities, and with government codes
and enforcement. This section discusses each of these topics and identifies the governmental
controls that may adversely affect housing production.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 96

Preservation of Agricultural Land
One of the major thrusts of the City’s land use controls is to encourage in-fill development while
preserving land for agriculture. The agricultural soils of St. Helena are identified as Prime
Farmland by the California State Department of Conservation, Division of Land Resource
Protection, Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program. The wines produced from the grapes in
this region achieve international recognition for their superb quality.
Roughly one-half of the 3,055 acres within the incorporated limits of the City are considered
urbanized area. This portion of the City of St. Helena is defined by an Urban Limit Line (ULL)
which denotes the area within which urban development is allowed. The intent of the ULL is to
discourage urban sprawl by containing urban development within a limited area.
There are approximately 1,500 acres of land outside of the Urban Limit Line, but inside the
incorporated limits of the City of St. Helena. Most of this land is farmed and planted to vineyards.
Land-Use Controls
The St. Helena Zoning Ordinance and General Plan can affect housing production because they
determine the location, amount of land, and also the density of housing.
Zoning Ordinance
Title 17 of the St. Helena Municipal Code outlines both the residential and nonresidential zoning
designations. Table 36 provides a list of all of the residential zoning districts as well as
information on the rights and requirements associated with each district. Residential uses,
including transitional and supportive housing, are permitted by right in the following zones:
Twenty-Acre Agriculture (A-20), Winery (W), Woodland Watershed (WW), Agricultural Preserve
(AP), Low Density Residential One Acre Minimum (LR-1A), Low Density Residential (LR),
Medium Density Residential (MR), and High Density Residential (HR).
In terms of units per acre, the lowest allowable density is the AP district. The AP district permits,
by right, one single-family unit per 40-acre lot. The A-20 and W zones allow one single-family
dwelling and one second unit by right on 20 acres of land. Agricultural employee housing for up
to 36 beds in group quarters or 12 units designed for use by a single family or household is
permitted by right in the AP, A-20 and W districts.
Both the LR and LR-1A zones permit by right not only single-family dwellings, but also permanent
mobilehomes, and agricultural employee housing, intermediate care, residential, developmentally
disabled, and nursing facilities for six or fewer persons. The LR-1A allows one unit per acre;
however, the LR zone sets a minimum of one unit per acre, and applies a maximum at five units
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 97

per acre. In addition, both zones permit as a conditional use single-family dwellings at less than
one unit per acre and all of the aforementioned types of facilities for seven or more persons.
The MR zone allows the same uses by right and with a conditional use permit as the LR district and
also allows small lot developments, condominium, or townhomes with a conditional use permit.
Minimum and maximum densities for the MR zone range from 5.1 to 16 DUA. Finally, the HR
zone, in addition to allowing the same residential uses by right as the LR and MR zones, permits
multifamily dwellings, apartments, single room occupancy housing, and dwelling groups
containing four units or less. The allowable density for the HR zone is between 16.1 to 28 DUA.
With a conditional use permit, buildings with more than four units, multifamily dwellings,
apartments, and dwelling groups are permitted. The conditional use permit requirements for
multifamily dwellings of more than four units does not place an undue burden on development
because the Magnolia Oaks and Vineland Station development, which both contain apartments,
were approved by the City of St. Helena in 2007 without creating unreasonable timeframes for
approval and without imposing unreasonable conditions of approval.
In addition to the residential zones described above, some overlay districts can affect the type and
amount of housing that can actually be built, including the Planned Development, Rural-
Residential, Specific Plan, Flood Plain, Historic Preservation, and Mobile Home Park overlay
district. An overlay district expands upon the regulations already set by the underlying zoning
district. For example, the Planned Development Overlay District (PD) allows for a wider variety of
development, including mixed-use development not otherwise allowed in the zoning code. The PD
zone is often applied to large pieces of land and requires approval of a rezoning and a conditional
use permit application.
General Plan
While St. Helena is in the process of updating the City’s General Plan, the currently valid General
Plan was completed in 1993. The City of St. Helena consists of approximately 3,025 acres, and
roughly 925 acres are already developed with residential, commercial or industrial uses, and the
remaining 2,100 acres consist of agricultural cropland, open space, parks, and woodlands and
                     42
watershed land. Not all of the 3,000 acres within the City of St. Helena are available for
development; rather only about 1,500 acres within the Urban Limit Line (ULL) are eligible for
                  43
development. Thirteen land use designations cover the land in St. Helena.
     42
        City of St. Helena General Plan Update 2030, Chapter Two Land Use and Growth Management.
     http://cityofsthelena.org/sites/default/files/02_land_use_%26_growth_management_revised_07311_0.pdf.
     Accessed March 14, 2014.
     43
        City of St. Helena General Plan Update 2030, Chapter Two Land Use and Growth Management.
     http://cityofsthelena.org/sites/default/files/02_land_use_%26_growth_management_revised_07311_0.pdf.
     Accessed March 14, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 98

The ULL contains land use designations including Low, Medium, and High Density Residential,
Central Business, Service Commercial, Industrial, Business and Professional Office, Parks and
Recreation, Public/Quasi-Public, Open Space and Agriculture. The Low, Medium, and High
Density Residential land use correspond to the zoning district of the same names presented in Table
35. Some land outside, yet contiguous to the ULL has a General Plan designation of Urban
Reserve (UR) indicating that it should be considered first if land outside the ULL is needed for
development. All lands with a UR land use designation are zoned A-20.
Residential Growth Management System
The residential growth management system (GMS) first went into effect in 1979, but has been
                                     44
revised most recently in 2010. The stated purpose of the system is “to regulate the residential
growth of the city to approximately two percent per year, while providing for both market rate and
                               45
affordable housing units.” The current GMS establishes a baseline of 2,707 housing units in 2000
(U.S. Census 2000 data) and imposes a limitation of nine building permits for market rate housing
                                                                    46
per year over 10 years, with a cap of 2,800 units by 2010.               In 2010, the U.S. Census counted
2,776 housing units in St. Helena, and increase of 69 housing units over ten years, or
approximately seven units per year. Not all new residential development is subject to this
restriction of nine permits per year. The relevant exemptions include affordable housing, and
second dwelling units. The City Council had the power to decide on the number of permits issued
for affordable housing units. The Growth Management System has not prevented housing
development that would have occurred otherwise. The City has not issued all nine permits each
year and puts the excess permits into a bank that “shall only be available for allocation for the
construction of market rate units in development projects that include a minimum of forty percent
                       47
affordable units.” These “rollover” permits are only made available for the market rate portion of
developments with at least 40 percent affordable units.
Design Review
Chapter 17.164 of the St. Helena Municipal Code outlines the City’s Design Review policies. The
purpose of the policy is to go beyond the controls inherent in the land use controls and building
codes and examine individual project proposals for the “general form of the land before and after
development, the spatial relationships of the structures and open spaces to proximate land uses and
     44
        City of St. Helena Municipal Code. Chapter 17.152. http://www.codepublishing.com/CA/sthelena/.
     Accessed on March 14, 2014.
     45
        City of St. Helena Municipal Code. Chapter 17.152. http://www.codepublishing.com/CA/sthelena/.
     Accessed on September 25, 2008.
     46
        City of St. Helena Municipal Code. Chapter 17.152. http://www.codepublishing.com/CA/sthelena/.
     Accessed on September 25, 2008.
     47
        St. Helena Municipal Code. 17.152 Residential Growth Management System
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 99

the appearances of building and open spaces as they contribute to an area as it is being
                48
developed.” The Municipal Code lists 17 specific design criteria considered by the Planning
Commission and a summary of these points follows:
          Compatibility with the general plan, current site, and surrounding properties.
          Physical characteristics of the buildings and surrounding landscaping
          Employment of green building practices into the design.
The Planning Commission examines all proposed new buildings and structures and exterior
additions in relation to the design criteria and arrives at one of three recommendations, approve,
                                                         49
approve with minor modifications, or disapprove. The City staff had noted that the complex and
subjective nature of the design review process can be cumbersome for the Planning Commission,
and therefore this process may need to be streamlined to facilitate housing development.
The limitations to the design review processes are expressly stated in the Municipal Code, and the
one limitation that directly impacts affordable housing states that “the commission is not to use
design review intentionally or inadvertently to exclude housing for minority groups or housing for
                                          50
low and moderate income persons.” Presumably, then, the Planning Commission would take the
17 design criteria into consideration when reviewing affordable housing projects, but not
disapprove a project strictly because it is a low cost structure.
Implementation of new Design Review guidelines could commence after the new General Plan is
adopted. Assuming that architecturally distinct neighborhoods are identified in the General Plan
Community Design element, a consultant would be hired to identify design themes and develop
design guidelines for new construction within each of the neighborhoods. The target adoption date
for the new General Plan is mid-2015. Approximately one additional year will be required for
budget adoption, consultant selection, and finalization of design guidelines.
Housing Trust Fund, Housing Impact Fee, and Inclusionary/In-Lieu Fee
Requirements
In September 2004, the City Council passed Ordinance 2004-7 adding Chapter 17.146 Housing
Trust Fund, Housing Impact Fee, and Inclusionary/In-Lieu Fee Requirements to the St. Helena
Municipal Code. The regulations are designed so that new non-residential developments and
additions are required to pay a housing impact fee and new residential developments containing
five units or more are required to include 20 percent of their units as affordable housing, and
     48
        St. Helena Municipal Code. 17.165 Design Review.
     49
        Ibid.
     50
        Ibid.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                              City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                 Page 100

developments with less than five units pay an in-lieu fee. The fees collected from the
nonresidential and residential development then go into a Housing Trust Fund. The use of Housing
Trust Fund monies is directed exclusively to “increase and improve the supply of housing
affordable to households of moderate, low and very low income” including costs such as land,
                                                                   51
construction, financing, and reimbursements to the City. The monies are available for both
ownership and rental projects and services.
These affordable housing requirements do add additional cost to market rate residential
development in the process of creating additional affordable housing in St. Helena. To minimize
the impact on the price of market rate housing, the Municipal Code allows developers to submit an
                                                                                                 52
“alternative equivalent proposal” and offers a series of concessions or incentives. An “alternative
equivalent proposal” enables developers to meet the affordable housing requirements through
alternative means like dedicating vacant land as long as the proposed alternative aligns with the
purpose of the Municipal Code and is approved by the City Council. Concessions and incentives
that are automatically available to residential developers who construct inclusionary units include
the opportunity to submit a preliminary development proposal, priority in the City application
process, and fee deferment. In addition, the City Council can grant additional concessions and
incentives including extra density bonuses, changes to City standards, and monetary assistance.
The automatic and discretionary concessions and incentives help expedite the process of building
affordable housing and therefore minimize the cost to developers.
On/Offsite Improvement Standards
The St. Helena Municipal Code lists requirements for new development related to sewer and water
connections, parking, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, fire hydrants, and street trees.
Sewer
The City of St. Helena owns the Wastewater Treatment and Reclamation Plant, which provides
secondary-level treatment for domestic and commercial wastewater within the City. The plant has
a permitted average dry weather treatment capacity of 0.5 million gallons per day (mgd) and can
                                                53
treat up to 2.8 mgd during wet weather. The wastewater treatment plant has sufficient capacity to
meet the demands of the 31 housing units anticipated through the RHNA process.
Per Chapter 727, Statutes of 2004 (SB 1087), sewer providers must grant priority for service
allocations to proposed development that include housing units affordable to lower-income
     51
        St. Helena Municipal Code. 17.146.030
     52
        St. Helena Municipal Code 17.146.050
     53
        California Regional Water Quality control Boar San Francisco Bay Reigon. Order No. R2-0210-0105,
     NPDES No. CA0038016. http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/rwqcb2/board_decisions/adopted_orders/2010/R2-
     2010-0105.pdf. Accessed March 14, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 101

households. Local public and private wastewater service providers must adopt written policies and
procedures that grant priority for service hook-ups to developments that help meet the community’s
share of the regional need for lower-income housing. In addition, the law prohibits water providers
from denying, conditioning the approval, or reducing the amount of sewer service for an
application for development that includes housing units affordable to lower-income households
unless written findings are made as specified in Government Code Section 65589.7(c). The 2009
housing element contains Program HE1.D that commits the City to granting projects that include
affordable housing units priority access to sewer resources over other new projects should the
capacity of local sewer systems become inadequate to meet the full demand for new connections.
In January 2015, the City amended the Zoning Code to state that the City shall grant priority for the
provision of sewer service to developments that include housing units affordable to lower income
households. The City also adopted a resolution establishing a policy and procedure for granting
priority sewer service.
Water
The City has three sources of potable water: Bell Canyon Reservoir, water purchased from the City
of Napa under a long-term water supply contract, and groundwater from City-owned and operated
wells.
Bell Canyon Reservoir is the City’s primary source of potable water. Bell Canyon is an on-stream
reservoir with a physical storage capacity of 2,384 acre-feet, although the maximum annual yield
of water that is available in a good water year is around 1,100 acre-feet (AF). The City also
purchases significant water quantities from the City of Napa through a contract, expiring in 2035,
which guarantees delivery of a minimum of 600 AF per year. Finally, the City pumps groundwater
from its two wells. The City seeks to limit groundwater withdrawals to 450 AF in normal years.
The City calculates a safe annual yield for its water system as “the quantity of water which can be
reliable delivered on an annual basis through most rainfall years, including a Dry Year (rainfall at
22” to 25.9”) without undue hardship on water customers through water shortage restrictions. The
City defines “undue hardship” as three or more consecutive months of Phase II water restrictions or
Phase III water restrictions. Based on water supplies available in 2013, the City estimates the safe
annual yield of its water system is 1,950 AF.
Water demand has decreased significantly in recent years, from a high of 2,384 AF in 2007 to
1,806 AF in 2013. Based on the methodology the City uses to calculate water demand, the City
estimates that it had a water surplus of 80 AF in 2013.
In 2011, the City adopted a new Water Shortage Emergencies Ordinance. The ordinance
establishes three water shortage emergency phases with increasing water use restrictions. Phase I
Housing Element Needs Assessment                           City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                              Page 102

water regulations are triggered when the supply/usage balance is in deficit, meaning that the five-
year rolling average of total water usage exceeds the safe annual yield of the City’s water system.
Under Phase I regulations, water customers are prohibited from expanding or installing new water-
using appliances, plumbing, or improvements, such as landscaping and pools, unless the
installation will result in no increase in water use. Replacement fixtures must be water-efficient.
In addition, new water connections for new development may only be approved if the projected
water demand for the project can be offset by a corresponding reduction in the existing water
demand on the city water system. New development proposals may demonstrate that the project is
water-neutral through a combination of on-site water conservation measures, off-site retrofitting or
well water. The City is currently in a Phase I water emergency.
Phase II water shortage emergency regulations include all Phase I regulations plus mandatory
conservation measures. Under Phase II, residential water users are limited to 65 gallons per person
per day. An additional allocation of 2,500 gallons per month for single-family landscape irrigation
is provided during the April through October billing cycle. Multi-family or mobile home occupants
are permitted up to 70 gallons per day per 1,000 square feet of landscaped area or for dedicated
irrigation meters, a 60 percent limit of current reference evapotranspiration. There are strict
penalties for non-compliance of these mandatory conservation measures. In addition, no new water
connections are permitted during a Phase II water emergency. Phase III water shortage emergency
regulations limit water use further, to 60 gallons per person per day, and place additional limits on
landscape irrigation.
Future water demand for new housing units is calculated using the City’s 2004 Water and
Wastewater Study estimate of 203 hundred cubic feet (HCF) per single-family unit and 89 HCF per
multifamily unit. The 31 housing units required under the City’s 2014-2022 RHNA is assumed to
represent 18 multifamily and 13 single-family units. This new development is estimated to have a
future water demand of 4,241 HCF, or 9.74 AF, which is substantially less than the 80 AF surplus
that was recorded in 2013. As a result, the analysis indicates that St. Helena has capacity to supply
water to the 31 housing units anticipated through the RHNA process.
In 2012, the City adopted a water management plan ordinance with the stated objective of
conserving and managing water resources to achieve adopted land use planning objectives. The
ordinance defines a procedure whereby the City Council establishes an allocation of water
resources when the City is not in a declared water shortage emergency by adopting a water
allocation resolution. The resolution must include a list of defined land use or project categories for
which surplus water will be made available. On September 24, 2013, the Council adopted its first
resolution allocating a water surplus of 80 AF. Defined water categories were General Residential,
Affordable Housing, Commercial, Industrial, Hotel/Resort, Public Facilities, and Unallocated
Reserves. The Council allocated 2 AF to affordable housing and the remaining 78 AF to
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 103

unallocated reserves. The affordable housing allocation was intended to include an allocation for a
proposed 9-unit affordable housing project at 684 McCorkle Place with an estimated annual water
demand of 1.2 AF. In addition to the water surplus allocation, the City may approve any
residential project that can demonstrate it is water neutral as long as the City is not in a Phase II or
higher water shortage emergency.
Per Chapter 727, Statutes of 2004 (SB 1087), water providers must grant priority for service
allocations to proposed developments that include housing units affordable to lower-income
households. Local public and private water providers must adopt written policies and procedures
that grant priority for service hook-ups to developments that help meet the community’s share of
the regional need for lower-income housing. In addition, the law prohibits water providers from
denying, conditioning the approval, or reducing the amount of water service for an application for
development that includes housing affordable to lower-income households unless written findings
are made as specified in Government Code Section 65589.7(c). A city may deny, condition or
reduce water services to developments that include lower-income housing units if the city does not
have “sufficient water supply” as defined in Government Code Section 66473.7(a) (2) or is
operating under a water shortage emergency as defined in Section 350 of the Water Code.
In January 2015, the City amended the Zoning Code to state that the City shall grant priority for the
provision of water service to developments that include housing units affordable to lower income
households. The City also adopted a resolution establishing a policy and procedure for granting
priority water service.
Parking
Residential parking requirements vary according to the number of dwelling units, as follows:
          One to two dwelling units: Minimum of two spaces per unit, with one of the spaces in a
           garage or carport.
          Three or more dwelling units: Minimum of one space under cover per unit, plus either a
           half space or one additional whole space depending the number of bedrooms in the units.
          Rooming, boarding, or lodging house: Minimum of one space per room, and two spaces
           for the owner-occupied unit.
                                                                                                             54
          Mobile home: Minimum of two spaces per unit plus centralized space for guest parking.
The one exception to these requirements is housing built for senior citizens, with funding from the
                                                                                                          55
Federal or State government, which is affordable to low- and moderate-income households. For
     54
        Municipal Code 17.124.030 Minimum on-site parking requirements
     55
        Ibid.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 104

all other uses not covered in the Municipal Code, the Planning Commission has the power to set
the parking requirements based upon the general parking guidelines of the City.
Other
Other miscellaneous improvements required by the City of St. Helena include curb, gutter and
sidewalk treatments, fire hydrants, and street trees. Whenever new development fronts a public
street, the developers are required to provide curb, gutter, and sidewalk treatments to the
                                                           56
specifications supplied by the Public Works director. If the Fire Chief or Public Works director
decides that there is not sufficient supply of fire hydrants nearby, new development would cover
                                                     57
the cost of additional hydrants as necessary. Finally, if a new development fronts a planting strip,
then the owner must care for and maintain the trees and other vegetation in the strip.
The water, parking, and other miscellaneous on-and-off site improvements standards do not
constrain residential development in St. Helena. .
Building Codes and Enforcement
The current St. Helena Building code has been adapted from the 2013 California Building
Standards Code, also known as Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. These regulations
include the 2013 California Fire Code, 2013 Energy Code, 2011 National Electrical Code, 2012
Uniform Mechanical Code, and 2012 Uniform Plumbing Code. The major local amendments
included the continuation of St. Helena’s program for the seismic retrofit of unreinforced buildings
and the requirement that all new construction install an approved automatic fire-suppression
sprinkler system. Existing residential structures that undergo additions or repairs equal to at least
50 percent of the existing floor area, and units experiencing a change in occupancy to a more
                                                                                    58
hazardous use, also require the installation of an approved sprinkler system. Otherwise, Title 15
of the St. Helena Municipal Code closely adheres to the 2013 California Building Standards Code
and places no greater constraints on housing development than any other jurisdiction in the State
that follows this model code.
The enforcement of building codes within the City of St. Helena is centered on the inspection of
new construction and remodels or renovations requiring building permits. The City has the power
to inspect and declare unsafe any structure or piece of equipment, be it existing or under-
construction that does not meet specific municipal code standards. These include, but are not
limited to, structures with insufficient modes of egress; structures that are unsafe or that have been
made structurally unsound due to fire, earthquake, or other natural disaster; buildings that are
     56
        Municipal Code 12.08.090 Plans and specifications.
     57
        Municipal Code 16.32.110 Fire protection.
     58
        Municipal Code, 15.36.060 Fire protection systems.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                              City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                 Page 105

deemed a public nuisance; and, buildings that have been constructed or maintained in violation of
local or state law. Once a building has been declared unsafe, the building official may issue notice
that the structure be repaired, vacated, or demolished within a reasonable amount of time and with
                              59
the appropriate permits.
Building and Development Impact Fees
The City’s building department fee schedule is designed to directly offset the costs incurred by the
City when processing and reviewing development applications, and to inspect new construction.
Fees are charged when a building permit is issued and are based on building plans and estimated
construction costs.
Development impact fees are charged to new projects in order to offset costs for the construction,
expansion, and maintenance of off-site improvements that either were built for the purposes of the
new project or were existing improvements from which the new developments will benefit. In the
case of St. Helena, impact fees are charged for public safety, civic facilities, water and wastewater
services, a drainage, traffic mitigation, and schools. In 2013, the City conducted a comprehensive
study and update of all of its development impact fees. As a result, total impact fees for single
family houses decreased from $19.78 per square foot to $16.32 per square foot, a 17.5 percent
reduction. Fees for multi-family development increased from $13.78 per square foot to $21.37 per
square foot, a 55 percent increase.
The single-family fee calculations shown in Table 37 are based on a development prototype of a
2,300 square foot single-family residence with three-bedrooms and two-bathrooms with a total
construction cost estimate of approximately $920,000 ($400 per square foot). The fee calculations
for the multifamily project use the conceptual plan for the 8 unit, three story project proposed by
Calistoga Affordable Housing. As shown in Table 37, building permit and development impact
fees for a prototypical single-family home total $71,190, representing 7.7 percent of total
construction costs.
The fees are different for a multifamily development. Using the 8 unit, 6,780 square foot Calistoga
Affordable Housing development as a prototype, the total development fee comes to $171,952, or
$21,494 per unit, representing 12.3 percent of total construction costs. Fees are calculated as
shown in Table 38.
The multifamily development impact fees have increased to reflect the costs of the improvements
necessary to serve residential development. Without the money collected through the fees, the City
     59
        City of St. Helena. St. Helena Municipal Code, Title 15. http://www.codepublishing.com/CA/sthelena/.
     Accessed March 28, 2014
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 106

could not afford to make the necessary improvements in infrastructure, and thus the fees to do not
represent an undue governmental constraint to housing development. In addition, fee reductions
and adjustments for affordable and other housing projects are permitted on a case by case basis, as
approved by City Council under Section 3, Chapter 3.32 of the St. Helena Municipal Code. For
example, the City reduced development fees of up to $150,000 for the Calistoga Affordable
Housing project at 1105 Pope Street.
Processing and Permit Procedures
The processing and permitting procedures in St. Helena are summarized in Tables 39 and 40 and
described below using examples of a single-family unit, a multifamily affordable housing
development, and a market rate single-family development. A single-family unit requires design
review approval from the Planning Commission (four weeks) and a building permit (two weeks)
for a total of approximately two months to process.
The prototype multifamily housing project contains 20 units on land zoned high-density
              60
residential. Since it is a multifamily dwelling, it requires a conditional use permit from the City.
In addition, the development would require design review and a building permit. The processing
time for the development would amount to around 9 months, with an allowance of 60 days for
application submittal, staff review and response to comments, an additional 90 to 135 days for
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review processing, including the applicant hiring a
consultant and the preparation of an Initial Study and mitigation measures, 60 days for comments
on the Mitigated Negative Declaration, and, finally, about 30 days for design review. The process
for a multifamily affordable housing development would take longer than 9 months if a complete
EIR is necessary.
In comparison, a 20-unit, market rate single family development would take an additional 90 days,
for a total of approximately 12 months, including an additional month for staff review and response
to comments, since market rate single family developments are not given priority processing. As
shown in Table 39, this development type would require environmental review and applications for
a tentative subdivision map and design review. A significant portion of the time involved is due to
the procedural requirements of CEQA, which are beyond the City's control. In addition, a market
rate single family development of around 20 units would actually take years to build since the
Building Department only issues 9 building permits per year under the Growth Management
System and only developments with at least 40 percent of the units affordable to lower-income
households qualify for the reserve of GMS residential permits from previous years.
     60
        Personal Communication with City staff, April 2, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                               City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                  Page 107
Constraints to Housing for Persons with Disabilities
On January 1, 2002, SB 520 went into effect, requiring local jurisdictions to analyze potential
governmental constraints to the development, improvement, and maintenance of housing for
persons with disabilities as part of a jurisdictions housing element update. Under SB 520, housing
elements must also include one of the following 1) a program to remove constraints, or 2) provide
reasonable accommodations for, “housing designed for occupancy by, or with supportive services
for, persons with disabilities.” A jurisdiction can fulfill this second clause in a variety of ways
including establishing policies that facilitate the provision of housing that is physically accessible
to people with mobility impairments, residential care facilities for individuals with Alzheimer’s,
housing for persons with AIDS/HIV, and transitional housing that serves homeless with
disabilities.
Senate Bill 520 Analysis
The City has not identified any barriers to the provision of accessible housing. In January 2015, the
City adopted a Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance that provides a procedure for people with
disabilities to request reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning laws and other land
use regulations, policies and procedures. Applications are reviewed and approved by the Planning
Director if no discretionary permit approval is required other than the request for reasonable
accommodation. Otherwise, the request is reviewed concurrently with another discretionary review
permit.
Zoning and Land Use
The zoning code and land use designations for the City of St. Helena support the provision of
housing for persons with disabilities. The City permits transitional and supportive housing in all
residentially zoning districts and conditionally permits transitional and supportive housing in
commercial zoning districts, subject only to the same restrictions that apply to other residential
uses of the same type in the same zone.
The City of St. Helena allows an intermediate care facility, and residential or developmentally
disabled nursing facilities serving six or fewer persons as a right in the LR-1A, LR, MR, and HR
                                   61
zones, as required by SB520. Therefore, small group homes are permitted by right in the majority
of residential zones in the City, and these same districts allow larger group homes of more than six
persons with a conditional use permit (CUP) as required by SB 520. No other regulations in the
zoning code or land use designations restrict the siting of either group homes or housing for other
                                                                62
special needs populations, including disabled persons.
     61
        City of St. Helena Municipal Code, Title 17.
     62
        Government Section Code 12926 defined physical disability as including, “but is not limited to, all of the
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 108

The City’s parking and loading requirements do not have specific provisions related to persons
with disabilities, but there is a provision stating that “rest homes, convalescent hospitals, residential
care and similar group care facilities” require only one space for each four beds, which is a reduced
requirement compared to the two parking spaces required for typical “one-and two-family dwelling
        63
units.” Consequently, the reduced parking requirements for group care facilities decrease the
parking requirements for some disabled persons, but parking requirements for residential
development need to serve all disabled persons. In addition, federally subsidized senior citizen
housing for low- and moderate-income residents is subject to reduced off-street parking
requirements.
The City appears to comply with Fair Housing Laws in respect to occupancy standards since the
                                                                                                                      64
City does not make a distinction between families and unrelated adults of less than six persons.
The remaining requirements under SB 520 may not have been met by the City of St. Helena
because the City of St. Helena has not conducted a complete review of the City’s compliance with
Fair Housing Law.
Permits and Processing
The majority of the City of St. Helena permitting and processing procedures do not appear to
negatively affect the ability to design or retrofit homes that will be accessible for the disabled, or,
to constrain the siting of group homes. The City, however, applies the same process required for
other renovations to retrofitting homes and the City does not have a special process for such
retrofits.
As discussed above, group homes with fewer than six persons are permitted by right, and group
homes with more than six persons are permitted with a CUP in the residential zones, and no
additional permits are required. This is consistent with the City’s requirements for other larger
group quarters such as condominiums, townhomes, apartments, and dwelling groups containing
more than four units, which also require a CUP. There are no additional requirements placed on
    following: (1) Having any physiological disease, disorder, condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical
    loss that does both of the following: (A) Affects one or more of the following body systems: neurological,
    immunological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory, including speech organs, cardiovascular,
    reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine.”
    63
       City of St. Helena Municipal Code, Chapter 17.124: Parking and Loading Requirements
    64
       City of St. Helena Municipal Code, Chapter 17.04 defines family as follows Family” means any of the
    following groups living together in the same dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit:
               1. Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or legal adoption;
               2. A nuclear family identified by extended cohabitation;
               3. A group not exceeding five persons whose interpersonal relationships relating to shared
               household expenses, duties and private lives are indistinguishable from groups listed in subsections 1
               and 2 above.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 109

group homes providing on-site services because they fall under the definition of intermediate care
                                                                65
and nursing facilities, which allow for on-site care.
Building Codes
The City of St. Helena adopted the California Uniform Building Code in January 2013, and the
changes made to this Code by the City, enumerated in the Governmental Constraints section of this
document, do not unfairly treat group homes differently than other residential uses. Nevertheless,
no specific exemptions to the Uniform Building Code exist for housing for disabled persons. The
City of St. Helena does not have local universal design requirements.
Summary
The possible non-governmental constraints discussed above include the price of land, the cost of
construction, the availability of financing, and the flooding of the Napa River. Land costs
represent a significant component of the cost of housing development in St. Helena because the
price per acre of recent vacant residential land sales amounted to approximately $1 million. The
cost of construction in St. Helena does not appear to constrain development and is in line with
construction costs seen throughout the region. Obtaining financing for development projects can
be difficult, and once a development is complete it is hard for potential residents to qualify for
mortgages. Overall housing production costs for both single-family and multifamily rental
development indicate that a subsidy would probably be necessary for some moderate-income
households, and all lower income households to own or rent new units in St. Helena.
The governmental controls analyzed in this section were land use controls, codes and
enforcements, on-and off-site improvements, fees and exactions, processing and permit procedures,
and regulations affecting housing for persons with disabilities. The land use controls including
zoning and current General Plan land use designations do not constrain residential development;
however, some changes are necessary to streamline the Design Review process. The St. Helena
zoning code allows development of up to 28 dwelling units per acre in the HR zone and the density
can be even higher if a developer chooses to utilize the City’s density bonus. In addition, the
zoning code sets mandatory minimums on the densities so that land zoned MR, for example cannot
be built at less than 5.1 dwelling units per acre. The Growth Management System does not appear
to place an undue burden on market rate development, since there has never been a year when the
demand for residential building permits has exceed the number of available permits. Furthermore,
housing projects affordable to households at up to 120 percent of AMI are exempt from the GMS.
    65
       The State of California Department of Developmental Services defines an intermediate care facility as “are
    health facilities licensed by the Licensing and Certification Division of the California Department of Public
    Health to provide 24-hour-per-day services.” http://www.dds.ca.gov/ICF/Home.cfm Accessed December 17,
    2008
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                        City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                           Page 110

One General Plan policy that may need revision is the Design Review process, because the criteria
are subjective in nature and may add a significant amount of time to the development process.
Changes to the Design Review process are being explored as part of St. Helena’s current General
Plan update.
The on- and off-site improvement standards related to water, sewer, parking and other
miscellaneous regulations impact housing development in a variety of different ways. Sewer
capacity is sufficient to support additional development. The water capacity during a normal year
is sufficient and is expected to remain sufficient through 2023, but there will always be water
shortages in dry years. The City has adopted written policies and procedures to grant priority water
and sewer service to proposed developments that include housing units affordable to lower-income
households. The remaining parking and miscellaneous requirements do not place an undue burden
on housing development.
Neither the building codes nor the building fees represent a governmental constraint to
development. St. Helena adopted the 2013 California Building Codes Standards, and although they
have made some changes to the Code such as seismic control measures, these changes were
necessary for safety and so not unduly affect housing production. The fee structure for both single-
family and multifamily development reflects the costs of the development to the City, and therefore
facilitates development.
The time it takes for a developer to complete the City’s permitting and processing procedures for
single-family detached subdivisions is manageable.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 111

Table 36: St. Helena Residential Zoning Districts
                                                                                                                     Minim um           Minim um                                              Maxim um
     Zoning                 Residential Uses          Conditionally Perm itted Uses        Minim um Lot Area      and Maxim um              Lot         Setback (feet) Yard (feet) (a)       Bldg. Height
     District            Perm itted as of Right          or Special Requirem ents                  Acres          Units per Acre        Width (feet) Front Side             Rear Side            (feet)       FAR (b)
Agricultural           One single-family dw elling;    Farmw orker housing and                      40                  0.03                n.a.            20    20         20     20             35          n.a.
Preserve (AP)          transitional and supportive     seasonal farm labor camps
                       housing; agricultural employee not expressly permitted by right
                       housing up to 36 beds or 12
                       units
Tw enty-Acre           One single-family dw elling;    More than one single-family                   20                  0.2                n.a.            50    50         20     20             30          n.a.
Agriculture (A-20)     one second unit; transitional dw elling and farmw orker housing
                       and supportive housing;         not expressly permitted by right
                       agricultural employee housing
                       up to 36 beds or 12 units
Winery (W)             One single-family dw elling;    More than one single-family                   20                  0.2                300            100    50         75     50             45          n.a.
                       one second unit; transitional   dw elling; ow ner and caretaker
                       and supportive housing;         dw ellings; farmw orker housing
                       agricultural employee housing   not expressly permitted by right
                       up to 36 beds or 12 units
Woodland               One single-family dw elling;    One second unit under                      5 to 40          0.03 to 0.2                20          20 to 20 to (c) 20 to   20 to (c)        35
Watershed (WW)         one second unit that meets      certain environmental                                                                                50    50         50     50
                       certain crieria; transitional   conditions
                       and supportive housing;
                       agricultural employee
                       for up to 6 persons
Low Density            One single-family dw elling;    One single-family dw elling below           1 (d)                  1                   70          20 to 20 to (e) 20 to   10 to (e)        30          n.a.
Residential One        Intermediate care, residential  the minimum density;                                                                                 30    30         30     15
Acre Minimum           or developmentally disabled     Intermediate care facility,
(LR-1A)                nursing facilities and farm-    residential or developmentally
                       w orker housing serving         disabled nursing facility serving
                       six or few er persons;          seven or more persons
                       transitional and supportive
                       housing; permanent mobile
                       home; one second unit
Notes:
(a) A yard is defined as open space inside the established interior lot lines.
(b) Floor Area Ratio.
(c) Setback and yard requirements in the Woodland Watershed (WW) district may vary and are dependent upon the effect of certain health and safety considerations.
(d) Parcels can be less than one acre if created as a result of lot line adjustments, so long as the number of parcels existing prior to the lot line adjustment does not increase and that no lots are less than 7,000
square feet.
(e) Setback and yard requirements in the Low Density Residential One Acre Minimum (LR-1A), Low Density Residential (LR) and Medium Density Residential (MR) districts vary and are dependent upon the height of
the structure.
(f) Floor area ratios (FARs) in the Medium Density Residential (MR) and High Density Residential (HD) districts vary and dependent upon the net parcel area.
Sources: City of St. Helena, Municipal Code Title 17, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                                 City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                                 Page 112
Table 36: St. Helena Residential Zoning Districts (Page 2 of 2)
                                                                                                                    Minim um            Minim um                                              Maxim um
     Zoning                 Residential Uses          Conditionally Perm itted Uses Minim um Lot Area             and Maxim um              Lot         Setback (feet) Yard (feet) (a)       Bldg. Height
     District            Perm itted as of Right          or Special Requirem ents                  Acres          Units per Acre        Width (feet) Front Side             Rear Side            (feet)       FAR (b)
Low Density            One single-family dw elling;    One single-family below the                 1 (d)                1 to 5                70          20 to 20 to (e) 20 to 10 to (e)          30           n.a.
Residential (LR)       Intermediate care,              minimum density; Intermediate                                                                        30    30         30     15
                       residential or                  care facility, residential or
                       developmentally disabled        developmentally disabled nursing
                       nursing facilities and farm-    facility serving seven or more
                       w orker housing serving         persons
                       six or few er persons;
                       transitional and supportive
                       housing; permanent mobile
                       home; one second unit
Medium Density         One single-family dw elling;    One single-family below the                  0.16              5.1 to 16               70          20 to 20 to (e) 20 to   10 to (e)        30          .21 to (f)
Residential (MR)       Intermediate care facility,     minimum density; Intermediate                                                                        30    30         30     15                        .36
                       residential or                  care facility, residential or
                       developmentally disabled        developmentally disabled nursing
                       nursing facilities and farm-    facility serving seven or more
                       w orker housing serving         persons; small lot development;
                       six or few er persons;          condominium or tow nhouse
                       transitional and supportive
                       housing; permanent mobile
                       home; one second unit
High Density           One single-family dw elling;    One single-family dw elling below            0.16             16.1 to 28               70            20    20         20     10          30 to 35      .21 to(f)
Residential            Intermediate care facility,     the minimum density;                                                                                                                                   .36
(HR)                   residential or                  Intermediate care facility,
                       developmentally disabled        residential or developmentally
                       nursing facilities and farm-    disabled nursing facility serving
                       w orker housing serving         seven or more persons; small lot
                       six or few er persons;          development; condominium or
                       transitional and supportive     tow nhouse; multiple-family
                       housing; permanent mobile       dw ellings, apartments and
                       home; one second unit;          dw elling groups containing more
                       single room occupancy           than four units
                       housing; multiple-family
                       dw ellings, apartments and
                       dw elling groups containing
                       four units or less
Notes:
(a) A yard is defined as open space inside the established interior lot lines.
(b) Floor Area Ratio.
(c) Setback and yard requirements in the Woodland Watershed (WW) district may vary and are dependent upon the effect of certain health and safety considerations.
(d) Parcels can be less than one acre if created as a result of lot line adjustments, so long as the number of parcels existing prior to the lot line adjustment does not increase and that no lots are less than 7,000
square feet.
(e) Setback and yard requirements in the Low Density Residential One Acre Minimum (LR-1A), Low Density Residential (LR) and Medium Density Residential (MR) districts vary and are dependent upon the height of
the structure.
(f) Floor area ratios (FARs) in the Medium Density Residential (MR) and High Density Residential (HD) districts vary and dependent upon the net parcel area.
Sources: City of St. Helena, Municipal Code Title 17, 2015.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                                       Page 113
Table 37: Building Permit and Development Impact Fees,
Buiding Department
Permit Fees                                                $3,823
City Impact Fees                           Fee
Public Safety Fee                      $1.04 psf           $2,392
Civic Facilities Fee                   $1.95 psf           $4,485
Parks Fee                              $7.16 psf          $16,468
Water System Fee                       $3.05 psf           $7,015
Wastew ater System Fee                 $0.45 psf           $1,035
Drainage System Fee                    $0.73 psf           $1,679
Transportation Fee                     $1.94 psf           $4,462
Housing Fee                             2.5% of valuation $23,000
Other District Fees                      Fee
School District Fee                    $3.20 psf           $6,831
Total Fees                                                $71,190
Building Size (square feet)            2,300
Construction Cost (psf)                $400
Valuation                           $920,000
Fees as % of Construction Costs         7.7%
Source: City of St. Helena Planning Department
Housing Element Needs Assessment                               City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                  Page 114
Table 38: Building Permit and Development Impact Fees, 8-Unit Multi-Family Development,
2014
 Building Department
 Permit Fees                                              $5,503
 City Impact Fees                               Fee
 Public Safety Fee                          $1.04 psf     $7,051
 Civic Facilities Fee                       $1.95   psf  $13,221
 Parks Fee                                 $12.18   psf  $82,580
 Water System Fee                           $2.47   psf  $16,747
 Wastewater System Fee                      $0.66   psf   $4,475
 Drainage System Fee                        $0.69   psf   $4,678
 Transportation Fee                         $2.36   psf  $16,001
 Other District Fees                          Fee
 School District Fee                        $3.20   psf  $21,696
 Total Fees                                             $171,952
 Per Unit Fee                                            $21,494
 Building Size (square feet)                6,780
 Valuation                             $1,400,000
 Fees as % of Construction Costs           12.3%
 Source: City of St. Helena Planning Department
Housing Element Needs Assessment                         City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                            Page 115
Table 39: Timelines for Permit Procedures
Type of Approval or Permit           Typical Processing Time    Approval Body
Ministerial Review                  2 weeks                     Planning Director; reported to Planning Commission.
Conditional Use Permit              4-6 weeks                   Planning Commission
Zone Change                         6 months                    Planning Commission & City Council
General Plan Amendment              6 months                    Planning Commission & City Council
Site Plan Review                    2 months                    Planning Commission
Design Review                       4 weeks                     Planning Commission
Tract Maps                          6 months                    Planning Commission & City Council
Parcel Maps                         3 months                    Planning Commission
Initial Environmental Study         3 months                    Planning Commission and City Council depending upon project
Environmental Impact Report         10 months                   Planning Commission & City Council
Source: City of St. Helena staff, 2014
Table 40: Typical Processing Procedures by Project Type
                                                 Single-fam ily                 Subdivision                      Multifam ily
                                                       Unit                      (20 Units)                       (20 Units)
                                           Ministerial Review          Tentative Map                  Conditional Use Permit
                                           Design Review               Final Map                      Site Plan Review
              Required                                                 Site Plan Review               Design Review
               Perm it                                                 Design Review                  Initial Environmental Study
            Procedures                                                 Initial Environmental Study    Mitigated Negative Declaration
                                                                       Environmental Impact Report
Estim ated Total Processing Tim e                  2 m onths                     12 m onths                       9 m onths
Source: City of St. Helena Planning Department, 2014
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                               City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                    Page 116
Opportunities for Energy
Conservation
Government Code Section 65583(a) (7) requires the “analysis of opportunities for energy
                                                               66
conservation with respect to residential development.” This is important due to the key role
played by energy efficiency in determining the relative affordability of housing. As long as design,
installation, and equipment costs do not exceed potential energy savings, lower rates of energy
usage decrease utility costs for residents, making a housing unit more affordable. The discussion
that follows outlines current State policies and development standards along with local City
policies that promote energy conservation for new and existing development in the City of St.
Helena. Additionally, increasing attention is being paid to the role of the design and location of
residential development in addressing greenhouse gas emissions at the local and regional levels.
Instituted by legislative action in 1978 to reduce overall energy consumption statewide, the
California Building Energy Efficiency Standards set thresholds and guidelines for energy
efficiency for both residential and nonresidential construction. The revised standards for 2013
went into effect January 1, 2014, under Title 24, Part 6, of the California Code of Regulations.
Title 24 is otherwise known as the California Building Standards Code. The energy requirements of
the new State code are significantly more stringent than the prior code (an approximately 25
percent reduced energy budget for new homes, 30 percent reduction for commercial buildings and
14 percent reduction for multi-family structures) and are intended to progress to net zero energy
homes by 2020 and commercial structures by 2030.
In addition to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Part 11 of Title 24 contains California’s
Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen). St. Helena adopted the revised standards in 2013,
with amendments to require all new indoors plumbing fixtures to meet the 20 percent reduction in
water use, a 20 percent reduction in cement use in foundations, and certified U.S. EPA Phase II
certified wood-burning devices or pellet-fueled device.
On a local level, the 1993 City of St. Helena General Plan Land Use and Growth Management
Element addresses energy conservation for residential development by including goals and policies
geared toward compact urban development and increased residential densities which support
walkable communities and reduce energy usage and greenhouse gas emissions related to
transportation between residential areas and shopping or employment centers. These goals and
policies align well with the intent of recently enacted State legislation dealing with reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions, including AB 32 and SB 375. The typical reduction in the size of
     66
        HCD Building Blocks for Effective Housing Elements, “Opportunities for Energy Conservation.” Accessed
     September 24, 2008. http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/housing_element/index.html.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 117

individual residential units associated with higher density development also leads to reductions in
energy usage and costs for heating and cooling. Finally, an emphasis on providing housing for all
income levels increases the likelihood that persons employed in St. Helena will find the
opportunity to live in the City, and reduce costs and greenhouse gas emissions associated with
                   67 68
transportation.
The 2009 City of St. Helena Housing Element, in accordance with State mandated guidelines, sets
goals for efficient land use, higher density and mixed-use development, and residential design
standards. In addition, the 2009 Housing Element established two policies that encourage the use
of alternative energy sources and encourage energy and resource conservation as well as twelve
programs to implement those policies. As discussed earlier, the City waives permit fees for all
solar and electric vehicle charging stations, provides information to the public regarding alternative
energy technologies and how they relate to the permitting process, and promotes energy and
resources savings programs including rebates, audits, and water-efficient landscaping practices.
The City participates in Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) programs that allow property
owners to finance renewable energy, water efficiency and energy efficiency improvements through
a property tax assessment. The City also adopted a bicycle plan in 2013. Programs still to be
implemented include incentives for passive natural heating and cooling and provisions for on-site
alternative wastewater facilities.
In 2006, the City established a Climate Protection Task Force, now known as the Sustainability
Committee. The Committee’s mission is to educate St. Helena citizens, businesses, city staff and
elected officials and assist with reasonable measures to achieve greenhouse gas reductions and
effective sustainability practices.
In addition to the policies and programs contained the housing element, the City’s draft General
Plan Update 2030 contains a climate change element that aims to effectively address the City’s
energy conservation concerns, renewable energy production and use, transportation issues,
sustainable business development, and the responsible evolution of the City to reduce climate
change impacts in St. Helena.
Overall, the City is in compliance with State standards and, in some respects, even exceeds these
minimum standards.
     67
        City of St. Helena. “General Plan: Land Use and Growth Management Element.” 1993. Accessed
     September 24, 2008. http://www.sthelena2030.com/global/pdf_files/2_lu.pdf.
     68
        City of St. Helena. “General Plan Update Working Paper: Sustainability.” October, 2007. Accessed
     September 24, 2008. http://www.sthelena2030.com/documents/.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                      Page 118

Sites Inventory and Analysis and
Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
State law requires that a Housing Element include an inventory of available land that is
appropriately zoned and suitable for housing development to accommodate the City’s regional
housing needs allocation.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation
The Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) identifies the supply of housing
necessary to meet the existing and projected growth in population and households in California.
Each of the 39 regional jurisdictions in the State, including the Councils of Governments (CoGs),
receives a RHNA from HCD that specifies the number of units, by affordability level, that the
regional jurisdiction must plan to accommodate during their Housing Element planning period.
Each regional jurisdiction then distributes the allocations throughout the cities and counties
pursuant to article 65584 of the California Government Code. The allocation must be consistent
with the following objectives:
        65584(d)(1) “Increasing the housing supply and the mix of housing types, tenure, and
         affordability in all cities and counties within the region in an equitable manner, which shall
         result in each jurisdiction receiving an allocation of units for low and very low-income
         households”
        65584(d)(2) “Promoting infill development and socioeconomic equity, the protection of
         environmental and agricultural resources, and the encouragement of efficient development
         patterns.”
        65584(d)(3) “Promoting an improved intraregional relationship between jobs and
         housing.”
        65584(d)(4) “Allocating a lower proportion of housing need to an income category when a
         jurisdiction already has a disproportionately high share of households in that income
         category, as compared to the countywide distribution of households in that category from
                                                             69
         the most recent decennial United States census.”
HCD determined the RHNA for the ABAG region, consistent with the objectives above. The
RHNA for the nine-county Bay Area region was 187,990 units for the 2014-2022 RHNA period.
Napa County received 1,482 units, or approximately 0.8% of the total.
    16
       California Government Code Section 65584.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                              City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                 Page 119

Regional Housing Needs Allocation, 2014-2022
Table 41 shows that the City received a Regional Housing Needs Allocation of 31 units for the
period of January 1, 2014 through October 31, 2022. This breaks down to the various income
categories as follows: 8 units affordable to very low-income households; 5 units affordable to low-
income households; 5 units affordable to moderate-income households; and 13 units affordable to
above moderate-income households. As per State law, projected housing need for extremely low-
income households earning 30 percent or less of the area median income is one half of the very
low-income category, or 4 units.
Table 41: St. Helena Regional Housing Needs Allocation, 2014-2022
                                                                                                    Above
                                                    Very Low         Low           Moderate       Moderate  TOTAL
 Original ABAG Allocation                                  8               5               5             13    31
 Less Built or Building Permits Issued to Date (a)         4               0               2             25    35
 Less Units Approved to Date (a)                                           5               3                    8
 Remaining Balance                                         4               0               0              0     4
 Note:
 (a) January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2014.
 Sources: ABAG, 2013; City of St. Helena Planning Department, 2015; O'Rourke Community Planning, 2015.
From January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2014, developers built or the City issued building
permits for 35 units. Twenty-five single family houses and 10 second units have been built or are
under construction. This includes 20 market-rate single family houses and 4 deed-restricted second
units for very low income households in Phase II and Phase III of the Magnolia Oaks development,
as provided for in the affordable housing agreement. The remaining units are on scattered sites
throughout the City. Affordability levels for market-rate second units are based on the City’s 2014
second unit survey, which found that 25 percent of second units are affordable to low-income
households, 50 percent are affordable to moderate-income households, and 25 percent are
affordable to above-moderate income households. The City estimates that 4 out of 10 second units
are available for rental. As a result, the City has conservatively allocated the market rate second
units as 2 moderate-income units.
The City also approved 8 affordable units for development at 1105 Pope Street. Sixty percent of
the units are to be affordable to lower-income households and 40 percent affordable to moderate-
income households. Although the developer is committed to providing the units at the deepest
affordability levels possible, the City is conservatively estimating all lower-income units will be
affordable to low-income households and not very-low income households. Additional
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                   City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                      Page 120

information on this site is found in the Housing Opportunity Sites section (see Site #7).
As shown in Table 41, the City has already met or exceeded its RHHA requirement for the low,
moderate and above moderate income categories. The remaining RHNA need is for 4 units for very
low income households.
Zoning to Accommodate the Development of Affordable Housing to Lower Income
Households
Government Code Section 65583(2) sets default minimum allowable densities for zoning presumed
to accommodate housing affordable for lower-income households. The Government Code
classifies jurisdictions in four different categories. All cities in Napa County are categorized as
suburban jurisdictions, where the default minimum density necessary to provide affordable housing
                                        70
is at least 20 dwelling units per acre. The City of St. Helena Municipal Code already allows for
residential development of up to 28 dwelling units per acre in the High Density residential zone.
Additional density can be achieved by projects that include sufficient affordable units to qualify for
density bonuses. Thus, the City’s High Density Residential zoning category is presumed to be able
to accommodate development that can meet very low- and low-income housing needs.
Housing Sites Inventory
The Housing Sites Inventory is primarily comprised of sites that were identified in the 2009
housing element after an extensive public process. Table 42 details the inventory of key housing
opportunity sites, and Table 43 lists other sites in St. Helena that could potentially support
additional residential development, but due to factors including small parcel size, environmental
constraints, and current zoning are not identified as key housing opportunity sites for the 2015-
2023 housing element period. The key opportunity sites are shown in Figure 1, and the other sites
are shown in Figure 2. It should be noted that with the exception of Sites #7, 8 and 11, the property
owners have not expressed interest in developing these sites at the current time. However, the sites
are appropriately zoned for multi-family housing, with no known environmental constraints other
than the need to provide street and utility extensions to some of the identified opportunity sites. In
addition, the City is not aware of any long term leases which would preclude development of these
sites during the 2015-2023 planning period. As a result, the City considers these sites available for
development within the current RHNA cycle.
Overall, there are four high density housing opportunity sites (Sites #8 - 11) totaling 3.9 acres that
     70
        Department of Housing and Community Development, Division of Hosing Policy Development,
     “Amendment of State Housing Element Law – AB 2348” June 9, 2005.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                   Page 121

have a realistic development capacity of 62 units, which far exceeds the City’s RHNA for 13 units
                                                 71
affordable to lower income households. As discussed above, the High Density Residential zone
can support affordable housing for lower income households. These estimates of development
capacity are based on a conservative assumption that the sites will develop at the lowest
permissible density for each category. The City purchased the 684 McCorkle Avenue parcel in
2013 and plans to develop 9-12 units of affordable housing on the site over the planning period.
The property owner of 821 Pope Street has submitted conceptual drawings to the City for a senior
co-housing development consisting of 19 residential units.
There are seven medium density key housing opportunity sites (Sites #1 - 7) totaling 34 acres that
are estimated to have a minimum development capacity of 173 units. One of these sites has been
approved for an 8-unit affordable multifamily project. Two sites are vacant and have the capacity
to support a minimum of 59 units. The remaining four sites are currently vineyards and ranches.
These sites, though currently in agricultural use, are zoned for residential development and are
identified as key housing opportunity sites. Due to the general lack of residentially zoned land in
Napa Valley overall, these vineyard sites that have the appropriate residential zoning, are located
within St. Helena’s Urban Limit Line, and have access to City services are considered developable.
Medium density sites are generally assumed to provide market rate housing affordable to above-
moderate income households. However, development projects will be subject to the City’s
inclusionary regulations, which require 20 percent of the units to be affordable.
Public Participation
The initial step in developing a housing sites inventory for the Housing Element Update was to
start with the housing sites inventory in the 2009 Housing Element. The 2009 Housing Element
identified 12 key housing development sites. Seven of these sites were identified as Medium
Density Residential, and three were identified as high density. In addition, a City-owned site zoned
for commercial and agricultural use was included for potential rezoning for residential
development.
City staff and the City’s consultant presented these sites at the April 2014 Community Workshop
and, based upon community input and a review of staff’s general knowledge of sites within the
City, revised the list to reflect the current development potential of the key housing sites. Two sites
were removed from the key housing site list and moved to the other vacant/underutilized list: the
Hunter property located between Adams Street and the City-owned flood control parcel adjacent to
the Napa River, and a City-owned parcel at Adams Street and Library Avenue. In addition, a site
identified at 1600 Main Street was removed from the list because the parcel is not currently zoned
for high density housing and cannot currently accommodate additional housing units. One site was
     71
        “Realistic” development capacity is based upon the imposition of development standards that impact the
     residential development capacity of the site.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                      City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                         Page 122

moved from the other vacant/underutilized site list to the key housing site list because the property
owner is currently interested in developing a 19-unit senior co-housing project on the parcel.
The City then conducted an analysis of the constraints to housing development, infrastructure
availability, likely housing unit carrying capacity, and suitability of the various sites to
accommodate housing that could be affordable to the different income categories. This analysis
also identified recommended Housing Element policies and/or programs that would ensure that the
City can fully accommodate its RHNA through existing sites that are appropriately zoned and
available for housing development.
Additional input on the Sites Inventory was provided by both the Planning Commission and City
Council after public hearings were held during meetings in February of 2015.
Housing Opportunity Sites
Site #1 – 567 Pope Street APN 009-070-002 (Medium Density Residential /10 Ac) Unit range: 51-
160
This site is located on Pope Street at the terminus of Starr Avenue. Future development will need
to plan for the extension of Starr Avenue. Water, sewer, and storm drain lines are available from
Pope Street. The site is currently developed with a single residence, a stand of oaks, and a remnant
walnut orchard.
Site #2 – 591 McCorkle, APN 009-070-003 (Medium Density Residential /8 Ac) Unit range: 40-
127
This parcel is directly south of the Romero Property and contains a residence and vineyards.
Development of the site will require improvements to traffic circulation with the extension of
McCorkle Avenue and Starr Avenue as shown on the General Plan. Water, sewer, and storm drain
are available from McCorkle Avenue. Any future extension of Starr Avenue may provide
additional services to the site. The property will not need either a General Plan Amendment or a
rezoning for residential development.
Site #3 – 1817 Spring Street, APN 009-322-009 (Medium Density Residential /1.5 Ac) Unit range:
8-24
This site is located on North Crane and is currently occupied by a barn and an oak grove. Water,
sewer, and storm drain are available to the site. The parcel will not need either a General Plan
Amendment or a rezoning for residential development.
Site #4 – Sulphur Springs, APN 009-362-015 (Medium Density Residential /5.3 Ac) Unit range:
27-85
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 123

This site is directly west of the Magnolia Oaks project and is currently planted to vineyards. It is a
split zoned lot with 5.3 acres zoned as Medium Density Residential and 10 acres zoned as
Agriculture. The agricultural portion of the site is not completely within the Urban Limit Line.
Development of the site would require improvements to traffic circulation with the extension of La
Quinta Way and a secondary connection to Sulphur Springs Avenue and/or South Crane Avenue.
Sewer lines would need to be extended to the site. The property, zoned as Medium Density
Residential, will not need either a General Plan Amendment or a rezoning for residential
development.
Site #5 – Spring Street, APN 009-441-023 (Medium Density Residential /4.4 Ac) Unit range: 22-
70
This site is located on Spring Street and is planted to vineyards. In 2007 the owners had expressed
interest in designating the property as a historic resource and establishing a small winery but a
formal application has not yet been filed. Water, sewer, and storm drain are available to this site.
The property will not need either a General Plan Amendment or a rezoning to facilitate residential
development.
Site #6 – 576 Pope Street, APN 009-552-002 and 009-552-003 (Medium Density Residential /4.6
Ac) Unit range: 24-74
This site is located on the northeast corner of Starr Avenue and Pope Street and is currently
occupied by a barn and a vineyard. Water, sewer, and storm drain are available to this site. The
site contains two legal parcels. The parcels would not need either a General Plan Amendment or a
rezoning for residential development.
Site #7 – 1105 Pope Street, APN 009-090-003 (Medium Density Residential /.22Ac) Units
approved: 8
In August 2013, the City approved an 8-unit affordable housing project on this site. Calistoga
Affordable Housing owns parcel and is developing the project. The approved three-story, 6,780
square foot building will contain 6 two-bedroom units and 2 three-bedroom units. The City
granted several concessions and a density bonus to ensure the financial feasibility of the project,
and, in 2013, granted a water allocation to the project from the City’s water supply surplus. Under
the Medium Density designation, the project was entitled to 3.5 market rate units. Under State
density bonus law, the project was entitled to a maximum of 5 units. The City granted an
additional density bonus to increase the number of units to 8. In addition, the City granted
concessions from the following development standards: maximum floor area (3,000 square feet
allowed; 6,780 square feet granted); height of structure (30 feet allowed; 36 feet granted); setbacks;
and parking (8 covered and 8 uncovered on-site spaces required; 8 covered on-site spaces granted).
The City also reduced development fees of up to $150,000 for the project (fees are estimated at
approximately $172,000 in the housing element). City staff provided extensive technical assistance
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 124

to the applicant and assisted in obtaining a grant for the project. Although regulatory agreements
have not yet been executed, the project was approved for 60 percent of the units to be affordable to
lower income households and 40 percent affordable to moderate income households.
Site #8 – 684 McCorkle Avenue, APN 009-502-007 (High Density Residential /.54 Ac) Unit
range: 9-12
The City purchased this site in 2013 utilizing Housing Trust funds. The City plans to develop 9 to
12 units of affordable housing on the site within the planning period. The City was awarded a
CDBG grant to analyze the feasibility of developing affordable housing units on opportunity sites
throughout the community, including 684 McCorkle Avenue. The City will use the results of this
analysis to guide development of a financing plan for the property.
Sites #9 & 10 – 1515 and 1447 Spring Street, APN 009-590-010 and 009-590-003 (High Density
Residential/2.4 total Ac) Unit range: 38-67
These sites are adjacent to each other with each site containing one single-family residence. They
are located between the Wallis/Voorhees development and homes located on Spring Street with
access from Spring Street. Water, sewer, and storm drain are available to these sites. The
properties will not require a General Plan Amendment or a rezoning for residential development.
Site #11 – 821 Pope Street, 009-503-001 (High Density Residential/.97 Ac) Unit range: 15-27
This site is located on Pope Street and contains a single-family residence. The site is underutilized
and its size and proximity to the center of town make it a prime site for increased density. The site
is served by existing water, sewer and storm drains. The property would not require a General Plan
Amendment or a rezoning for additional residential development. The current owner has submitted
conceptual drawings to the City for a senior co-housing development consisting of 19 residential
units.
Second Unit Development
Local governments can employ a variety of development strategies and/or commit to specific
program actions to address the adequate sites requirement. As provided in Government Code
Section 65583(c)(1))., in addition to identifying vacant or underutilized land resources, local
governments can address a portion of their adequate sites requirement through the provision of
second units.
To rely on second units as part of an overall adequate sites strategy to accommodate a portion of
the regional housing need, the element must include an estimate of the potential number of second
units to be developed in the planning period based on an analysis that considers the following
factors:
         1. the number of second units developed in the prior planning period;
Housing Element Needs Assessment                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                               Page 125

          2. community need for these types of housing units,
          3. the resources and/or incentives available that will encourage the development of
               second-units; and
          4. other relevant factors as determined by HCD.
Thirty-nine second units were developed during the 2007-2014 planning period at a rate of 5.6
units per year. Based upon this past production, 49 second units are projected to be developed over
the next 8.8-year RHNA period (January 1, 2014 to October 31, 2022) under current conditions and
the current development standards. Ten of these second units have already been approved and/or
are under construction. Projected affordability levels for market-rate second units are based on the
City’s second unit survey, conducted in 2014, which found that approximately 4 out of 10 second
units are being rented, and of this number, 25% are affordable to low income households, 50% are
affordable to moderate income households, and 25% are affordable to above moderate income
households. Second units can provide housing for aging parents, adult children, caretakers, and in-
home caregivers, and are an important source of affordable housing in St. Helena. They also can
provide additional income for property owners, allowing retired and aging residents to remain in
their homes rather than relocate to a more affordable community. The City intends to explore
future policies for reporting requirements in order to determine actual use and affordability levels
of newly constructed second units.
Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
Multifamily Rental Housing
The St. Helena Municipal Code permits multifamily dwellings, apartments, and dwelling groups
with fewer than five units, by right in the High Density Residential (HR) zoning district. Projects
permitted by right require only routine approvals and are subject to a design review by the Planning
Commission. Multifamily projects with five or more proposed units require a conditional use
permit and must undergo a public review process. In addition, the Medium Density Residential
(MR) district permits the construction of attached duplex or triplex units with a conditional use
        72 73
permit.        As discussed previously, the City of St. Helena’s recent approval of an 8-unit
multifamily project at 1105 Pope Street demonstrates the City’s commitment to ensure that the
conditional use permit requirement does not represent an undue constraint on the development of
multifamily rental housing in St. Helena. As a result of the City’s careful application of its zoning
regulations, St. Helena boasts a number of examples of high-quality, attractive affordable housing
developments. Nonetheless, Program HE1.E of the 2009 Housing Element committed the City to
    72
       City of St. Helena. Annual Report of Compliance with Housing Element. June 2008.
    73
       City of St. Helena. St. Helena Municipal Code, Title 17. Accessed October 2, 2008.
    http://www.codepublishing.com/CA/sthelena/.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 126

eliminate the use permit requirement for multifamily projects in both the medium and high density
residential districts by June 30, 2012. The program anticipated that the City would adopt the
General Plan Update and adopt design review guidelines for multifamily projects prior to removing
the use permit requirement. As these actions have not yet been completed, the program has been
continued in the Housing Element Update.
Housing for Permanent and Seasonal Agricultural Employees
Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 of the California Health and Safety Code establish specific
requirements for the permitting of agricultural employee housing in a jurisdictions’ zoning code.
Specifically, Section 17021.5 mandates that “employee housing providing accommodations for six
                                                                                                           74
or fewer employees shall be deemed a single-family structure with a residential land use.”
Furthermore, designated employee housing, as defined above, cannot be subject to conditional use
permit requirements, zoning variance, fees, taxes, or any other requirement other than those
pertaining to a traditional single-family structure. Section 17021.6 pertains to larger employee
housing facilities featuring a maximum of 36 beds in group quarters, or 12 single-family units.
Under this legislation, such units are deemed an agricultural land use and cannot be subject to any
restrictions, conditional use requirements, zoning variance, fees, taxes, or other requirements not
imposed on other agricultural uses in the same zone.
In January 2015, the City amended the Municipal Code to allow agricultural employee housing for
6 or fewer employees as a permitted use in all residential zoning districts and to allow employee
housing for up to 36 beds or 12 units as a permitted use in the Agricultural (A-20), Agricultural
Preserve (AP), and Winery (W) zoning districts.
Zoning for Emergency Shelters, Transitional Housing, and Supportive Housing
Government Code Section 65583(a)(4) requires that St. Helena identify one or more zoning
districts that permit the development of at least one, year-round, emergency shelter, without
conditional use permit, and with capacity to accommodate the jurisdictions homeless and
                                 75 76
transitional housing needs.            In 2015, the City amended the Municipal Code to allow emergency
shelters as a permitted use in the Service Commercial (SC) and Industrial (I) zoning districts.
These zones include 6 sites that are currently vacant. These sites range from 0.3 acres to 1.8 acres,
for a total 5.3 acres, and could accommodate approximately 58,000 building square feet using a
conservative Floor Area Ratio (FAR) assumption of 0.25. This amount of building space could
     74
        California Government Health and Safety Code 17021.5 (b)
     75
        Building Block for Effective Housing Elements, “Adequate Sites Inventory and Analysis: Zoning for
     Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing”. http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/housing_element/index.html.
     Accessed on June 13, 2008.
     76
        Senate Bill 2, Chapter 633. Amendment to Acts 655582, 65583 and 65589.5. Approved by the Governor on
     October 13, 2007. Effective January 1, 2008.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                    City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                       Page 127

easily support St. Helena’s share of the identified countywide need of 68 emergency shelter beds.
Furthermore, all sites within the SC and I zones are within the Urban Limit Line, indicating that
they are in close proximity to Main Street, public transportation, and other services to serve this
special needs population. All 6 sites are either located on Main Street or within 0.2 miles of Main
Street, and all 6 sites are within 0.3 miles of a public transit stop. Sites within these zones are also
generally located near uses compatible with an emergency shelter (primarily residential,
commercial, open vineyards, and public or quasi-public uses). A few of the sites are within an area
of town with commercial offices and light industrial uses. The light industrial uses include
businesses such as warehousing for agricultural and wine products, a home improvement operation,
and a gourmet food production business. The nearby light industrial uses do not include heavy
manufacturing, hazardous materials, or 24-hour operations.
The City also amended the Municipal Code to allow transitional and supportive housing in all
zoning districts that allow residential uses, subject to the same regulations as other housing of the
same type in the same zone. Transitional and supportive housing is a permitted use in all residential
zoning districts and is allowed with a conditional use permit in the Service Commercial (SC) and
Central Business (CB) zoning districts, subject to the same regulations that apply to other housing
in these districts.
In addition, the Low Density Residential (LR), Low Density Residential One Acre Minimum (LR-
1A), Medium Density Residential (MR) and High Density Residential (HR) zoning districts permit
by right any residential facility serving six or fewer persons. Residential facilities serving more
than six persons are permitted with a conditional use permit. Under the City’s zoning code, a
residential facility is defined as “any family home, group-care facility, or similar facility
determined pursuant to state law, for 24-hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal
service, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
                                     77
protection of the individual.”
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
Single-room occupancy residential units are a traditional form of affordable housing for low-
income individuals consisting of a single room, often between 80 and 250 square feet in size, with
or without cooking and sanitary facilities, that is rented out, often on a daily, weekly, or monthly
basis. The St. Helena Municipal Code currently permits single-room occupancy units by right in
the High Density Residential (HR) zoning district. Single room occupancy housing is defined as
multi-unit housing that consists of single room dwelling units rented for at least thirty days in
which all living activities occur within a single room.
     77
        City of St. Helena. St. Helena Municipal Code, Title 17. Accessed October 2, 2008.
     http://www.codepublishing.com/CA/sthelena/.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 128

Factory Built Housing and Mobile Homes
Government Code Section 65852.3(a) requires that manufactured and mobile homes, including the
lots on which they are installed, meeting certain standards of construction and be subject to the
                                                                                                            78
same development standards that apply to conventional, stick built, single-family homes. In
accordance with this legislation, the St. Helena Municipal Code, Title 17, defines a single-family
dwelling to include a “mobilehome constructed to meet 1976 HUD standards, when placed on a
permanent foundation, which is designed or used exclusively as a residence, including only one
                     79
dwelling unit.” Thus, mobile units meeting the above definition are permitted under single-
family site development standards in all zones that allow single-family housing units by right.
In addition, the Low Density Residential (LR), Low Density Residential One Acre Minimum (LR-
1A), Medium Density Residential (MR) and High Density Residential (HR) districts specifically
permit as an allowed use, permanent mobile homes constructed in accordance with the 1974 safety
standards and installed on a permanent foundation. Chapter 17.100 of the Municipal Code sets
forth requirements for the Mobilehome Park Overlay (MHP) zoning district that applies the State
Mobilehome Parks Act to the establishment and operation of mobilehome parks within the
                                             80 81
boundaries of the City of St. Helena.              Under these provisions of the Municipal Code, St. Helena
fully adheres to the State standards regarding manufactured and mobile homes, and mobile home
parks. The City is considering updating this Chapter of the Municipal Code to cover all
manufactured housing and not just mobilehomes. This change should not affect adherence to State
standards regarding manufactured housing and mobilehome parks.
Second Units
The St. Helena Municipal Code defines a second unit as “an attached or detached residential
dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same
                                                        82
parcel as a single-family dwelling is situated.” A second unit may also be an efficiency unit or
manufactured home, as defined by the California Health and Safety Code. In compliance with
State law, the St. Helena Municipal Code permits the construction of second units in all residential
     78
        GCS 65852.3(a) standards include the constructed or purchased after October 1976, certified under the
     National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and installed on a foundation
     system pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code.
     79
        City of St. Helena. St. Helena Municipal Code, Title 17. Accessed October 2, 2008.
     http://www.codepublishing.com/CA/sthelena/.
     80
        Building Blocks for Effective Housing Elements. Adequate Sites Inventory and Analysis: Zoning for a
     Variety of Housing Types. Accessed October 2, 2008. http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/housing_element/index.
     html.
     81
        City of St. Helena. St. Helena Municipal Code, Title 17. http://www.codepublishing.com/CA/sthelena/.
     Accessed October 2, 2008.
     82
        Ibid.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                       City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                          Page 129

zoning districts. Units within the Woodlands and Watershed (WW) district are held to a higher
standard due to potential environmental issues that would require mitigation. Second units meeting
specified standards are permitted and others require a conditional use permit. Second units are
exempt from the Growth Management System Municipal Code Section 17.152.040. In order to
maintain affordability, second units are limited to 850 square feet. Second units may not be rented
for periods of time less than 30 days.
Zoning Definition of a Family
The California courts have invalidated definitions of “family” within jurisdictions’ zoning
ordinances that refer to a) two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or b) a
group of not more than a certain number of unrelated persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit. Court rulings state that defining a family does not serve any legitimate or
useful objective or purpose recognized under the zoning and land planning powers of the city, and
therefore violates rights of privacy under the California Constitution. State and federal fair housing
laws also prohibit definitions of family that either intentionally discriminate against people with
disabilities or have the effect of excluding such individuals from housing.
The St. Helena Municipal Code includes the following definition of family:
         “Family” means any of the following groups living together in the same dwelling unit as a
         single housekeeping unit:
         1. Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or legal adoption;
         2. A nuclear family identified by extended cohabitation;
         3. A group not exceeding five persons whose interpersonal relationships relating to
         shared household expenses, duties and private lives are indistinguishable from groups
         listed in subsections 1 and 2 above.
St. Helena’s definition of a family is overly restrictive and should be revised pursuant to California
case law. Program HE1.K has been added to the housing element to update the City’s definition of
family. “Family” may be defined as one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping
unit in a dwelling unit. The definition should not distinguish between related and unrelated
individuals and should not impose a numerical limit on the number of persons that may constitute a
family.
Summary
St. Helena has already built, issued building permits for, or approved 35 housing units since
January 1, 2014. In order to address its remaining RHNA, the City must demonstrate that it has
sufficient sites to accommodate an additional 4 very low-income housing units. The City has
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 130

identified four high density sites that have a realistic development capacity, based on minimum
density requirements, of 62 units, which far exceeds the City’s total RHNA for the very low and
low-income categories. As a result, the City has sufficient, appropriately-zoned land to meet its
regional housing need obligation for lower-income units. The City also has identified seven
medium density sites which may provide market rate housing as well as affordable units under the
City’s inclusionary requirements.
St. Helena’s Zoning Ordinance allows for a variety of housing types in the City, including
multifamily units, emergency shelters, transitional and supportive housing, single-room occupancy
units, manufactured and mobile homes, farmworker housing, and second units. However, in order
to comply with Fair Housing laws, St. Helena should amend the Municipal Code to update the
definition of family. In addition, the St. Helena Municipal Code requires a conditional use permit
for multifamily projects with five or more proposed units in the High Density Residential (HR)
district and attached duplex or triplex units in the Medium Density Residential (MR). Program
HE1.D will remove this potential constraint to housing development by eliminating the use permit
requirement for multifamily projects in the high density residential districts and for key housing
opportunity sites in the medium density residential district that are identified in Table 42, the
Available Land Inventory Summary. These Zoning Code amendments will be completed by May
2016, once the City adopts design review guidelines for multifamily projects. The City will also
evaluate redesignating and rezoning medium density parcels not listed in Table 42 with a land use
designation that better reflects the type and character of existing development. In addition, the City
will eliminate, as appropriate, use permit requirements for multifamily projects for the remaining
parcels in the medium density residential district.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                             City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                Page 131

Table 42: Available Land Inventory Summary, Key Housing Sites
                                                                                              Allow able         Potential Unit                                                             Realistic Unit
  Site                                           Current        Current                    Density (du/ac)          Capacity      Existing          Infrastructure          Environm ental   Capacity at
Num ber        APN              Address         Zoning (a)    Gen. Plan (b)     Acreage      Min.    Max.        Min.     Max.       Use                Capacity              Constraints   Min. Density(c)
Medium Density
       1   009-070-002      567 Pope St.            MR            MDR                 10.0    5.1     16          51       160  Vacant        Part of the parcel needed for  None Currently        51
                                                                                                                                              Starr Ave. extension.          identified
                                                                                                                                              Water, sew er, and storm
                                                                                                                                              drain available.
       2   009-070-003      591 McCorkle Ave.       MR            MDR                  7.9    5.1     16          40       127  Ranch and     Water, sew er, and storm       None Currently        40
                                                                                                                                Vineyard      drain available.               identified
       3   009-322-009      1817 Spring St.         MR            MDR                  1.5    5.1     16           8        24  Vacant        Water, sew er, and storm       None Currently         8
                                                                                                                                              drain available.               identified
       4   009-362-015      Sulphur Springs Ave. MR/AG          MDR/AG            5.3/10.0    5.1     16          27        85  Vineyard      Extend sew er lines to site.   None Currently        27
                                                                                                                                              Increase access w ith new      identified
                                                                                                                                              road to Sulphur Springs
                                                                                                                                              Ave. Not completely w ithin
                                                                                                                                              Urban Limit Line.
       5   009-441-023      Spring St.              MR            MDR                  4.4    5.1     16          22        70  Vineyard      Water, sew er, and storm       None Currently        22
                                                                                                                                              drain available.               identified
           009-552-002
       6   009-552-003      576 Pope St.            MR            MDR                  4.6    5.1     16          24        74  Vineyard      Water, sew er and storm drain  None Currently        24
                                                                                                                                              available.                     identified
       7   009-090-003      1105 Pope St.           MR            MDR                  0.2    5.1     16           1         3  Single-family Water, sew er and storm drain  None Currently      8 (d)
                                                                                                                                residence     available.                     identified
Medium Density Total                                                                                             173       543                                                                    180
High Density
       8   009-502-007      684 McCorkle Ave.       HR             HDR                 0.5   16.1     28           9        12  City-ow ned   Water, sew er and storm drain  None Currently         9
                                                                                                                                              available.                     identified
       9   009-590-010      1515 Spring St.         HR             HDR                 0.9   16.1     28          14        25  Single-family Water, sew er and storm drain  None Currently        14
                                                                                                                                residence     available.                     identified
     10    009-590-003      1447 Spring St.          HR            HDR                 1.5   16.1     28          24        42  Single-family Water, sew er and storm drain  None Currently        24
                                                                                                                                residence     available.                     identified
     11    009-503-001      821 Pope St.             HR            HDR                 1.0   16.1     28          15        27  Single-family Water, sew er and storm drain  None Currently        15
                                                                                                                                residence     available.                     identified
High Density Total                                                                                                62       106                                                                     62
Notes:
(a) AG = Agriculture, CB = Central Business, HR = High Density Residential, MR = Medium Density Residential.
(b) AG = Agriculture, CB = Central Business, HDR = Higher Density Residential, MDR = Medium Density Residential.
(c) Based on minimum density requirements w here appropriate.
(d) Number of units based on approved project.
(e) Number of units based on conceptual designs submitted by property ow ner.
Sources: City of St. Helena staff, June 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                 Page 132
Table 43: Available Land Inventory Summary, Other Vacant/Underutilized Sites
                                                                                           Allow able         Potential Unit                                                                         Realistic Unit
                                                Current        Current                 Density (du/ac)           Capacity            Existing            Infrastructure           Environm ental      Capacity at
Site #       APN             Address           Zoning (a)    Gen. Plan (b)  Acreage      Min.      Max.      Min.       Max.            Use                    Capacity              Constraints     Min. Density(c)
          Low Density
    12    009-391-020 Spring Street            WW/LR-1A        WW/LDR         8.7/5.6     n.a.        1      n.a.          5       Vacant         Water, sew er and storm drain None Currently             n.a.
                                                                                                                                                  available. Rezone to MR.         identified
          Medium Density
    13    009-173-011 Stockton                      MR           MDR              0.4     5.1        16        2           6       Vacant         All utilities available.         None identified           2
    14    009-222-003 1521 Oak Avenue               MR           MDR              0.2     5.1        16        1           3       Vacant         All utilities available.         None identified           1
    15    009-270-004 Kearney                       MR           MDR              0.2     5.1        16        1           4       Underutilized  All utilities available.         None identified           1
    16    009-304-013 1405 Adams                    MR           MDR              0.2     5.1        16        1           4       Vacant         All utilities available.         None identified           1
    17    009-305-046 Madrona                       MR           MDR              0.2     5.1        16        1           3       Underutilized  All utilities available.         None identified           1
    18    009-305-047 Madrona                       MR           MDR              0.2     5.1        16        1           2       Underutilized  All utilities available.         None identified           1
    19    009-311-005 Allyn                         MR           MDR              0.1     5.1        16        1           2       Underutilized  All utilities available.         None identified           1
    20    009-312-005 1623 Adams                    MR           MDR              0.2     5.1        16        1           4       Underutilized  All utilities available.         None identified           1
    21    009-312-050 Stockton                      MR           MDR              0.1     5.1        16        1           2       Underutilized  All utilities available.         None identified           1
    22    009-313-041 Spring                        MR           MDR              0.4     5.1        16        2           7       Vacant         All utilities available.         None identified           2
    23    009-362-016 Sulphur Springs               MR           MDR              0.4     5.1        16        2           6       Vineyard       No public w ater, sew er, or     None identified           2
                                                                                                                                                  storm drain currently available.
    24    009-401-042    Crinella                   MR           MDR              0.1     5.1        16        1           2       Underutilized  All utilities available.         None identified           1
    25    009-403-013    Park                       MR           MDR              0.1     5.1        16        1           2       Underutilized  All utilities available.         None identified           1
    26    009-431-019    Sulphur Springs            MR           MDR              0.2     5.1        16        1           2       Vacant         All utilities available.         None identified           1
    27    009-441-021    Olive                      MR           MDR              0.2     5.1        16        1           3       Vacant         All utilities available.         None identified           1
    28    009-710-006    Quail Court                MR           MDR              0.4     5.1        16        2           6       Vacant         All utilities available.         None identified           2
    29    009-030-020    No address                 MR           MDR             17.1     5.1        16       87         274       Vineyard       Extend w ater, sew er, and       Identified in the        87
                                                                                                                                                  storm drains from the             Draft EIR
                                                                                                                                                  proposed public street.
          High Density
    30    009-180-034 Vidovich                       HR          HDR             13.4    16.1        28      216         376       Vineyard       No public w ater, sew er, or     None identified           0
                                                                                                                                                  storm drains. Improvements
                                                                                                                                                  needed to surrounding
                                                                                                                                                  streets.
          Woodlands Watershed
    31    009-131-043 Spring Mountain              WW            WW              29.3     n.a.      0.2 (d)  n.a.          6       Vacant         No public w ater or sew er.      Biological, slope         0
    32    009-131-039 Spring Mountain              WW            WW               5.0     n.a.      0.2 (d)  n.a.          1       Vacant         No public w ater or sew er.      Biological, slope         0
          Other
    33    009-150-006 Library Ave./Adams         CB/AG          CB/AG         3.6/2.0     n.a.       28      n.a.         28       Vacant         Water, sew er, and storm         None currently           28
                                                                                                                                                  draiin available. Not completely identified
                                                                                                                                                  w ithin Urban Limit Line.
    34    009-070-033 1000 Mills                 SC/AG          SC/AG         6.1/4.2     n.a.       10      n.a.         20       Vacant         No public w ater, sew er, or     None identified         20
                                                                                                                                                  storm drains. Improvements
                                                                                                                                                  needed to surrounding
                                                                                                                                                  streets. Not completely
                                                                                                                                                  w ithin Urban Limit Line.
    35    009-180-008 905 Main                      SC            SC              0.3     n.a.      n.a.   Unknow n Unknow n       Vacant                                                               Unknow n
    36    009-580-009 Dow dell                      IND            I              0.8     n.a.      n.a.   Unknow n Unknow n       Underutilized                                                        Unknow n
Total                                                                                                        321         766                                                                               153
Notes:
(a) AG = Agriculture, CB = Central Business, IND = Industrial, HR = High Density Residential, MR = Medium Density Residential, LR-1A = Low Density Residential One Acre Minimum, SC = Service Commercial,
and WW = Woodlands and Watershed.
(b) AG = Agriculture, CB = Central Business, I = Industrial, HDR = Higher Density Residential, MDR = Medium Density Residential, LDR = Low Density Residential SC = Service Commercial, and WW = Woodland and
Watershed.
(c) Based on minimum density requirements w here appropriate.
(d) Allow able density of one dw elling unit per five acres.
Sources: City of St. Helena staff, June 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                                                            City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                                                                                   Page 133
Housing Element Needs Assessment City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                    Page 134
Housing Element Needs Assessment City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                    Page 135
                            Appendix A:                                 Definitions
Terms Related to Geography
Bay Area: For the purpose of this Housing Element, the Bay Area is defined to include the counties of Alameda,
Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Sonoma, and Solano.
Terms Related to Households
Average Household Size: Average household size equals the number of people living in households divided by
the number of occupied housing units in a given area.
Disability: “A long-lasting physical, mental, or emotional condition. This condition can make it difficult for a
person to do activities such as walking, climbing stairs, dressing, bathing, learning, or remembering. This
condition can also impede a person from being able to go outside the home alone or to work at a job or
           83
business.”
Elderly: Persons 65 years of age or older according to the 2000 Census. However, the Comprehensive housing
Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Data set, published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development
defines elderly as ages 62 and over.
Family Household: Two or more related persons occupying a dwelling unit.
Household: A person or group of persons occupying a single dwelling unit. This does not include persons living
in group quarters, such as dormitories, convalescent homes, or prisons.
Large Family: A family of five (5) or more persons.
Non-Family Household: A single person living alone, or two or more unrelated persons sharing a dwelling unit.
Overcrowding: More than one person per room. Also see Room.
Terms Related to Income Levels
Extremely-Low Income Household: A household whose income, with adjustments for household size, does not
exceed 30 percent of the Area Median Family Income (AMFI), as published annually by the State of California,
Department of Housing and Community Development.
Very Low-Income Household: A household whose income, with adjustments for household size, does not exceed
50 percent of the Area Median Family Income (AMFI), as published annually by the State of California,
Department of Housing and Community Development.
Low-Income Household: A household whose income, with adjustments for household size, does not exceed 80
percent of the Area Median Family Income (AMFI), as published annually by the State of California, Department
    83
       American Factfinder. http://factfinder.census.gov/help/en/index.htm#glossary.htm, Accessed February 5, 2015.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                     City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                        Page 136

of Housing and Community Development.
Moderate-Income Household: A household whose income, with adjustment for household size, falls between 80
percent and 120 percent of the Area Median Family Income (AMFI), as published annually by the State of
California, Department of Housing and Community Development.
Above Moderate-Income Household: A household whose income, with adjustment for household size, is greater
than 120% of the Area Median Family Income (AMFI), as published annually by the State of California,
Department of Housing and Community Development.
Terms Related to Housing Units
Affordable Housing: As defined by federal guidelines, a housing unit is affordable if the household spends less
than 30 percent of its total gross income on the costs of housing, including rent or mortgage payments.
Room: The American Community Survey defines a room to “include living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens,
bedrooms, finished recreation rooms, enclosed porches suitable for year-round use, and lodgers' rooms. ”
Transitional Housing: “A [housing] project that has as its purpose facilitating the movement of homeless
individuals to permanent housing within a reasonable amount of time (usually 24 months). Transitional housing
includes housing primarily designed to serve deinstitutionalized homeless individuals and other homeless
                                                                                                    84
individuals with mental or physical disabilities and homeless families with children.”
Terms Related to Employment
Employed Residents: Employed residents equal the number of local area residents who are currently working.
This is not the same as employment, which refers to local jobs that may be filled by employees that are residents
of other jurisdictions.
Employment: Area employment equals the number of jobs in an area for which employers pay workers’ wages or
salaries. This is not the same as employed residents, since some workers may commute from outside the
jurisdiction in which they work.
Terms Related to Government
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG): ABAG is the official comprehensive planning agency for the San
Francisco Bay Area region. ABAG’s mission is to strengthen cooperation and coordination among local
governments located in the nine Bay Area counties of Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San
                                                85
Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano, and Sonoma.
California Building Standards Code: Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, contains the regulations that
govern the construction of buildings, residential or nonresidential, in the State of California.
     84
        Department of Housing and Urban Development. http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/library/glossary/t/. Accessed April 7, 2014.
     85
        Association of Bay Area Governments, 2008. http://www.abag.ca.gov/. Accessed April 7, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                  City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                     Page 137

California Code of Regulations: The California Code of Regulations is the official publication of regulations
adopted, amended or repealed by California State agencies under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA).
Regulations that have been properly adopted and filed with the Secretary of State are considered to have the force
of law.
California Energy Code: Section 6 under Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, the 2013 Edition of the
California Energy Code (CEC), sometimes referred to as “Title 24”, contains energy conservation standards
applicable to all residential and nonresidential buildings in the State of California.
Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo): LAFCos are responsible for administering California
Government Code Section 56000 et seq., also known as the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government
Reorganization Act of 2000. LAFCos are charged with encouraging orderly formation and development of local
governmental agencies, promoting the efficient management of municipal services, and preserving agricultural
lands and open space through municipal service reviews, annexations, and the establishment of spheres of
influence. The Napa County LAFCO is comprised of two members of the Board of Supervisors, two city council
                                                     86
members, and one member of the public.
Senate Bill 1087: Effective January 1, 2006, this California State Senate Bill “requires local governments to
provide a copy of the adopted housing element to water and sewer providers. In addition, water and sewer
providers must grant priority for service allocations to proposed developments that include housing units
                                                     87
affordable to lower-income households.”
Senate Bills 221 and 610: These companion measures became effective January 1, 2002. “Under SB 610, water
assessments must be furnished to local governments for inclusion in any environmental documentation for certain
projects (as defined in Water Code 10912(a)) subject to the California Environmental Quality Act. Under SB221,
approval by a city or county of certain residential subdivisions requires an affirmative written verification of
                               88
sufficient water supply.”
Title 24: See California Building Standards Code, and California Energy Code.
     86
        LAFCO of Napa County. 2008. http://www.napa.lafco.ca.gov/. Accessed April 7, 2014.
     87
        Cathy E. Creswell. “Memo to Planning Directors, Public Works Directors, Water and Sewer Service Providers, Interested
      Parties, Department of Housing and Community Development”, Sacramento, CA. May 22, 2006.
      http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/memo_sb1087.pdf. Accessed April 7, 2014.
     88
        Office of Water Use Efficiency. “Guidebook for Implementation of Senate Bill 610 and Senate Bill 221 of 2001 to assist water
     suppliers, cities, and counties in integrating water and land use planning, California Department of Water Resources.” October 8,
     2003. Accessed April 7, 2014.
Housing Element Needs Assessment                                         City of St. Helena General Plan Update
May 26, 2015                                                                                            Page 138

