                                                            CHAPTER FOUR
                      Community Design and
                                                Development
Introduction
This chapter defines the Land Use Designations of the Gilroy General Plan
and presents the Land Use Plan Map.
It also sets forth the City’s goals, policies and implementing actions for:
 Community Design
 Growth Management
 Economic Development
 Agriculture
 Historic Preservation
 Scenic Highways
Revised December 2016                                                Gilroy General Plan 4-1

Community Design and Development
                        Land Use Plan Map and Designations
                        The Land Use Plan Map
                        The Land Use Plan Map, displayed in Appendix B, defines the general pattern
                        of future development for the City. It is a graphic expression of the General
                        Plan’s goals and policies pertaining to community design and development as
                        well as to policy areas covered elsewhere in the Plan. It is the single most
                        important policy implementation measure of the General Plan.
                        The Land Use Plan Map covers the area within the “20-Year Boundary” of the
                        General Plan. This is the area that the City expects to be serviced and
                        developed by the year 2020 provided that all such service provision and
                        development must be consistent with the Urban Growth Boundary adopted by
                        initiative in 2016, with additional lands beyond projected growth needs to
                        ensure a functioning land market. It also includes some open space areas (most
                        notably the southwestern hillside area) that will not be developed in urban uses,
                        but are included to facilitate their protection and management as scenic
                        community resources.
                        The Land Use Plan Map should not be confused with the Zoning Map. The
                        Land Use Plan Map is a long-term planning tool that depicts the desired
                        pattern of development (at a generalized level) for the Plan’s horizon year of
                        2020. The Zoning Map is a current planning tool, depicting uses that are
                        permitted today. The Land Use Plan Map is purposefully general, and not
                        intended as a parcel-level plan. It provides direction for development of the
                        more detailed, parcel-level Zoning Map. For each land use designation on the
                        Land Use Plan Map, there may be several zoning districts that would be
                        considered consistent. These are defined in the descriptions for each land use
                        designation, beginning on the next page.
                        Changes from the Previous General Plan Land Use Map
                        The previous Land Use Map of the Gilroy General Plan provided the starting
                        point for the updated Land Use Plan Map. While the vast majority of the map
                        remains unchanged, there have been several significant changes that previous
                        users of the General Plan should be aware of, including:
                         Expansion of the 20-year planning boundary, most notably to include
                             the area east of the Outlets, south of Leavesley Road, north of Ronan
                             Channel and west of Llagas Creek; as well as the area north of Day Road
                             and Buena Vista Road and some smaller areas along the southern and
                             eastern boundaries of the planning area (including lands for future
                             expansion of the SCRWA treatment plant).
 4-2                     Gilroy General Plan                                               Revised December 2016

                                                                             Community Design and Development
 Inclusion of the Urban Growth Boundary adopted by initiative in 2016.
     The UGB focuses future growth within the City in order to prevent urban
     sprawl into the agriculturally and environmentally important areas
     surrounding the City. With limited exceptions, lands outside the UGB are
     to be preserved for agricultural and open space uses.
 Creation of a Neighborhood District land use designation to
     encourage a more diverse mix of housing types in areas of new residential
     development, and the incorporation of neighborhood-serving amenities,
     including small-scale, neighborhood-serving commercial uses (with
     appropriate siting, use, and design restrictions). Neighborhood District has
     been mapped in most undeveloped areas intended for future residential
     development.
 Creation of a Campus Industrial land use designation to encourage
     development of campus-style office parks.
 Expansion of the Downtown commercial district, and creation of
     three sub-categories for Downtown land uses: Downtown Historic
     District, Downtown Mixed Use District, and Downtown Office District.
     These designations are intended to encourage preservation of the historic
     character in the Downtown core; development of a wider mix of
     commercial and residential uses in the surrounding Downtown area; and
     development of larger office uses in the “northern gateway” to Downtown
     along Monterey Street from Leavesley to Third. These three sub-categories
     are defined in the Land Use Designations and displayed in Figure 4-2. The
     Land Use Plan Map displays all three sub areas under the general
     designation of “Downtown.”
 Creation of a Hecker Pass Special Use District in the area along Hecker
     Pass Highway, between Santa Teresa and Bonfonte Gardens (including a
     portion of the Bonfante site), to establish special use controls and
     development guidelines that will allow for limited development while
     encouraging open space preservation, view protection, and enhancement of
     the features that give this unique area its special character.
Land Use Designations
The Land Use Plan Map presents four general categories of land uses:
residential, commercial, industrial, and “other” (including parks and recreation,
schools, public facilities, etc.). The specific uses within each category are
defined in the text that follows. These definitions build upon the existing land
use designations of the City, providing greater detail and direction in terms of
minimum and maximum allowed densities and consistent zoning districts.
Revised December 2016                                                  Gilroy General Plan                 4-3

Community Design and Development
                        Residential Land Use Designations
                        RURAL RESIDENTIAL
                        Density:             Maximum of 0.4 dwelling units per acre (one unit per 2.5 acres).
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the Rural Residential
                                             designation include:
                                                 A1- Agriculture
                                                 OS- Open Space
                                                 PF- Park/Public Facility
                        Description: This designation is generally applied to areas designated for part-
                                             time farming and the keeping of livestock. Only very low density
                                             residential development is considered appropriate, and is
                                             generally considered to be ancillary to agricultural use of the site.
                                             The Rural Residential land use designation is not consistent with
                                             urban levels of development, and is only mapped in areas located
                                             outside the city limits (but within the planning area), where
                                             County zoning of ‘rural residential’ densities would be
                                             considered consistent. The City’s Zoning Ordinance does not
                                             have a ‘Rural Residential’ district. It is expected that, over time,
                                             these areas will transition to more urbanized land uses as they
                                             are annexed to the City and come under the City’s zoning
                                             authority.
                        HILLSIDE RESIDENTIAL
                        Density:             0.5 to 4 dwelling units per acre, with actual allowed density
                                             determined on a site-specific basis according to the formula set
                                             forth in the Residential Hillside Zoning District requirements.
                                             This formula relates average slope of the site to the number of
                                             allowable units. Limited density bonuses, not to exceed 30
                                             percent, may be given if preferred development techniques are
                                             utilized (as specified in the Zoning Ordinance, section 9.50).
 4-4                     Gilroy General Plan                                                     Revised December 2016

                                                                              Community Design and Development
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Hillside Residential
                   designation include:
                       RH - Residential Hillside
                   In addition, the Planned Unit Development (PUD)
                   Combining District could be applied as an overlay
                   designation in hillside residential areas.
Description: This designation is generally applied to developable
                   hillside areas with slopes of 10 percent or greater
                   (but less than 30 percent). Developments in these
                   areas must follow special design and siting criteria
                   to preserve the sensitive hillside environment, as
                   specified in the Residential Hillside Zoning District
                   regulations and in the City’s adopted Hillside
                   Development Guidelines.
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                                                                              Hillside residential areas must follow special design and
Density:           3 to 7.25 dwelling units per acre (though densities of siting criteria to preserve the sensitive hillside environment.
                   up to 9 units per acre may be allowed in the Old
                   Downtown Quad, where smaller lots are predominant)
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Low Density
                   Residential designation include:
                       R1 - Single Family Residential
                       R2 - Two-Family Residential
                   In addition, the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Combining
                   District could be applied as an overlay designation in low-
                   density residential areas.
Description: This is the most common residential land use in Gilroy. It is ap-
                   plied to existing areas of predominantly single family detached
                   homes, with lot sizes ranging from 6,000 square feet (though as
                   small as 3050 square feet in the new Eagle Ridge development,
                   and as small as 3500 square feet in older parts of the City) to
                   14,500 square feet. Appropriate residential uses include single
                   family detached homes as well as duplexes and secondary
                   (“accessory”) dwelling units that comply with City standards.
                   Other compatible uses include religious facilities, day care and
                   group care facilities, schools, and parks.
Revised December 2016                                                   Gilroy General Plan                                        4-5

Community Design and Development
                        MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                        Density:             8 to 16 dwelling units per acre
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the Medium Density
                                             Residential designation include:
                                                 R1 - Single Family Residential
                                                 R2 - Two-Family Residential
                                                 R3 - Medium Density Residential
                                                In addition, the Planned Unit Development (PUD)
                                                Combining District could be applied as an overlay designation
                                                in medium-density residential areas.
                        Description: This designation encourages residential development with a
                                             minimum site area of 2,722.5 square feet per unit and maximum
                                             site area of 5,445 square feet per unit. It is intended primarily for
                                             multi-family structures (duplexes, townhomes, condominiums,
                                             apartment buildings) but can also contain single family detached
                                             homes, with or without secondary units. Buildings are typically
                                             two stories tall, and are usually located in transition areas
                                             between lower density neighborhoods and higher density
                                             developments or commercial areas. They are also usually located
                                             on or near Arterials or Collector streets and in close proximity to
                                             neighborhood facilities such as a school or park. Compatible
                                             non-residential uses include religious facilities, day care and
                                             group care facilities, schools, and parks.
                        HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                        Density:             16 to 30 dwelling units per acre
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the High Density
                                             Residential designation include:
                                                 R2 - Two-Family Residential
                                                 R3 - Medium Density Residential
                                                 R4 - High Density Residential
                                             In addition, the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Combining
                                             District could be applied as an overlay designation in high-
                                             density residential areas.
                        Description: This designation encourages higher density apartments and
                                             condominiums within walking distance of commercial areas. The
 4-6                     Gilroy General Plan                                                     Revised December 2016

                                                                                 Community Design and Development
                   minimum site area allowed is 1,452 square feet per unit, up to a
                   maximum of 2,722.5 square feet per unit. The predominant
                   housing type is multi-family structures, such as apartments or
                   condominiums, with buildings typically being two or more
                   stories. High density developments are usually located along
                   major transportation corridors, in close proximity to commercial
                   areas, transit stops, and neighborhood facilities such as a school
                   or park. Compatible non-residential uses include religious
                   facilities, day care and group care facilities, schools, and parks.
NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
Density:           6 to 12.5 dwelling units per acre
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Neighborhood
                   District Residential designation include:
                       All of the residential zoning districts
                       PO - Professional Office
                       C1 - Neighborhood Commercial
                   The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Combining District
                   should be encouraged as an overlay designation in
                   neighborhood district areas.
Description: This is a new residential category to encourage a mix of housing
                   types in new areas of development. The intent is to create new
                   neighborhoods that reflect a similar mix of housing throughout
                   the City, avoiding concentrations of specific housing types in
                   some areas. These new neighborhoods will be predominantly
                   single family in character, with duplexes, townhomes,
                   condominiums and apartments interspersed. Higher density
                   housing types will be sited and designed in accordance with the
                   City’s zoning and development regulations. Neighborhood-
                   serving amenities such as schools, parks, open space, and
                   neighborhood commercial (subject to strict siting, design and use
                   controls) will be integrated in the neighborhood design
The target mix for residential land uses in the Neighborhood
District (excluding land required for streets, schools, parks,
resource protection, neighborhood commercial, or other
infrastructure and/or amenities) shall provide for at least:
    10 percent two-family (duplex) uses (R2)
    15 percent medium density residential uses (R3)
    5 percent high density residential uses (R4)                              Target Mix of Residential Densities
Revised December 2016                                                      Gilroy General Plan                     4-7

Community Design and Development
                        The remainder of the residential land will be allocated for single family homes.
                        The actual mix in any particular development will vary based on site constraints
                        and opportunities. However, developers will be encouraged to achieve or
                        exceed the target mix (while retaining the predominantly single family character
                        of the neighborhood) through an incentives program that might include
                        priority ranking in the Residential Development Ordinance competition and/
                        or density bonuses. The exact incentives to be used will be established through
                        the Neighborhood District Implementation Strategy (Action 1.C).
                        To ensure adequate land for development density housing types, a minimum mix
                        for residential land use in the Neighborhood District excluding land required
                                          for streets, schools, parks, resource protection, neighborhood
                                          commercial or other infrastructure and/or amenities) shall
                                          provide for at least:
                                                5 percent two-family (duplex) uses (R2)
                                                10 percent medium density residential (R3)
                                                3 percent high density residential uses (R4)
                                              Local-serving commercial uses and small-scale professional
 Minimum Mix of Residential Densities        offices are also encouraged, when limited in scope and scale
                                             and sited and designed in accordance with the City’s zoning and
                        development regulations. Other compatible non-residential uses include
                        religious facilities, day care and group care facilities, schools, and parks.
                        An overview of the Neighborhood District designation and its relationship to other policies in
                        the General Plan is provided in Chapter 3 under the heading of “Neighborhood Districts.
 4-8                     Gilroy General Plan                                                     Revised December 2016

                                                                               Community Design and Development
Commercial Land Use Designations
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
Intensity:         Maximum building height of 35 feet (2 stories)
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Neighborhood
                   Commercial designation include:
                       C1 - Neighborhood Commercial District
                       PO - Professional Office
Description: This designation encourages low-intensity commercial uses that
                   cater directly to residents of the immediate neighborhood only,
                   rather than to the entire City. These can include small retail
                   establishments such as cafes, bakeries, small grocery stores,
                   daycare centers, small bank branches, and cleaners. Small
                   professional offices are also considered compatible. All
                   structures must be sited and designed in keeping with the scale
                   and character of the surrounding neighborhood. Ample
                   landscaping and creative design are encouraged to create
                   neighborhood amenities such as pedestrian and bike access,
                   small outdoor gathering places, and small-scale neighborhood
                   landmarks. Neighborhood commercial centers should be located
                   at the “entrances” to residential neighborhoods, typically at the
                   intersection of two Collectors or a Collector and an Arterial.
                  The General Plan does not map the “Neighborhood
                  Commercial” designation on the Land Use Plan Map, as it is a use
                  encompassed under the “Neighborhood District” designation.
                  However, the Plan maintains the Neighborhood Commercial
                  designation for potential application in specific plans and other
                  more detailed land planning efforts.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
Intensity:         Maximum building height of 35 feet (2 stories)
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Professional Office
                   Commercial designation include:
                       PO - Professional Office
Description: This designation allows for uses that provide professional
                   services to the surrounding residential areas. This might include
                   small of ice spaces for lease to local residents to support
Revised December 2016                                                    Gilroy General Plan                 4-9

Community Design and Development
                                             telecommuting and “home based” businesses that do not attract
                                             high volumes of traffic. Typically, these establishments are only
                                             open on weekdays from 8 am to 6 pm. As in the Neighborhood
                                             Commercial designation, structures should be sited and designed
                                             so that they are in keeping with the scale and character of the
                                             surrounding neighborhood. Professional office uses should also
                                             be located at the “entrances” to residential neighborhoods,
                                             typically at the intersection of two Collectors or a Collector and
                                             an Arterial.
                        GENERAL SERVICES COMMERCIAL
                        Intensity:           Maximum building height of 55 feet (4 stories)
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the General Services
                                             Commercial designation include:
                                                C3 - Shopping Center Commercial
                                                HC - Highway Commercial
                                                CM - Commercial Industrial
                                               Potentially consistent zoning districts include:
                                                PO - Professional Office
                                                C1 - Neighborhood Commercial
                        Description: This designation allows for commercial uses that, due to the
                                             nature of their operations, are not compatible with residential
                                             uses. They typically have a larger market area and a greater
                                             volume of customers than establishments in the Neighborhood
                                             Commercial category (e.g., a furniture store, department store, or
                                             supermarket). As a result, they generate considerable traffic
                                             volumes and require large parcels with large parking lots. This
                                             designation also allows for “commercial industrial” uses. These
                                             are low intensity commercial operations with a light
                                             manufacturing or light industrial nature (e.g., glass shops, small
                                             welding shops, and plumbing shops). Also included are
                                             establishments for Automobile Sales and Service that require
                                             large lots to house their equipment and merchandise. Examples
                                             of establishments that would be compatible with this category
                                             include automobile sales, boat sales, recreational vehicle sales,
                                             and body shops.
 4-10                    Gilroy General Plan                                                   Revised December 2016

                                                                               Community Design and Development
VISITOR-SERVING COMMERCIAL
Intensity:         Maximum building height of 55 feet (4 stories)
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Visitor-Serving
                   Commercial designation include:
                      HC- Highway Commercial
                      Potentially consistent zoning districts include:
                      C3 - Shopping Center Commercial
                      CM - Commercial Industrial
Description: This designation allows for uses that cater to travelers passing
                   through Gilroy. Examples of compatible uses include motels,
                   restaurants, drive-in (fast food) restaurants, and gas stations. The
                   Bonfonte Gardens area is the largest “visitor serving” use in the
                   City. All other Visitor-Serving Commercial areas are located in
                   close proximity to Highway 101 and its access ramps, where they
                   are easily accessible by car and highly visible from the road.
DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL
The Land Use Plan Map designates the City’s central commercial area as
“Downtown Commercial.” This designation actually comprises three sub-
districts with differing uses, design character, and planning requirements. These
are:
          Downtown Historic District
          Downtown Mixed Use District
          Downtown Office District
Figure 3-5 (page 3-25) provides an illustrative diagram of the three districts
that comprise the Downtown commercial area. The boundaries of these
districts will be defined in greater detail in the Downtown Specific Plan. An
overview of the General Plan’s goals and intent for the Downtown area is in
Chapter 3 (page 3-24).
Downtown Historic District
Intensity:         Maximum building height of 45 feet (3 stories)
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Downtown Historic
                   District designation include:
                      PO - Professional Office
                      C2 - Central District Commercial
Revised December 2016                                                    Gilroy General Plan                4-11

Community Design and Development
                                                R3 – Medium Density Residential
                                                R4 – High Density Residential
                        The Historic Site and Historic Neighborhood Combining Districts could be
                        applied as overlay designations in the Downtown Historic District.
                       Description: This designation applies to the historic core of the Downtown. It
                                             encourages pedestrian-oriented uses that are compatible with the
                                             unique historic character and small scale of this important area
                                             of the City. Examples of such uses include specialty shops, cafes,
                                             restaurants, small hotels, and professional offices. Mixed use
                                             developments with retail uses on the ground floor and residential
                                             or office uses above are especially encouraged. Emphasis is given
                                             to restoration and adaptive reuse of historic buildings,
                                             compatibility of architectural styles, and enhancement of the
                                             area’s overall visual character. Parking is provided in shared
                                             public facilities in those areas covered by the Downtown Parking
                                             District and/or on-site for developments with a residential
                                             component.
                        Downtown Mixed Use District
                        Intensity:           Maximum building height of 55 feet (4 stories)
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the Downtown Mixed
                                             Use District designation include:
                                                PO - Professional Office
                                                C1 - Neighborhood Commercial
                                                C2 - Central Commercial
                                                R3 - Medium Density Residential
                                                R4 - High Density Residential
                                                The Historic Site and Historic Neighborhood Combining
                                                 Districts could be applied as overlay designations in the
                                                 Downtown Mixed Use District.
                        Description: This designation encourages mixed use development that
                                             supports the Downtown Historic District and creates a vibrant,
                                             active Downtown. Uses should be pedestrian-oriented, and
                                             uniform street facades are encouraged to create an integrated
                                             design throughout the Downtown area. A wide mix of uses is
                                             encouraged, with second, third and fourth stories used for
                                             residential units, offices, artists’ lofts and other compatible uses.
                                             Public/quasi-public facilities and civic uses such as parks,
                                             playgrounds, cultural and arts facilities, cinemas, community
 4-12                    Gilroy General Plan                                                      Revised December 2016

                                                                                Community Design and Development
                   centers, and day care facilities are encouraged. This designation
                   encompasses the Downtown Transit Center area as well as the
                   Civic Center area. Parking facilities are located on the sides and
                   backs of buildings, with height bonuses provided for features
                   such as structured parking, public open space, or other
                   amenities.
Downtown Office District
Intensity:         Maximum building height of 55 feet (4 stories)
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Downtown Office
                   District designation include:
                      PO - Professional Office
                      C2 - Central Commercial
                      C3 - General Commercial
                   Potentially consistent zoning districts include:
                      R3 - Medium Density Residential
                      R4 - High Density Residential
Description: This designation encourages development of larger scale office
                   buildings in the “northern gateway” to the Downtown area (i.e.,
                   Monterey between Leavesley and Third Street). While consistent
                   with the Downtown area in design (with buildings fronting on
                   the street to create an integrated design of uniform street
                   facades), these uses tend to be larger in scale and more auto-
                   oriented than those in the other two Downtown use
                   designations. Nonetheless, continuous pedestrian facilities are
                   required to promote access between this area and the Historic
                   Downtown area. Parking facilities are located on the sides and
                   backs of buildings, with height bonuses provided for features
                   such as structured parking, public open space, or other
                   amenities. For buildings higher than two stories, a “stepped-
                   back” design should be used to create a pleasant pedestrian
                   environment (with the bottom two stories fronting on the street,
                   and upper stories set back). In addition to office uses,
                   compatible uses include civic facilities, hotels, theaters,
                   restaurants, and financial institutions. Higher density residential
                   uses can also be compatible if developed as part of a mixed use
                   project.
Revised December 2016                                                     Gilroy General Plan                4-13

Community Design and Development
                        Industrial Land Use Designations
                        CAMPUS INDUSTRIAL
                        Intensity:           Maximum building height of 45 feet (3 stories)
                        Zoning:              The Campus Industrial land use will require development of a
                                             new zoning district to implement the necessary use controls and
                                             other development restrictions (see Implementing Action 1.A,
                                             Zoning Ordinance). Other existing zoning districts that are
                                             consistent with the Campus Industrial designation include:
                                                M1 - Limited Industrial
                                                CM - Commercial Industrial
                                                PO - Professional Office
                                               Potentially consistent zoning districts include:
                                                C3 - General Commercial
                        Description: This designation encourages development of attractive “business
                                             parks” in integrated, relatively compact campus settings. Users
                                             of such developments might include software developers,
                                             research and development companies, customer service centers,
                                             and “high tech” or information-based industries, including high-
                                             tech manufacturing operations. Site design will provide extensive
                                             open space and landscaping, with storage areas and loading bays
                                             kept out of sight. The design and operation of such
                                             developments will allow them to be located in close proximity to
                                             residential areas, though they must be sited to provide direct
                                             access to an Arterial without impacting adjacent residential
                                             streets. Light manufacturing operations may be compatible in
                                             these areas if they have similar use characteristics and impacts,
                                             and meet similar site design requirements.
                        An overview of the General Plan’s goals and intent for the new Campus Industrial land use
                        designation is in Chapter 3 (page 3-19).
                        INDUSTRIAL PARK
                        Intensity:           Maximum building height of 35 feet (2 stories)
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the Industrial Park
                                             designation include:
                                                M1 - Limited Industrial
 4-14                    Gilroy General Plan                                                    Revised December 2016

                                                                                 Community Design and Development
                      CM - Commercial Industrial
Description:        This designation allows developments similar to those in the
                   “Campus Industrial” designation in that they demonstrate by the
                   quality of their development and the nature of their operations
                   that they can locate in close proximity to residential and
                   commercial uses with a minimum of environmental conflict.
                   Although they still must meet strict landscaping, buffering and
                   design standards, they do not require a “campus” setting or
                   integrated open space areas. Typical activities include light
                   manufacturing operations, electronics assembly plants, and large
                   warehouses. While “Campus Industrial” uses might be
                   considered more “office” and less “industrial,” uses in this
                   category might be considered more “industrial” and less
                   “office.”
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL
Intensity:         Maximum building height of 75 feet (6 stories)
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the General Industrial
                   designation include:
                      M2 - General Industrial
                      M1 - Limited Industrial
                      CM - Commercial Industrial
Description: Establishments located in these areas characteristically require
                   large parcels of land with good truck and/or rail access. Due to
                   the nature of their operation (potential noise, truck traffic,
                   outside storage, lighting, odors, etc.), uses in this category
                   typically require special mitigations (e.g., landscape buffers,
                   limited hours of operation, etc.) when located adjacent to
                   residential areas. Examples of activities in a General Industrial
                   area include large-scale manufacturing, assembly, storage,
                   distribution, and wholesaling.
Revised December 2016                                                      Gilroy General Plan                4-15

Community Design and Development
                        Other Land Use Designations
                        HECKER PASS SPECIAL USE DISTRICT
                         Density:             Suggested target residential density of 0.4 units per acre, with
                                              potential density bonus of 25% (for maximum suggested target
                                              density of 0.5 units per acre) in exchange for permanent open
                                              space dedications and clustered residential site design.
                                             Commercial developments shall be low intensity, covering no
                                             more than 10 percent of parcel acreage for “agri-tourism” uses.
                                             Building heights shall be limited to 35 feet maximum (2 stories),
                                             with setbacks and additional restrictions as necessary to preserve
                                             views.
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts potentially consistent with the Hecker Pass
                                             designation include:
                                                A1 - Agriculture
                                                OS - Open Space
                                                PF - Park/Public Facility
                                                R1 - Single Family Residential
                                                R2 - Two-Family Residential
                                                A new “agri-tourism” zoning district is also proposed to meet the
                                                 specific needs of this designation.
                                               The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Combining District
                                               as well as the Historic Site Combining District could be
                                               applied as overlay designations in the Hecker Pass Special Use
                                               District.
                        Description: This designation is intended to establish specific use controls
                                             and development guidelines for the Hecker Pass corridor area, as
                                             designated on the Land Use Plan Map. It encourages
                                             preservation of the natural features and unique qualities of this
                                             important community asset, while allowing limited, compatible
                                             development. Of special concern are:
                                                preservation of open space, agricultural lands, and the Uvas
                                                 Creek riparian corridor
                                                maintaining views to the southern hills
                                                protection of significant natural features such as the cedar
                                                 trees along Highway 152
                                                limiting access points along Highway 152
 4-16                    Gilroy General Plan                                                        Revised December 2016

                                                                                     Community Design and Development
                      creating an integrated trail network that will include
                       extension of the Uvas Creek Park Preserve from Santa
                       Teresa to Bonfonte Gardens and creation of a bicycle
                       staging area
                      enhancing the area’s potential as a tourist destination,
                       building upon its agricultural character and scenic qualities
                   Residential uses in the Hecker Pass area should be limited to
                   lower density developments, clustered along the southern part
                   of the corridor area towards Uvas Creek (respecting views from
                   the creek and its importance as a recreational resource) and in
                   the Hoey Ranch area north of Highway 152. Clustered designs
                   should ensure the preservation of significant open space areas,
                   view corridors, and significant natural features.
                   Commercial uses should be limited in scale and type to ensure
                   compatibility with the agricultural character of Hecker Pass.
                   These “agri-tourism” uses might include wineries, fruit stands,
                   and gift shops specializing in agricultural products. Small
                   restaurants and “bed-and-breakfast” establishments would also
                   be compatible if limited in scale and quantity.
                   All developments must meet strict landscaping, site design,
                   signage, and architectural design standards to ensure visual
                   compatibility with the unique atmosphere of the Hecker Pass
                   area.
                   An overview of the General Plan’s goals and intent in relation to the new
                   Hecker Pass Special Use District is provided in Chapter 3, Strategic
                   Direction.
OPEN SPACE
Zoning:            Zoning districts that are consistent with the Open Space
                   designation include:
                      OS – Open Space
                      A1 – Agriculture
Description: This designation is applied to areas where urban development is
                   either inappropriate or undesirable. Specifically, it is used to
                   preserve and protect lands that are considered environmentally
                   unfit for development, including:
                      Natural resource areas such as the Uvas Creek and Llagas
                       Creek corridors and the southwestern foothills; and
                      Hazardous areas such as fault zones and floodways.
                   While some limited activities and structures may be allowed,
                   these are subject to site-specific environmental review and must
Revised December 2016                                                          Gilroy General Plan                4-17

Community Design and Development
                                             be limited in scope to ensure preservation of natural resources
                                             and protection of public health and safety.
                        PARK AND RECREATION FACILITY
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the Park and Recreation
                                             designation include:
                                                PF – Park/Public Facilities
                                                OS – Open Space
                        Description: This designation is applied to existing and future developed park
                                             lands, including existing and planned “linear parks” that serve
                                             both a circulation and recreation function. It is also applied to
                                             public recreation areas such as the golf course.
                        PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC FACILITY
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the Public/Quasi-Public
                                             Facility designation include:
                                                PF – Park/Public Facilities
                        Description: This designation is applied to existing and planned public or
                                             quasi-public facilities. Examples of public facilities include City
                                             Hall, the library, the fire stations, and utility sub-stations;
                                             examples of quasi-public facilities include the cemetery and the
                                             hospital.
                        SCHOOL
                        Zoning:              Zoning districts that are consistent with the School designation
                                             include:
                                                PF – Park/Public Facilities
                        Description: This designation is applied to existing and future school facilities,
                                             including both public schools (owned and operated by the
                                             Gilroy Unified School District and Gavilan College) and private
                                             schools (except where the school is part of another facility, such
                                             as a church).
 4-18                    Gilroy General Plan                                                      Revised December 2016

                                                                                     Community Design and Development
Goals and Policies
  1       Community Design
  3
GOAL: An attractive community that preserves and strengthens the City’s historic, small-
town character; provides and maintains safe, livable, and affordable neighborhoods; and meets
the needs of Gilroy’s diverse population.
Policy 1.01
Pattern of Development. Ensure an orderly, contiguous pattern of
                                                                                                    Action 1.A
development that prioritizes infill development, phases new development,                            Zoning Ordinance
encourages compactness and efficiency, preserves surrounding open space and
agricultural resources, and avoids land use incompatibilities.
Policy 1.02
Mix of Uses. Create a diverse mix of land uses to achieve a balance between                         Action 1.A
jobs and housing and to ensure the community’s long-term viability. Through                         Zoning Ordinance
the Land Use Plan Map, the City shall encourage a range of housing types, a
diversity of businesses and industries, and adequate services and leisure
activities to meet residents’ social and economic needs.
Policy 1.03
Uses East of Highway 101. Restrict lands east of Highway 101 to industrial                          Action 1.A
                                                                                                    Zoning Ordinance
and agricultural use except for (1) commercial developments that draw a clear
majority of customers from outside of Gilroy, in accordance with criteria
established by the City of Gilroy; and (2) public and quasi-public facilities
identified on the Land Use Plan Map. The City will encourage the maintenance
of agricultural uses in all undeveloped industrially designated areas. Residential
care facilities will only be allowed in the area east of Highway 101 if they meet
the criteria set forth in Policy 14.05, Residential Care Facilities for Seniors.
Policy 1.04
New Neighborhoods. Promote a more integrative, comprehensive, and                                    Action 1.C
creative approach to neighborhood planning in new areas of residential                               Neighborhood Districts
                                                                                                     Implementation Strategy
development to create neighborhoods that are attractive, safe, and diverse. Use
the ideas, objectives, and guidelines set forth in Chapter 3 under Neighborhood
Districts (page 3-8) to guide the planning, design and development of new
residential neighborhoods to achieve the vision and goals of the General Plan.
Revised December 2016                                                          Gilroy General Plan                      4-19

Community Design and Development
                        Policy 1.05
                        Existing Neighborhoods. Maintain and enhance the quality of existing
                        residential neighborhoods, ensuring adequate public facilities such as parks,
                        schools, streets, water supply, and drainage. Protect residential neighborhoods
                        from excessive noise and traffic impacts; provide pedestrian and bicycle
                        circulation facilities to encourage walking and biking; and work with the Santa
                        Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) to provide adequate levels of
                        transit service to meet resident needs. Encourage infill developments that
                        enhance neighborhood quality, supporting community input and participation
                        in the planning and design of large infill projects or projects that propose non-
                        residential, neighborhood-serving uses (such as neighborhood commercial
                        uses). Infill development in existing residential neighborhoods should follow
                        similar design guidelines as those outlined for new neighborhoods in the
                        Neighborhood Districts text on pages 3-8 through 3-14.
                        Policy 1.06
                        Downtown. Promote the old downtown section of Monterey Street as the
                        focal point for community identity, providing a “sense of place” and feeling of
                        historic continuity for Gilroy residents. Use the ideas, objectives, and guidelines
                        set forth in Chapter 3 under Downtown (page 3-18) to guide future planning,
                        design and development in the Downtown to achieve the vision and goals of
                        the Gilroy General Plan. In particular, explore opportunities for creating a new
                        park or plaza in the Downtown area to enhance its role as a gathering place and
                        community focal point. See also policies 3.24 through 3.33 under “Economic
                        Development” and policy 5.04 under “Historic Preservation.”
                        Policy 1.07
                        Hecker Pass. Protect and enhance the unique qualities and character of the
                        Hecker Pass area as the City’s western gateway and as a highly valued scenic
                        resource for Gilroy residents and visitors. Use the ideas, objectives, and
                        guidelines set forth in Chapter 3 under Hecker Pass (page 3-21) to guide future
                        planning, design and development in the area to achieve the vision and goals of
                        the Gilroy General Plan.
                        Policy 1.08
                        Areas with Fragmented Property Ownership. Encourage coordinated
                        development in areas where a fragmentation of property ownership poses
                        potential difficulties for orderly and efficient development (e.g., layout of
                        streets, lots, and utilities), potentially requiring a Specific Plan or a Master
                        Environmental Impact Re-port to provide the necessary level of coordination
                        in project planning and implementation.
 4-20                    Gilroy General Plan                                                  Revised December 2016

                                                                           Community Design and Development
Policy 1.09
Clustered Development. Encourage clustered development as a strategy for                 Action 1.A
                                                                                         Zoning Ordinance
achieving desired densities while protecting fragile environmental habitats or           Action 1.B
natural features; creating amenity open spaces; and achieving other community            Hillside Development Guidelines
                                                                                         Action 1.J
design goals.                                                                            Design Review
Policy 1.10
Gateways. Create entry points to the City that are identified by well-designed,          Action 1.H
landscaped entrances with landscaped medians, indicating civic pride and a               Gateway Landscaping
concern for civic beauty. Principal gateways to Gilroy are located on north and
south Monterey Street; Highway 152/Hecker Pass; Highway 152/Pacheco
Pass; north and south Santa Teresa Boulevard; and at the Highway 101
interchanges at Masten, Buena Vista, Leavesley, and Tenth Street.
Policy 1.11
Community Beautification. Actively promote the beautification of Gilroy by                Action 1.I
acquiring easements or development rights for open space, planting street trees,          Community Beautification Efforts
and landscaping public rights-of-way.
Policy 1.12
Street Trees. Line the City’s streets with trees so that they become enjoyable            Action 1.G
                                                                                          Street Tree Program
and beautiful spaces rather than merely corridors of traffic, creating a rich
“urban forest” for the enjoyment of future generations. Tree species should be
selected that will (a) provide a canopy of shade; and (b) have root systems that
will not cause sidewalk buckling and other damage.
Policy 1.13
Undergrounding of Utilities. Remove overhead utility lines and wooden                     Action 19.F
poles in central areas, and ultimately throughout the City, and require                   Utilities Undergrounding Program
undergrounding of utilities in all new developments.
Policy 1.14
Signs and Billboards. Strictly regulate signs and billboards in order to                   Action 1.K
                                                                                           Sign Ordinance
minimize their impact on the visual environment.
Policy 1.15
Signs on Santa Teresa Boulevard. Prohibit signs within 1000 feet of Santa                  Action 1.K
                                                                                           Sign Ordinance
Teresa Boulevard in the unincorporated portions of the Planning Area, and
within 660 feet in incorporated portions except for on-site business
identification signs.
Revised December 2016                                                Gilroy General Plan                       4-21

Community Design and Development
                        Policy 1.16
                        Hillside Development. Minimize the amount of grading and topographical
                        alteration needed in hillside development to create developments that appear to
                        be in a natural setting, sited in the least obtrusive fashion as a compatible rather
                        than as an imposed scheme. Clustered development in hillside areas should be
                        encouraged. Also, design roadways that pass through hillside areas to preserve
                        the ecological and scenic character of the hillsides.
                        See also
                                              Policy 23.01: Open Space Areas
                                              Policy 23.05: Greenbelts
 4-22                    Gilroy General Plan                                                Revised December 2016

                                                                                         Community Design and Development
   2       Growth Management
GOAL: A clearly defined, well-managed development process that ensures that (a) the rate of
growth does not outpace the City’s and other agencies’ ability to provide necessary infrastructure
and services; (b) the demands created by new growth do not exceed resource and system capacity
constraints; (c) new growth is directed first to areas where municipal services are available and
capacity exists; (d) the incremental public service costs generated by new growth are paid for by
new growth; and (e) the resulting pattern of development is compact, efficient, and contiguous.
Policy 2.01
Location of Growth. Maximize existing infrastructure and service
investments— and avoid premature investment for facility and service
extensions—by directing new growth to vacant and under-utilized lands within
the Urban Service Area, consistent with the Urban Growth Boundary ("UGB")
adopted by initiative in 2016. As a second-tier priority, direct new development
to areas that border on existing urban development or are immediately adjacent
to the Urban Service Area, prohibiting costly “leap frog” development and
ensuring a compact development pattern, consistent with the UGB.
Policy 2.02
Rate and Timing of Growth. Ensure that the rate of growth is controlled
such that resource and system capacity constraints are not exceeded (e.g., water
supply and sewage treatment) and necessary urban services (such as sewer,
water supply, police, and schools) are funded, implemented and completed
prior to occupation of new buildings.
Policy 2.03
Annexation Prior to Development. Allow urban development only within
the incorporated portion of the Planning Area, requiring that land be annexed
to the City before final development approval is given.
Policy 2.04
Growth Management Tools and Process. Utilize the Residential
Development Ordinance, Urban Growth Boundary, Urban Service Area, 20-
Year Planning Boundary, sewer treatment and disposal capacities, and natural
resource management policies (including water resources) as tools for
managing the rate, location and extent of growth. Ensure that the processes for
establishing, reviewing and implementing these tools are open to the public and
responsive to public concerns.
Revised December 2016                                                              Gilroy General Plan                4-23

    Community Design and Development
                            Policy 2.05
                            Growth Monitoring and Evaluation. Provide for regular review and
Action 28.C                 evaluation of growth management goals, tools, and results—as part of the
General Plan Review and
Update                      periodic General Plan review process—comparing planned and actual levels of
                            growth and reviewing current and projected market trends and conditions.
                            Policy 2.06
Action 18.B                 Development Impact Fees. Require that new developments pay all of the
Public Facility Impact Fees incremental public service costs that they generate.
Action 19.A
Infrastructure Impact Fees  Policy 2.07
                            Urban Service Area. Establish and maintain an Urban Service Area that
Action 2.A
Urban Service Area
                            indicates the area of land that could potentially be developed in the next 5 years
                            and to which the City is committed to providing basic infrastructure and
                            services. Urban zoning, development approvals, and building permits will only
                            be granted to properties within the Urban Service Area. The City will not
                            accept development proposals on land outside the Urban Service Area, and will
                            coordinate with the County to discourage premature subdivision of such land.
                            Applications for inclusion in the Urban Service Area will be accepted annually
                            and evaluated in light of General Plan policies promoting infill development
                            and efficiency in the provision of urban services.
                            Policy 2.08
                            20-Year Boundary. Establish a “20-Year Boundary” and display it on the
                            Land Use Plan Map, indicating the area of land that could potentially be
                            developed in the next 20 years. The objectives of the 20-Year Boundary are to:
                                Direct the location and extent of urbanization in the 20-year term,
                                 providing an efficient way to undertake long-term infrastructure planning.
                                Minimize public service and infrastructure costs.
                                Promote compact development and efficient utilization of land and
                                 resources, encouraging investment in existing neighborhoods.
                                Protect natural resource areas.
                                Discourage development in areas subject to public safety hazards, including
                                 flood hazards.
                                Maintain the productivity and economic viability of agricultural lands by
                                 minimizing urban encroachment into agricultural areas.
                                Help the private sector to make informed development investments and
                                 discourage speculative land purchases through clear city policies for land
                                 development and infrastructure planning.
                            Lands within the 20-Year Boundary are those to which the City expects to
                            provide services in the next 20 years. Any such service provision shall be
                            consistent with the Urban Growth Boundary adopted by initiative in 2016.
      4-24                   Gilroy General Plan                                             Revised December 2016

                                                                             Community Design and Development
Applications for Urban Service Area expansions will only be accepted for lands
within the 20-Year Boundary.
Policy 2.09
20-Year Boundary Amendments. Discourage piecemeal amendments to the
20-Year Boundary that might undermine its integrity as a long-term planning
tool. Consider amendments to the 20-Year Boundary only in conjunction with
a citywide review of land availability and in light of the objectives of the 20-
Year Boundary (set forth in Policy 2.08). The circumstances under which a
citywide review of land availability might take place, and the 20-Year Boundary
modified, shall be limited to:
a) A comprehensive update of the City’s General Plan;
b) A General Plan Review indicating that growth is occurring at a significantly
     faster pace than anticipated at the time that the 20-Year Growth Boundary
     was established (see Chapter 9, General Plan Management and
     Coordination);
c) “Rare and exceptional circumstances,” as defined in Policy 2.10.
d) Development of a Specific Plan, where a citywide review of land availability
     is considered appropriate and/or necessary.
Modification of the 20-Year Boundary shall require a citywide review of land
availability, quantifying the acreage of land within the current 20-Year
Boundary, by land use type, and comparing the inventory to current growth
projections. If it is determined that a land shortage exists for specific land use
types, then the City may consider:
a) As a first priority, redesignating lands within the current boundary to
     ensure an adequate land supply for projected growth in all land use types;
     or
b) As a second priority, modifying the 20-Year Boundary to provide adequate
     land to meet projected growth needs.
Any proposed modification must take into consideration General Plan policies
regarding agricultural lands and open space preservation; the efficient provision
of urban services; the ability of GUSD to provide school facilities; the role of
special districts in providing services; public safety hazards in the expansion
area, including flood hazards; traffic impacts; and fiscal impacts on affected
agencies.
Revised December 2016                                                  Gilroy General Plan                4-25

Community Design and Development
                        Policy 2.10
                        “Rare and Exceptional Circumstances” for Amendments to the 20-Year
                        Boundary. While endeavoring to maintain the integrity of the 20-Year
                        Boundary as a long-term planning tool, and discouraging boundary
                        amendments that are counter to the objectives in Policy 2.08, ensure that the
                        City is able to respond to unforeseen challenges and opportunities in a manner
                        that helps achieve the vision and goals set forth in the General Plan. To this
                        end, recognize that amendments to the Boundary may be necessary, under rare
                        and exceptional circumstances, outside of the scope of a General Plan Review,
                        a comprehensive General Plan Update, or Specific Plan process.
                        To qualify for consideration of a boundary amendment under this policy, the
                        following conditions must be met:
                        a) There must be a specific development proposal on a property or properties
                             adjacent to but outside the current 20-Year Boundary.
                        b) The applicant must substantiate that the proposed project will (1) provide a
                             significant number of high-paying jobs; or (2) contribute substantially to the
                             City’s tax revenues; or (3) provide significant new public facilities or public
                             works.
                        c) The applicant must substantiate that there is no other developable property
                             within the current 20-Year Boundary to accommodate the proposed
                             development, either as proposed or with modifications that would provide
                             the same benefits but allow for development on lands within the existing
                             20-Year Boundary.
                        d) The applicant must substantiate that the proposed development is in
                             keeping with the other goals and policies of the General Plan.
                        If these conditions are met, then the City may consider an amendment to the
                        20-Year Boundary, in keeping with the process and criteria set forth in Policy
                        2.09. The purpose of this review shall be to ensure that the proposed project
                        and amendment request meet the standards established by LAFCo for
                        extending the City’s Urban Service Area. If these standards are not sufficiently
                        met, the requested boundary amendment shall be denied.
                        Policy 2.11
                        Deleted by 2016 Urban Growth Boundary Initiative.
 4-26                    Gilroy General Plan                                              Revised December 2016

                                                                                Community Design and Development
Policy 2.12
SCRWA Exemption. Exempt expansions to the 20-Year Boundary to
incorporate lands needed for the specific purpose of expanding the South
County Regional Wastewater Authority (SCRWA) plant from the requirements
of Policy 2.09.
Policy 2.13
Urban Growth Boundary. In 2016, the people of the City of Gilroy approved
an Urban Growth Boundary (" UGB") by initiative to protect the unique
character of the City of Gilroy and the agriculture and open space character, of
the surrounding areas. The UGB is a line beyond which urban development is
not allowed. Except for public parks, public educational facilities (such as
public schools and public colleges), and public wastewater, sewer, storm drain,
and water recycling facilities, only uses consistent with: 1) the General Plan
"Open Space" land use designation as this designation existed on February 26,
2016; and (2) the uses of "open space land" as set forth in Government Code
section 65560, subsections ( b), (b)( 1), ( b)( 2), (b)( 3), and (b)( 4) are allowed
outside the UGB.
The City of Gilroy's UGB reflects a commitment to direct future growth within
the City' s existing urban areas in order to prevent urban sprawl into the
agriculturally and environmentally important areas surrounding the City. The
UGB protects the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of the residents of
Gilroy by concentrating future residential, commercial, and industrial growth in
areas already served by urban services. The policies implementing the UGB
allow sufficient flexibility within its limits to respond to the City' s changing
needs over time. The UGB complements General Plan policies encouraging
infill development and supporting a thriving downtown center.
Policy 2.14
Urban Growth Boundary Implementation. Until December 31, 2040, the
following General Plan provisions, as adopted by the Gilroy Urban Growth
Boundary Initiative, may not be amended or repealed except by a vote of the
people: Policy 2. 13 and Policy 2. 14 of the Community Design and
Development Element.
a) Until December 31, 2040, lands outside the UGB as shown on the General
     Plan Land Use Plan Map may be redesignated, and the location of the
     UGB depicted on the Land Use Plan Map may be amended, only by a vote
     of the people, or by the City Council pursuant to the procedures set forth
     in subsections (b) through (e) below.
b) The City Council may, if it deems it to be in the public interest, amend the
     location of the UGB depicted on the Land Use Plan Map, provided that
     the amended boundary is within or coextensive with the limits of the UGB
Revised December 2016                                                     Gilroy General Plan                4-27
Community Design and Development
                             as established by the Gilroy Urban Growth Boundary Initiative. The City
                             Council, may, if it deems it to be in the public interest, redesignate lands
                             outside the UGB, provided that the new designation allows only uses
                             consistent with (1) the General Plan " Open Space" land use designation as
                             this designation existed on February 26, 2016; and (2) the uses of "open
                             space land" as set forth in Government Code section 65560, subsections (
                             b), ( b)( 1), (b)( 2), ( b)( 3), and (b)(4).
                        c) The City Council may amend the location of the UGB located on the Land
                             Use Plan Map, and/or redesignate lands outside the UGB, if the City
                             Council determines that doing so is necessary to comply with State law
                             regarding the provision of housing for all segments of the community. The
                             City Council may do so only if it first makes each of the following findings
                             based on substantial evidence:
                                  1) That the land proposed to be brought within the UGB and/or
                                        redesignated is immediately adjacent to: (i) the existing UGB; and (
                                        ii) available water and sewer connections; and
                                  2) That the proposed development will consist primarily of low- and
                                        very low-income housing pursuant to the Housing Element of this
                                        General Plan;
                                  3) That there is no existing vacant or undeveloped residentially
                                        designated land within the UGB to accommodate the proposed
                                        development and it is not feasible to accommodate the proposed
                                        development by redesignating lands within the UGB for low and
                                        very low-income housing; and
                                  4) That the proposed development is necessary to comply with State
                                        law requirements for the provision of low- and very low-income
                                        housing and the area of land within the proposed development will
                                        not exceed the minimum area necessary to comply with State law.
                        d) To promote sustainable job creation, the City Council may amend the
                             location of the UGB located on the Land Use Plan Map and/or redesignate
                             lands outside the UGB in order to allow uses consistent with the General
                             Plan " General Industrial” land use designation as this designation existed
                             on February 26, 2016, provided that no more than 50 acres of land may be
                             brought within the UGB and/ or redesignated pursuant.to this subsection
                             in any calendar year. The City Council may do so only if it makes each of
                             the following findings based on substantial evidence:
                                  1) That the land proposed to be brought within the UGB and/or
                                        redesignated is immediately adjacent to: (i) the existing UGB; and
                                        (ii) available water and sewer connections; and
 4-28                    Gilroy General Plan                                                  Revised December 2016

                                                                             Community Design and Development
          2) That the land proposed to be brought within the UGB and/ or
             redesignated is the subject of a pending application to the City for a
             specific development proposal; and
          3) That there is no existing appropriately designated land within the
             UGB that could accommodate the development as proposed or
             with modifications, and that would provide substantially the same
             benefits; and
          4) That it is not feasible to accommodate the proposed development
             by redesignating lands within the UGB for the proposed
             development.
e) Upon request of an affected landowner with a pending development
     application, the City Council may amend the location of the UGB depicted
     on the Land Use Plan Map, and/or redesignate lands outside the UGB, if it
     makes both of the following findings based on substantial evidence:
          1) That the application of the, UGB depicted on the Land Use Plan
             Map, or of the Gilroy Urban Growth Boundary Initiative's designation of
             land outside the UGB, would constitute an unconstitutional taking
             of the landowner' s property; and
          2) That the UGB amendment and/or land use redesignation will allow
             additional land uses only to the minimum extent necessary to avoid
             such a taking of the landowner's property.
f) Prior to amending the location of the UGB or redesignating lands outside
     the UGB pursuant to subsections (c) through (e) of this Policy, the City
     Council shall hold at least one noticed public hearing for the purpose of
     receiving testimony and evidence from the applicant and the public on the
     proposed amendment and any findings proposed in connection with such
     amendment. This hearing shall be in addition to any other public hearings
     required for a General Plan amendment.
g) The General Plan may be reorganized or updated, and individual provisions
     may be renumbered or reordered in the course of ongoing updates of the
     General Plan in accordance with the requirements of State law, but Policy
     2. 13 and Policy 2. 14 of the Community Design and Development
     Element shall continue to be included in the General Plan unless earlier
     amended or repealed by the voters of the City. After December 31, 2040,
     this Policy 2. 14 shall have no further force and effect, and the City
     Council, if it deems it in the public interest, may amend the Land Use Plan
     Map and other General Plan provisions addressed by this Policy 2. 14 in
     accordance with State law without a vote of the people.
Revised December 2016                                                  Gilroy General Plan                4-29
Community Design and Development
                        h) The City, and its departments, boards, commissions, officers, and
                             employees, shall not approve any general plan amendment, zoning
                             amendment, specific plan, specific plan amendment, rezoning, subdivision
                             map, conditional use permit, or take any other discretionary action, that is
                             inconsistent with Policy 2.13 and Policy 2.14 of the Community Design and
                             Development Element of the General Plan. Any general plan amendment,
                             zoning amendment, specific plan, specific plan amendment, rezoning,
                             subdivision map, conditional use permit, or any other discretionary
                             approval granted by the City that either redesignates land outside the UGB
                             or brings land within the UGB under subsections (c) through (e) of this
                             Policy 2. 14 must be consistent with the findings made to support that land'
                             s redesignation or inclusion within the UGB.
 4-30                    Gilroy General Plan                                             Revised December 2016
                                                                                       Community Design and Development
  3       Economic Development
GOAL: A mix of traditional and new businesses and industries that provide a vibrant local
economy, a diversity of economic opportunities for all Gilroyans, and a stable tax base to
support City services, with a vital city center in and around Gilroy’s historic Downtown.
Policy 3.01
Jobs and Revenues. Attract industrial, high-tech, and commercial office
employers to provide a diversity of well-paid job opportunities for local
residents and to broaden the City’s revenue base, ensuring adequate resources
over time to support the provision of quality city services. Also, support the
development, retention, and expansion of small and medium size businesses,
agricultural businesses, and tourism-related businesses, recognizing their vital
importance to the City’s economic future. See also SCJAP 2.01 and 2.02.
Policy 3.02
Economic Development Activities. Actively promote Gilroy as a place for
business and industry, capitalizing on the City’s location and numerous
amenities, to encourage new businesses to locate here and to retain existing
businesses.
Policy 3.03
Commercial and Industrial Design Standards. Ensure that new commercial
and industrial developments contribute to the overall attractiveness of the
community through appropriate site design, architectural design, and
landscaping.
Industrial Development
Policy 3.04
Industrial Growth. Encourage new industrial uses to locate in Gilroy that can
provide jobs for Gilroy residents. Discourage industrial uses that create noxious
or nuisance conditions, as well as industries that would substantially fuel
housing and population growth and place excessive burdens on public services,
facilities, and schools. Phase new industrial development according to the
availability of local housing, public facility capacities, and provision of urban
services (see also Policy 2.02, Rate and Timing of Growth).
Revised December 2016                                                            Gilroy General Plan                4-31

 Community Design and Development
                         Policy 3.05
                         Heavy Industrial Activities. Continue to concentrate heavy industrial
Land Use Plan Map        activities in the City’s southeast industrial area, to avoid unsightly or
Action 1.A
Zoning Ordinance
                         incompatible scattered development. This area is suitable for heavy industrial
                         activity because it is located in an area that is close to major transportation
                         routes; is within the Insurance Service Office’s (ISO) prescribed “running
                         distance” of a fire station; has adequate land for industrial expansion; and is
                         adjacent to compatible land use activities.
                         Policy 3.06
                         Industrial Parks. Continue to encourage the development of well-designed
                         industrial park areas (in terms of parcel size, landscaping, and location) to
                         attract new light industrial development to the Gilroy area.
                         Policy 3.07
                         Campus Industrial Uses. Encourage development of well-designed campus
                         industrial areas to attract “high tech” businesses and related industries to
                         Gilroy, further diversifying the local economy and providing new types of jobs
                         for Gilroy residents. Use the ideas, objectives, and guidelines set forth on pages
                         3-15 through 3-18, Campus Industrial Areas, to guide future planning, design
                         and development of these uses to achieve the vision and goals of the Gilroy
                         General Plan.
                         Policy 3.08
                         Conditional Industrial Park Uses. Allow industrial park uses in areas other
                         than those designated on the Land Use Plan Map if the use is shown to meet
                         the City’s Industrial Design Guidelines for environmental compatibility with
                         existing or planned adjoining residential and commercial uses and high
                         standards of landscaping, buffering, and design.
                         Policy 3.09
                         Landscaping in Industrial Areas. Require the screening of loading areas and
                         open storage areas so that they are not visible from major roads. Also, require
                         landscape buffering where industrial uses abut designated scenic highway
                         corridors.
                         Policy 3.10
                         Industrial Nuisances. Require that defunct or abandoned structures on
                         industrial land which pose a visual blight or physical hazard be dismantled or
                         removed within a reasonable period of time. In addition, require the screening
                         and control of unsightly or excessively noisy operations.
   4-32                   Gilroy General Plan                                                Revised December 2016

                                                                            Community Design and Development
Policy 3.11
Agricultural Industries. Recognizing agriculture as an important base industry            Action 4.A
                                                                                          Implementation of “Strategies to
vital to the existing economy of Gilroy, support measures that strengthen the             Balance Planned Growth…”
position and economic viability of local agriculture and related industries.              Action 4.B
                                                                                          Interagency Coordination to
Policy 3.12                                                                               Promote Agriculture
Agriculture in Industrial Areas. Encourage agriculture as both an interim                 Action 1.A
                                                                                          Zoning Ordinance
and long-term use in areas designated for industrial development.
Commercial Development
Policy 3.13
Clustering of Commercial Uses. Encourage new commercial uses to group                     Action 1.A
                                                                                          Zoning Ordinance
into clustered areas or centers containing professional offices, retail sales and         Action 3.D
services. Locate such clustered development at the intersections of major                 Commercial Design and
                                                                                          Development Standards
thoroughfares, and prohibit “strip” forms of commercial development (shallow
depth, linear form).
Policy 3.14
                                                                                           Action 1.J
Commercial Design Standards and Review Procedures. Protect residential                     Design Review
uses from the possible adverse effects from adjacent commercial centers by a               Action 3.D
                                                                                           Commercial Design and Development
rigorous design review procedure that emphasizes high standards of                         Standards
construction, design, buffering, and screening.                                            Action 3.E
                                                                                           Use Controls &Design Guidelines for
Policy 3.15                                                                                Nbhd. Commercial Development
                                                                                           Standards.
Landscaping in Commercial Areas. Require that landscaping on commercial
                                                                                           Action 3.D
properties be well maintained. Encourage those properties currently without                Commercial Design and
landscaping to provide landscaping.                                                        Development Standards
Policy 3.16
Auto-oriented Commercial Uses. Require auto-oriented commercial uses                       Action 3.D
                                                                                           Commercial Design and
that front on major thoroughfares to present a high-quality design. Control                Development Standards
access to these uses to minimize circulation conflicts, and ensure adequate
screening from adjacent uses. For commercial uses that are located adjacent to
residential areas, ensure the provision of convenient and direct pedestrian
access to those areas.
Policy 3.17
Service Stations. Allow only one service station at any intersection, and                    Action 1.A
                                                                                             Zoning Ordinance
prohibit service stations on Santa Teresa Boulevard, except at First Street.
Revised December 2016                                                 Gilroy General Plan                       4-33

Community Design and Development
                        Policy 3.18
                        Neighborhood Commercial Uses. Encourage the creation of small
                        neighborhood commercial areas to minimize the necessity of using
                        automobiles, promote energy conservation, and encourage walking and
                        bicycling to procure basic goods and services. Neighborhood commercial areas
                        should be located on collector streets wherever possible, at the “entrances” to
                        residential neighborhoods. They should incorporate amenities such as
                        community gathering spaces and/or places for neighborhood-oriented cultural
                        events, and be linked to residential areas with bikeways and pedestrian paths.
                        Strict use controls should ensure that businesses and activities within
                        neighborhood commercial areas are consistent with residential uses, and design
                        standards should be applied to ensure consistency with the overall character
                        and quality of the surrounding neighborhood, with adequate screening and
                        buffering from adjacent residential uses. The concept of a “neighborhood
                        center” should be encouraged, clustering neighborhood commercial uses with
                        other neighborhood-serving facilities and amenities.
                        Policy 3.19
Action 1.A              Commercial Uses on Santa Teresa Boulevard. Prohibit commercial uses on
Zoning Ordinance
                        Santa Teresa Boulevard in order to minimize the number of points of ingress
                        and egress along the roadway, and encourage the County to establish the same
                        prohibition in unincorporated areas of Santa Teresa Boulevard. A possible
                        exception may be made for a single clustered commercial node in the vicinity
                        of Sunrise Road, Day Road, or the extension of Buena Vista to serve the needs
                        of local area residents.
                        Policy 3.20
Action 3.D Commercial   North Monterey Street Improvements. Require curbs and gutters in the
Design and              commercial areas along North Monterey Street.
Development Standards
                        Policy 3.21
Action 1.A Zoning       First Street Commercial Development. Encourage new commercial
Ordinance               development along First Street to use a Planned Unit Development (PUD)
Action 1.J Design       approach, with emphasis on larger interrelated developments as opposed to
Review                  smaller spot development. Developments will include such amenities as
Action 3.D
Commercial Design       extensive landscaping, a minimum of 30-foot setbacks and an architectural style
and Development         that is compatible with the newer development along First Street.
Standards
                        Policy 3.22
 Action 1.A             Commercial Uses West of Santa Teresa Boulevard. Prohibit commercial
 Zoning Ordinance       development in the areas west of Santa Teresa Boulevard with the exception of
                        visitor-serving commercial uses associated with theme/recreation parks; small
                        neighborhood commercial uses; and limited agri-tourism uses as permitted in
                        the Hecker Pass Special Use District.
  4-34                   Gilroy General Plan                                             Revised December 2016

                                                                                Community Design and Development
Downtown Development
Policy 3.23
Downtown Boundaries. Expand the definition of “Downtown” to include all
of the area designated on the Land Use Plan Map, roughly bounded by
Leavesley/ Welburn on the north, Railroad Street on the east, Tenth Street on
the south, and the alley between Eigleberry and Church Streets on the west.
Within this area, the concentrated retail core is situated between Third and
Seventh Streets, and between the railroad tracks and Eigleberry Street. These
boundaries will be reviewed, modified, and/or confirmed in the Downtown
Specific Plan process.
Policy 3.24
Downtown Use Districts. Consider establishing three distinct use districts in
the Downtown area through the Downtown Specific Plan, as outlined in the
Downtown Commercial land use designation description on pages 4-11
through 4-14, including a Downtown Historic District, Downtown Mixed Use
District, and Downtown Office District.
Policy 3.25
Mix of Uses Downtown. Encourage a wide mix of uses in close proximity to
each other in the Downtown area, including governmental services and
facilities, cultural and recreational activities, a broad range of retail activities,
financial and professional services, entertainment, transit services, and housing
for residents. Encourage mixed use developments that integrate housing and
commercial uses.
Policy 3.26
Business Development in the Downtown. Provide amenities that will make
Downtown attractive to office users and retail businesses (e.g., convenient
parking, an attractive and safe environment, access to regional transit services,
high quality infrastructure, reliable services, etc.) and encourage new office and
retail businesses and expansions of existing businesses in Gilroy to locate there.
Policy 3.27
Downtown Pedestrian Environment. Encourage and/or undertake design
improvements in the Downtown area to create a safe, convenient, and pleasant                    Action 1.D
                                                                                                Downtown Specific
pedestrian environment. Improvements—on an area-wide or project-specific                        Plan
basis— might include pedestrian-oriented amenities such as lighting, wider
Revised December 2016                                                     Gilroy General Plan                     4-35

Community Design and Development
                        sidewalks, clearly marked pedestrian crossings, benches, landscaping, signage,
                        and sidewalk seating areas. Design and manage roadway and pedestrian
                        facilities to reduce conflicts between automobiles, pedestrians and bicyclists.
                        Policy 3.28
                        Downtown Traffic Circulation / Monterey Street Improvements. Use the
                        Downtown Specific Plan process to develop a circulation plan for the
                        Downtown area to (a) ensure convenient automobile access into and through
                        the Downtown area, with special attention given to parking availability and
                        access; (b) reduce potential conflicts between automobile, pedestrian and
                        bicycle circulation; and (c) explore alternative street configurations and
                        streetscape designs to ensure a pleasant and safe environment for pedestrians.
                        Policy 3.29
                        Downtown Parking. Provide off-street parking facilities with convenient
                        access to retail stores. Encourage parking facilities to locate on the periphery of
                        the Downtown core to facilitate easy automobile access from the residential
                        areas to the east and west, and to encourage a continuous, unbroken building
                        facade on both sides of Monterey Street. Discourage parking lots that front
                        onto the west side of Monterey Street. Also encourage shared parking
                        opportunities, in keeping with Policy 12.12, Shared Parking. See also Policy
                        12.11, On-site Parking.
                        Policy 3.30
                        Historic Preservation, Restoration and Re-use in the Downtown Area.
                        Encourage restorative maintenance to deteriorated buildings in the Downtown
                        and restrict the demolition of historically and/or architecturally significant
                        buildings to accommodate new development. Encourage adaptive re-use of
                        historic structures to maintain their historic character while supporting
                        economic development.
                        Policy 3.31
                        Downtown Park or Plaza. Explore opportunities through the Downtown
                        Specific Plan process to designate and develop a new park or plaza in the
                        Downtown area that can serve as a community focal point and reinforce the
                        role of Downtown as a community gathering place.
                        Policy 3.32
                        Performing and Visual Arts Center in the Downtown Area. Use the
                        Downtown Specific Plan process to explore potential sites in or near the
                        Downtown area for development of a new Performing and Visual Arts Center,
                        recognizing that such a facility would attract large numbers of residents to the
                        Downtown area, supporting Downtown development efforts and securing the
                        position of Downtown as the community’s cultural and entertainment center.
 4-36                    Gilroy General Plan                                               Revised December 2016

                                                                                          Community Design and Development
  4       Agriculture
GOAL: Continued viability of agriculture and agri-tourism in the Gilroy area through (a)
recognition of agriculture’s significant contribution to the local economy; (b) protection of
agricultural lands from urban encroachment; (c) preservation of agricultural lands as a natural
buffer between Gilroy and surrounding communities; and (d) appreciation for the role of
agricultural lands in enhancing Gilroy’s semi-rural, small-town character.
Policy 4.01
Economic Viability of Agriculture. Support the long-term economic viability
of agriculture and agri-tourism, thereby encouraging landowners to keep their
land in cultivation.
Policy 4.02
Agricultural Land Preservation. Work with the County, LAFCo, and other
relevant agencies as well as private landowners to protect agricultural and
grazing lands from encroachment by urban uses, and to encourage the use of
such lands for active cultivation. Specifically, implement the strategies and
actions recommended by the South County Agricultural Study (Strategies to
Balance Planned Growth and Agricultural Viability in the Areas South and East
of Gilroy, October 1996).
Policy 4.03
Urban Containment. Contain urbanization within an area large enough to
meet foreseeable need but which will not intrude unnecessarily on, cause
premature conversion of, or impair the productivity of agricultural lands.
Policy 4.04
Agriculture and Annexation. Oppose urban development in lands under
County jurisdiction until such lands are annexed by the City. Support County
land use regulations that require minimum lot sizes to protect the viability of
local agriculture and to prevent the development of incompatible or
undesirable land use patterns prior to eventual annexation and urbanization.
Policy 4.05
Agricultural Uses within the Planning Area. Recognize and encourage
agriculture as a compatible use in undeveloped portions of the Planning Area.
Community gardens, food production, seed production and other intensive
agricultural operations will be allowed as long term uses when compatible with
adjacent existing or planned land use.
Revised December 2016                                                               Gilroy General Plan                4-37

Community Design and Development
                        Policy 4.06
                        Agricultural Uses in Hazard Areas. Encourage areas subject to natural
                        hazards such as major flooding or soils with a high water table to remain in
                        long-term agricultural production where such use exists.
                        See also South County Joint Area Plan policies 14.01 through 14.12; and “Strategies to
                        Balance Planned Growth and Agricultural Viability in the Areas South and East of
                        Gilroy” (adopted by City of Gilroy, September 1996).
 4-38                    Gilroy General Plan                                                  Revised December 2016

                                                                                     Community Design and Development
   5        Historic Preservation
GOAL: A strong sense of connection to Gilroy’s past through historical, archeological, and
paleontological resources that are preserved, protected, enhanced, and commemorated for the
benefit of current and future generations.
Policy 5.01
Historic Preservation. Encourage public and private efforts for the
preservation of historic and architecturally significant buildings, archeological
sites, and other landmarks that give residents a tie with the past.
Policy 5.02
Preservation Funding and Incentives. Seek state and federal funding for the
preservation of buildings of historical merit and consider public/private
partnerships for capital and program improvements. Support the use of Mills
Act contracts to reduce property taxes on historic properties and thereby
provide a monetary incentive for their acquisition, maintenance, and
restoration.
Policy 5.03
Historic Character. Encourage preservation of older homes, other structures,
and neighborhood districts to maintain and enhance the historic character of
the city. In particular, encourage the retention and rehabilitation of older
homes in and near the historic city center (roughly bound by First Street on the
north, Princevalle on the west, Tenth Street on the south, and
Chestnut/Murray on the east) and ensure that rehabilitation activities
(especially if funded by low-interest rehabilitation loans from the City) are
sensitive to the historic character of the building and/or site.
Policy 5.04
Downtown Historic District. Designate a Downtown Historic District and
promote the preservation of historic buildings within the district area to
reinforce Downtown’s historic character and scale. Provide incentives for the
retention and rehabilitation of buildings with historic merit.
Policy 5.05
Adaptive Reuse. Promote adaptive reuse of old buildings, especially in the
Downtown Historic District, to preserve the buildings’ historic character while
encouraging development of an economically vital Downtown.
Revised December 2016                                                          Gilroy General Plan                4-39

   Community Design and Development
                           Policy 5.06
                           Non-Conforming Uses in Historic Structures. Allow non-conforming uses
                           in designated Historic Structures. In some situations, a historic building can be
                           retained only if it can be used for an activity that would not normally be
                           permitted under the zoning classification. The City may consider conditional
                           use permits where the proposed use will not have a detrimental effect on the
                           neighborhood and will be in keeping with the historic nature of the building,
                           taking into consideration parking needs and compatibility of the use to
                           neighboring uses.
                           Policy 5.07
                           Archeological Resources. If archeological resources or human remains are
Action 5.I
                           discovered during construction, work shall be halted within 50 meters (150
Archeological Assessments  feet) of the find until it can be evaluated by a qualified professional
                           archeologist. If the find is determined to be significant, appropriate mitigation
                           measures shall be formulated and implemented.
      4-40                  Gilroy General Plan                                               Revised December 2016
                                                                                      Community Design and Development
  6       Scenic Highways
GOAL: Designation of Hecker Pass Highway, Santa Teresa Boulevard, and Pacheco Pass
Highway as scenic highways, and long-term protection of their scenic qualities.
Policy 6.01
Scenic Highways. Support the designation of Hecker Pass Highway, Santa
Teresa Boulevard, and Pacheco Pass Highway as official State Scenic Highways,
and stablish appropriate development controls to ensure long-term protection
of their scenic qualities. Controls should establish appropriate setbacks, sign
controls, and other development regulations in keeping with State guidelines
for the protection of scenic highway corridors.
Policy 6.02
Other Scenic Roadways. Recognize and protect important scenic qualities
and natural features on other roadways in the Planning Area, including Uvas
Park Drive and Miller Avenue from First Street to Mesa Road.
Policy 6.03
Highway 101 Landscaping and View Protection. Work with Caltrans and
the County to provide additional landscaping along the Highway 101 right-of-
way to enhance its attractiveness, recognizing that it is the primary “visitor-
serving” traffic artery in the Planning Area. Also, encourage new developments
facing Highway 101 to provide landscape screening and to protect and enhance
existing views of farmland and surrounding hills.
Revised December 2016                                                           Gilroy General Plan                4-41

Community Design and Development
                        Implementation Actions
                       1          Community Design
                        Action 1.A
                        Zoning Ordinance. Update the Gilroy Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map to
                        be consistent with the Land Use Plan Map and related policies of the updated
                        General Plan. Rezone areas inconsistent with the Land Use Plan Map, as
                        appropriate, and update the zoning district descriptions to reflect the updated
                        land use designation descriptions. Also, establish a new zoning district to
                        implement the Campus Industrial land use designation, in keeping with the
                        goals and policy objectives set forth in the Gilroy General Plan (pages 3-14 to
                        3-17). Ensure that the industrial and commercial zoning districts are clearly
                        differentiated from each other.
                        Additional zoning districts or modifications to existing zoning districts may be
                        required pending the detailed directives established in the Downtown Specific
                        Plan (e.g., to support mixed use development) and Hecker Pass Specific Plan
                        (e.g., for “agri-tourism” and/or for residential development with special
                        density, use or development restrictions).
                        Action 1.B
                        Hillside Development Guidelines. Maintain the Residential Hillside zoning
                        district and continue to enforce the Hillside Development Guidelines to
                        regulate future development in hillside areas.
                        Action 1.C
                        Neighborhood Districts Implementation Strategy. Convene a Task Force
                        including representatives from the City’s Community Development
                        Department; elected and appointed City officials; GUSD representative(s);
                        developers (for-profit and non-profit); and representatives of the community
                        at-large to develop a workable strategy for implementation of the
                        Neighborhood Districts. The implementation strategy shall:
                         Identify strategies and procedures to guide implementation of the
                             Neighborhood Districts in the areas so designated on the Land Use Plan
                             Map, recognizing the need for potentially different strategies in different
                             parts of the City
                         e.g., for areas of fragmented property ownership). Ensure a strong link
                             between the Neighborhood District implementation strategies and
                             expansions to the Urban Service Area; the RDO process; school facility
 4-42                    Gilroy General Plan                                              Revised December 2016

                                                                           Community Design and Development
     planning; City infrastructure and service planning; and City affordable
     housing policies and programs.
 Evaluate the Residential Development Ordinance in light of the goals,
     objectives and implementation strategies of the Neighborhood Districts
     and recommend strategies for making the two processes consistent,
     compatible, and mutually supportive.
 Develop strategies to ensure that affordable housing goals are integrated
     into and achieved through the Neighborhood Districts development
     process.
 Review and confirm the “minimum” and “target” percentage mixes for
     different densities of housing within each Neighborhood District based on
     the agreed upon implementation strategies.
 Define design guidelines and design review procedures to ensure that new
     Neighborhood Districts meet the vision, goals and policies of the General
     Plan. In particular, define use controls and design standards for
     Neighborhood Commercial developments in Neighborhood District areas.
 Define an exemption or modified requirements for developments on
     properties below a certain size.
Action 1.D
Downtown Specific Plan. Develop a Specific Plan for the Downtown area to
achieve the goals and objectives for the area set forth in the Gilroy General
Plan (pages 3-18 to 3-20). Ensure the participation of Downtown merchants,
property owners, and residents as well as the community at-large in the
development of the Downtown Specific Plan’s policies, design and
development recommendations, and implementation strategies.
Action 1.E
Hecker Pass Specific Plan. Develop a Specific Plan for the Hecker Pass area to
achieve the goals and objectives set forth in the Gilroy General Plan (pages 3-
21 through 3-25). Ensure the participation of property owners as well as the
community at-large in the development of the Hecker Pass Specific Plan’s
policies, design and development recommendations, and implementation
strategies.
Revised December 2016                                                Gilroy General Plan                4-43

Community Design and Development
                        Action 1.F
                        Campus Industrial Specific Plans. Undertake pro-active efforts in areas
                        where the City seeks to facilitate the development of ‘campus industrial’ uses in
                        keeping with the goals and policies of the General Plan.
                        Action 1.G
                        Street Tree Program. Continue to require deep-rooted street trees to be
                        planted in newly developed areas to beautify Gilroy and to enhance its rural
                        character. Street trees and sidewalks should be studied to improve existing
                        conditions and to determine the best methods for providing street trees in new
                        development. Also, continue to maintain existing street trees, replacing them as
                        necessary and encouraging the planting of new trees in areas where they are
                        lacking.
                        Action 1.H
                        Gateway Landscaping. Require developers of new development at
                        “gateways” to the City to design and landscape their buildings appropriately,
                        and contribute to strip landscaping, to create an attractive entrance to the City.
                        Principal gateways are identified in Policy 1.10. Also, work with CalTrans and
                        the County to enhance the landscaping along Highway 101, and encourage new
                        developments facing Highway 101 to provide landscape screening and to
                        protect and enhance views of farmland and the surrounding hills.
                        Action 1.I
                        Community Beautification. Continue to support beautification efforts—
                        through landscaping and design requirements for new development and
                        through improvements to existing areas of development—to enhance the
                        overall quality of life for Gilroy residents and make the City more attractive to
                        visitors and businesses.
                        Action 1.J
                        Design Review. Continue to require design review of all development prior to
                        the issuance of a development permit. The review should determine whether
                        the proposed development/remodeling would be in keeping with community
                        character and whether the proposed action satisfies the applicable ordinances.
                        Action 1.K
                        Sign Ordinance. Strictly enforce Gilroy’s Sign Ordinance. Have non-
                        conforming signs brought into conformance with the ordinance or removed.
 4-44                    Gilroy General Plan                                              Revised December 2016

                                                                             Community Design and Development
2      Growth Management
Action 2.A
Urban Service Area. Accept applications for inclusion in the Urban Service
Area on an annual basis, and review applications based on the following
criteria:
 The need for additional lands, if any, to accommodate projected growth for
     the next five years.
 Consistency of the proposed area of Urban Service Area expansion in light
     of General Plan policies regarding the pattern of development (1.01), the
     location of growth (2.01), and the rate and timing of growth (2.02).
 Consistency with implementation strategies for the Neighborhood
     Districts, including phasing strategies, if applicable (based on outcome of
     Action 1.C).
Consolidate approved applications into a single application to LAFCo for their
consideration.
Action 2.B
20-Year Boundary. Maintain a 20-year boundary to guide long-term land
planning and development decision-making in keeping with objectives set forth
in Policy 2.08. Display the 20-year boundary on the Land Use Plan Map, and
allow amendments to the boundary only in conjunction with the circumstances
set forth in Policy 2.09.
Action 2.C
Residential Development Ordinance. Evaluate the Residential Development
Ordinance (RDO) following adoption of the updated General Plan and
completion of implementing action 1.C, Neighborhood Districts
Implementation Program. Modify the RDO’s point system and procedures as
necessary to ensure that it remains a useful and effective tool for managing
growth and implementing the vision, goals and policies of the General Plan.
Revised December 2016                                                  Gilroy General Plan                4-45

Community Design and Development
                        Action 2.D
                        Interagency Coordination for Growth Management. Continue to work
                        with the County and other South Valley communities to ensure a regional
                        approach to growth management. Work with the County to discourage land
                        subdivision and development activities in areas outside the Urban Service Area
                        that might undermine the future urban development potential of those lands.
                        Action 2.E
                        Urban Growth Boundary. Maintain the Urban Growth Boundary adopted in
                        2016 by the voters in the Gilroy Urban Growth Boundary Initiative, in keeping with
                        the objectives set forth in Policy 2.13. Display the UGB on the Land Use Plan
                        Map, and process amendments to the UGB pursuant to the procedures set
                        forth in Policy 2.14.
                       3          Economic Development
                        Action 3.A
                        Industrial Performance Standards. Develop “performance standards” for
                        use in the review of industrial development proposals to help guide industry to
                        appropriate sites based upon the level of physical and environmental impacts
                        the new operations will impose on the surrounding area. In most cases, the
                        required EIR would contain all the information necessary to apply performance
                        standards.
                        Action 3.B
                        Industrial Design Guidelines. Continue to apply the City’s Industrial Design
                        Guidelines, including landscaping requirements, to promote attractive and
                        efficient industrial developments. Review and update the guidelines periodically
                        to ensure their continued relevance and usefulness in applying the vision, goals,
                        and policies of the General Plan to the review and approval of industrial
                        development proposals. In particular, update the guidelines to address the
                        architectural and site design requirements for Campus Industrial areas.
                        Action 3.C
                        Design Standards for High Impact Uses. Strictly enforce the City’s
                        standards for the design, landscaping, and decorative screening of junk yards,
                        salvage yards, and auto wrecking yards. Periodically review these standards to
                        determine whether they are adequate or in need of amendment. Develop and
                        enforce similar standards for other visually disruptive uses in the Planning
                        Area.
                        Action 3.D
                        Commercial Design and Development Standards. Update the City’s design
                        and development standards for commercial areas periodically to provide an
 4-46                    Gilroy General Plan                                              Revised December 2016

                                                                           Community Design and Development
effective tool for achieving vision, goals and policies of the General Plan, and
continue to review and evaluate commercial development proposals based on
these standards.
Action 3.E
Use Controls and Design Guidelines for Neighborhood Commercial
Developments. Develop strict use controls and guidelines for architectural
design, landscaping, buffering and signage in neighborhood commercial areas
to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential uses.
Action 3.F
Interagency Coordination for Economic Development. Continue to work
with and support the Gilroy Economic Development Corporation, Gilroy
Downtown Development Association, Chamber of Commerce, Hispanic
Chamber of Commerce and other groups working to promote Gilroy’s
economic development. In particular, support and coordinate efforts targeted
towards the further economic development of the Downtown area.
Action 3.G
Neighborhood Revitalization Strategy Area. Continue to support and
coordinate economic, social, and community development efforts in the
Neighborhood Revitalization Strategy Area to encourage economic
development for the benefit of all Gilroyans.
See also:
 Action 1.A: Zoning Ordinance
 Action 1.D: Downtown Specific Plan
Revised December 2016                                                Gilroy General Plan                4-47

Community Design and Development
                         4          Agriculture
                        Action 4.A
                        Implementation of “Strategies to Balance Planned Growth and
                        Agricultural Viability.” Continue to work with the County and other South
                        Valley communities to implement the recommendations set forth in “Strategies
                        to Balance Planned Growth and Agricultural Viability in the areas south and
                        east of Gilroy,” adopted by the City of Gilroy on September 23, 1996.
                        Specifically,
                         explore ways of funding the purchase of agricultural open space easements;
                         examine and work towards implementation of marketing strategies to
                             increase local awareness of local agricultural products and increase local
                             sales;
                         continue to explore and implement ways of providing affordable farm
                             worker housing by developing permanent and seasonal housing; and
                         work with the Santa Clara Valley Water District to maintain competitive
                             rates for agricultural users, and encourage the agricultural use of reclaimed
                             water and sewage sludge.
                        Action 4.B
                        Interagency Coordination for Agricultural Protection. Work with the
                        County and key stakeholder groups to protect and support the continued
                        viability of agriculture in lands within the City’s sphere of influence. Discourage
                        (a) property subdivisions or the splitting of properties by new roads into
                        parcels too small to be used economically for agricultural purposes, and (b) the
                        premature conversion of agricultural lands to urban uses until such lands are
                        annexed by the City. Also, ensure proper referral procedures for project
                        proposals in unincorporated areas of the City’s Sphere of Influence, facilitating
                        communication between the City and County on projects that may have an
                        impact on the City’s land use plans and policies.
 4-48                    Gilroy General Plan                                                Revised December 2016

                                                                               Community Design and Development
  5      Historic Preservation
Action 5.A
Historic Preservation Designations. Continue to designate buildings, sites,
features and districts based upon their historic value, and work towards their
preservation. Two types of designations apply:
 Historic Buildings and Sites: these are individual structures, sites, or features of
     historic value, whether or not they are located in a historic preservation
     district.
 Historic Preservation Districts: these are areas that contain a significant number
     of structures, sites, or features worthy of preservation. Although each and
     every structure in such an area may not be historically significant, the
     structures collectively, together with other features such as mature trees,
     flower gardens, etc., constitute an area worthy of preservation. A Historic
     Preservation District may include a block or part of a block or may consist
     of an entire neighborhood.
Action 5.B
Review of Structural Modifications and Use Changes. For designated Historic
Structures and of structures within a Historic Preservation District, submit
proposed structural modifications that change the exterior appearance and
proposed use changes to the Historic Heritage Committee and the Planning
Commission for review and approval.
Action 5.C
Environmental Impact Reports for Historic Structures. Require an
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for any proposed demolition of a
designated Historic Structure, with consultation of the Historic Heritage
Committee in preparation of the EIR. For demolition of a structure within a
Historic Preservation District, determination will be made by the Planning
Division Manager on whether a negative declaration or EIR is appropriate.
Following the Public Hearing of the EIR, the Planning Commission would
pass the EIR and the request for demolition permit, along with its comments
and recommendations, to the City Council for action. The Council would have
the power to postpone, without undue delay, approval of a demolition permit
for any structure in a Historic Preservation District or any designated Historic
Structure to provide interested parties an opportunity to preserve the structure.
In the case of historic structures heavily damaged by fire, earthquake, or other
natural disaster, the EIR requirement for demolition may be waived.
Revised December 2016                                                    Gilroy General Plan                4-49

Community Design and Development
                        Action 5.D
                        Design Review in Historic Preservation Districts. Evaluate projects in
                        Historic Preservation Districts for compatibility with the surrounding
                        neighborhood. Review and approval authority shall be with the Historic
                        Heritage Committee.
                        Action 5.E
                        Survey of Historic Structures. Periodically update the City’s Survey of
                        Historic Structures.
                        Action 5.F
                        Public Information Program on Historic Preservation. Continue to
                        provide public information to increase awareness of historic preservation.
                        Action 5.G
                        Mills Act Agreements. Support the development of Mills Act Agreements for
                        historic properties to provide reductions in property taxes, in keeping with the
                        City’s adopted Mills Act Agreement Policy.
                        Action 5.H
                        Historic Preservation Ordinance. Adopt a Historic Preservation Ordinance and
                        submit it for certification by the Secretary of the Interior so that owners of
                        designated historic buildings can apply for tax relief.
                        Action 5.I
                        Archeological Assessments. Require an archeological assessment for all
                        CEQA projects (i.e., projects requiring an environmental assessment) in
                        potentially sensitive archeological areas (as indicated on the City’s Historic and
                        Cultural Resources Map). The assessment shall consist of a preliminary survey
                        and, if evidence of sites is found, a test-level investigation.
                       6          Scenic Highways
                        Action 6.A
                        Scenic Highway Designations. Coordinate with Santa Clara County,
                        CalTrans and other agencies to support the application for Scenic Highway
                        status for Hecker Pass Highway, Santa Teresa Boulevard, and Pacheco Pass
                        Highway.
                        Action 6.B
                        Scenic Highway Development Standards. Develop and enforce use
                        controls, design guidelines, and other development standards for the areas
                        adjoining designated Scenic Highways to ensure protection and preservation of
                        their scenic qualities.
 4-50                    Gilroy General Plan                                               Revised December 2016

                                                                              Transportation and Circulation
                                                      C H A P T E R        S I X
                      Transportation and
                                              Circulation
Introduction
This chapter of the General Plan sets forth the City’s goals, policies and imple-
menting programs for Transportation and Circulation, including:
 Traffic Circulation and Parking
 Transit
 Bicycle and Pedestrian Circulation
Revised December 2016                                             Gilroy General Plan                    6-1

Transportation and Circulation
                                      Goals and Policies
                                      12        Traffic Circulation and Parking
                                      GOAL: (a) A functional and balanced transportation system that provides access for
                                      all, is compatible with existing and proposed land uses, and minimizes emissions of air
                                      pollutants; (b) A coordinated multi-modal system that accommodates private motor
                                      vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles and mass transit.
                                      Policy 12.01
Circulation Plan Map                  Street System. Use the proposed major street system (designed to accommodate
and the
Bicycle Transportation                traffic at build-out of the General Plan) shown on the Circulation Map and the
Plan Map                              Bicycle Transportation Plan Map to guide long-term planning of the citywide cir-
                                      culation system.
                                      Policy 12.02
Action 12.A                           System Function and Neighborhood Protection. Ensure that the existing and
Functional Street and Highway
Improvements
                                      proposed highways, streets, bikeways and pedestrian paths serve the functions
Actions 12.C and 12.D                 they are intended to serve, while protecting the character of residential neighbor-
Local and Collector Street Design in  hoods.
Residential Neighborhoods
                                      Policy 12.03
Actions 12.C and 12.D                 Residential Street System Design. Design street systems in residential areas to
Local and Collector Street Design in
Residential Neighborhoods
                                      encourage direct connections between neighborhoods; to encourage internal
                                      movement by bicycling and walking; and to provide safer and quieter neighbor-
                                      hoods.
                                      Policy 12.04
Action 6.B                            Scenic Routes. Preserve the scenic character and ecology of the hillsides to the west
Scenic Highway Development
Standards
                                      of the City when designing circulation facilities. Any roadways that must pass through
Action 1.I                            hillside areas will be designed so as to preserve the ecological and scenic character of
Community Beautification              the hillsides, and high quality vistas from scenic routes in the Planning Area will be
                                      preserved.
                                      Policy 12.05
                                      Uvas Creek Bridge Service. New development will not be permitted southwest
                                      of Uvas Creek unless such development provides adequate bridge service.
6-2                                  Gilroy General Plan                                                 Revised December 2016
                                                                                   Transportation and Circulation
Policy 12.06
Expressway Access. Limit driveway intersections on Santa Teresa Boulevard and
Hecker Pass Highway to maximize safety and traffic-carrying capacity, and to
                                                                                             Circulation Plan Map
maintain the high-speed inter-city character of these expressway routes. Street
intersections shall be minimal, with an average spacing of one-half mile between
intersections.
Policy 12.07
Commercial Driveways. To minimize traffic conflicts, keep commercial drive-                  Action 1.A
ways to a minimum, located so as to prevent conflicts at intersections and with              Zoning Ordinance
other driveways.
Policy 12.08
Standard Level of Service (LOS). Maintain traffic conditions at LOS C or better
at Gilroy intersections and roadways, allowing some areas (as specified on the             ‘Level of Service Areas’
‘Level of Service D Areas’ Map, page 6-11) subject to the timing and other                 Map
                                                                                           Action 12.A
limitations imposed by the Gilroy Urban Growth Boundary Initiative) to                     Functional Street and Highway
operate at LOS D or better. Exceptions to this standard will be allowed only where         Improvements
the City Council determines that the improvements needed to maintain the
City’s standard level of service at specific locations are infeasible.
Policy 12.09
LOS and Air Quality. Maintain the City’s Standard Level of Service whenever                Action 12.A
                                                                                           Functional Street and Highway
feasible to minimize traffic congestion and thereby minimize exposure to carbon            Improvements
monoxide, since vehicles generate less air pollutant emissions at higher speed.
Policy 12.10
Land Use and Congestion. Promote land use planning that helps to reduce auto-
mobile trips, thereby reducing congestion and helping to achieve air quality goals.         Land Use Plan Map
                                                                                            Action 1.C
In particular, strive for a balance of jobs and housing in future development to            Neighborhood Districts
provide Gilroy residents the opportunity to work within Gilroy, and reduce long             Implementation
                                                                                            Strategy
distance commuting both to and from Gilroy. The jobs-housing balance must                   Action 13.B
strive for parity in the total number of jobs to the total number of housing units,         Transit Oriented Development
as well as in the salary ranges of jobs compared to the costs of housing prices and
rents.
 Revised December 2016                                                 Gilroy General Plan                          6-3

Transportation and Circulation
                                  Policy 12.11
                                  On-site Parking. Ensure adequate on-site parking in new developments to meet
Action 12.F
Parking Standards                 the needs of residents, employees, and patrons, in keeping with the requirements
                                  of the City’s Zoning Ordinance. For residents and businesses in the Downtown
                                  area, parking requirements should be determined in accordance with the provi-
                                  sions of the City’s Downtown Parking Ordinance.
                                  Policy 12.12
Action 12.F                       Shared Parking. Encourage shared parking facilities where uses on the same or
Parking Standards
Action 12.G                       adjoining sites have parking requirements at different times of the day or week.
Downtown Parking District
                                  13       Transit
                                  GOAL: Local and regional public transit systems that are responsive to the changing
                                  needs of Gilroy area residents.
                                  Policy 13.01
Action 1.C                        Transit and Development. Plan new residential and commercial development to
Neighborhood Districts Implemen-
tation Strategy
                                  fully accommodate, enhance, and facilitate public transit, including pedestrian and
Action 13.B                       bicycle access to transit.
Transit Oriented Development
                                  Policy 13.02
Action 13.A                       Park and Ride Lots. Designate specific areas for Park and Ride lots, with support-
Park and Ride Land Set-asides
                                  ing commercial and transit activities.
                                  Policy 13.03
Action 1.C                        Transit-Oriented Development. Encourage higher density residential and mixed
Neighborhood Districts Implemen-
tation Strategy
                                  use developments in close proximity to transit services, especially in the vicinity of
Action 13.B                       the Downtown Caltrain station and multi-modal transit center.
Transit Oriented Development
Downtown
                                  Policy 13.04
Action 13.C                       Regional Transit Services. Support regional transit operations that serve the Gilroy
Interagency Cooperation for       area through coordination of planning efforts and development policies that pro-
Transit Services
                                  mote transit use.
6-4                              Gilroy General Plan                                              Revised December 2016

                                                                                   Transportation and Circulation
14        Bicycle and Pedestrian Circulation
GOAL: Bicycling and walking as significant transportation modes, promoting per-
sonal health and recreational enjoyment while minimizing energy consumption and
environmental degradation.
Policy 14.01
Non-Auto Modes of Travel. Emphasize non-auto travel modes of transportation                Actions 14.A thru 14.J
                                                                                           Bicycle and Pedestrian Circulation
as a key strategy for achieving air quality goals. For example, encourage bicycle
riding to school from an early age by providing safer bikeways between residential
areas and schools and encourage the schools to provide secured bike racks and/or
lockers.
Policy 14.02
Land Use Planning to Promote Walking and Biking. Promote compact, mixed                    Action 1.C
                                                                                           Neighborhood District Implementa-
use development patterns that encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel and transit          tion Strategy
use. For example, providing commercial services such as day care centers, restau-          Action 9.B
                                                                                           Infill Development Incentives
rants, banks and stores near employment centers can reduce auto trips by promot-
                                                                                           Action 9.C
ing pedestrian travel. Providing neighborhood commercial and park uses within              Mixed Use Zoning and Incentives
residential developments can reduce short auto trips by making pedestrian and
bicycle trips feasible. Support implementation of the Neighborhood Districts,
infill development, and mixed use development in the Downtown for their po-
tential air quality benefits, as well as their other community benefits.
Policy 14.03
Bicycle and Pedestrian Paths and Facilities. Correct deficiencies, expand existing         Action 14.B
                                                                                           Bicycle Transportation Plan
facilities, and provide for the design of safer, convenient and attractive bicycle and     Action 14.E
pedestrian facilities whenever possible. Proposed roadways will be planned to ac-          Easements for Pedestrian and
                                                                                           Bicycle Access
commodate bicycle traffic in accordance with the bikeway designations set forth
                                                                                           Action 14.J
in the City’s Bicycle Transportation Plan. Similarly, greenbelts, linear parks, public     Bikeway Planning and Design
easements and drainages reserved in public open space will be planned to accom-            Criteria
modate bike and pedestrian traffic if they are so designated in the Bicycle Trans-
portation Plan.
Revised December 2016                                                  Gilroy General Plan                               6-5

Transportation and Circulation
                             Policy 14.04
                             Crossings. Design street crossings to provide for the safety needs of bicyclists
Action 14.B
                             and pedestrians. River and other crossings by bridges will be designed to accom-
Bicycle Transportation Plan
Action 14.C                  modate bike lanes or paths in accordance with the designations set forth in the
Bridge Crossings             Bicycle Transportation Plan. Bridges for the exclusive use of pedestrians and bi-
Action 14.G
Roadway Design               cycles should be considered whenever barriers exist which impede convenient and
                             safe access.
                             Policy 14.05
Action 14.B                  Private Development of Bike and Pedestrian Facilities. Involve private devel-
Bicycle Transportation Plan
Action 14.D                  opment in providing bikeways, pedestrian pathways, and support facilities when
Bike Parking and Storage     such facilities pass through or about a development site.
                             Policy 14.06
Action 12.H                  Traffic Impact Fee for Bikeway Improvements. Use the comprehensive traffic
Traffic Impact Fee
                             impact fee to finance General Plan bikeway improvements in conjunction with
                             roadway improvements.
6-6                         Gilroy General Plan                                            Revised December 2016
                                                                                   Transportation and Circulation
Implementing Actions
12       Traffic Circulation and Parking
Action 12.A
Functional Street and Highway Improvements. Adopt the functional street and
highway improvements indicated in the General Plan Map to facilitate mainte-
nance of the City’s Standard Level of Service. The major circulation improve-
ments are listed in the General Plan appendices.
Action 12.B
Future Alignment Planning. Plan and reserve proposed expressway, arterial, col-
lector street and bicycle path alignments in advance of development in areas in
which increased traffic will be generated. Development will be set back along the
entire right-of-way (ROW) with sufficient width to accommodate anticipated fu-
ture traffic requirements.
Action 12.C
Local Street Design in Residential Neighborhoods. Encourage residential street
designs that discourage high speed and high volume through-traffic, while provid-
ing for roadway connections between adjacent residential subdivisions and mul-
tiple points of access to nearby collectors and arterials. Residential street designs
should include sidewalks as part of an interconnected pedestrian circulation system
(with the exception of hillside areas) and curbside planting strips for street trees
(with the exception of cul-de-sacs and private streets). In accordance with actions
recommended by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District, consider in-
cluding these and other traffic calming strategies in the City’s capital improvement
program.
Action 12.D
Collector Street Design in Residential Neighborhoods. Design Collector Streets
in new residential areas to ensure an even distribution of traffic, to maintain the
City’s Standard Level of Service, and to protect and enhance the quality of the
residential area.
Revised December 2016                                                  Gilroy General Plan                    6-7

Transportation and Circulation
                          Action 12.E
                          Access for Public Safety Vehicles. Require dual access on all streets serving 26 or
                          more dwelling units to facilitate access by public safety vehicles.
                          Action 12.F
                          Parking Standards. Ensure the provision of adequate on-site parking in new de-
                          velopment in accordance with the parking standards in the Zoning Ordinance.
                          Action 12.G
                          Downtown Parking District. Use the Downtown Specific Plan process to ad-
                          dress parking coordination and design issues in the Downtown, and update the
                          City’s Downtown Parking Ordinance as necessary to ensure adequate parking fa-
                          cilities while maintaining the area’s pedestrian orientation.
                          Action 12.H
                          Traffic Impact Fee. Establish a comprehensive traffic impact fee for new develop-
                          ment to be used to finance General Plan roadway improvements.
                          Action 12.I
                          County Coordination. Work with Santa Clara County to adopt official plan lines
                          for all circulation facilities designated on the General Plan map that are within the
                          jurisdiction of the County.
                          Action 12.J
                          Signal Timing. In accordance with the recommendations of the Bay Area Air
                          Quality Management District in the 2000 Clean Air Plan, continue and expand
                          local signal timing programs.
                          13        Transit
                          Action 13.A
                          Park and Ride Land Set-asides. Reserve land in the vicinity of the Monterey/
                          Buena Vista intersection, Monterey/Masten-Fitzgerald intersection, and/or other
                          suitable sites for potential park and ride lots to support ride-sharing and commuter
                          bus service.
6-8                     Gilroy General Plan                                                 Revised December 2016

                                                                                 Transportation and Circulation
Action 13.B
Transit Oriented Development Downtown. Use the Downtown Specific Plan
process to identify sites for potential Transit Oriented Development near the Down-
town Caltrain station, and to identify strategies for encourageing such develop-
ment.
Action 13.C
Interagency Cooperation for Transit Services. Work with the County of Santa
Clara transit planning effort to plan for new rail and/or other express services to
northern Santa Clara County and the rest of the Bay Area.
Action 13.D
Signal Preemption for Buses. In accordance with the recommendations of the
Bay Area Air Quality Management District in the 2000 Clean Air Plan, study
signal pre-emption for buses on arterial streets with a high volume of bus traffic.
14       Bicycle and Pedestrian Circulation
Action 14.A
Trail and Pathway Implementation. Work with the County in implementing
trails and bike paths planned locally as part of the County-wide network in the
County Trails and Pathways Master Plan. New development along designated trail
or bikeway corridors should be required to dedicate land and construct the desig-
nated facility.
Action 14.B
Bicycle Transportation Plan. The City should implement the comprehensive
City Bicycle Transportation Plan. Developers shall be responsible for implement-
ing planned bike paths/lanes within and along the frontage of their parcels.
Action 14.C
Bridge Crossings. Work with Caltrans and the Santa Clara Valley Water District
to provide bike and pedestrian bridge crossings across the South Valley Freeway
and drainage channels.
Revised December 2016                                                Gilroy General Plan                    6-9
Transportation and Circulation
                          Action 14.D
                          Bike Parking and Storage. Work with the Valley Transportation Authority (VTA)
                          to develop standards for providing bike racks and lockers at major transit stops,
                          and encourage safe and adequate facilities for storing and locking bicycles at trip
                          destinations such as business and employment centers, recreation areas, and major
                          public facilities. New public institutions, shopping centers, industrial centers, apart-
                          ments and condominiums should provide bicycle parking as well as automobile
                          parking.
                          Action 14.E
                          Easements for Pedestrian and Bicycle Access. Encourage street patterns that pro-
                          vide direct access between neighborhoods for autos, pedestrians, and bicycles. Where
                          access is not provided through the design of the street system, require developers to
                          provide easements for pedestrian and bicycle access (e.g., between cul-de-sacs).
                          Designate and design easements to ensure clear sight lines into and through the
                          easement from adjacent roadways; to minimize maintenance requirements; and to
                          address other security and adjacency issues. Easements should be provided at the
                          ends of cul-de-sacs and other locations where they do not directly abut private
                          property.
                          Action 14.F
                          Road Surfacing. Strive to maintain and improve the quality of the surface of the
                          right-hand portion of existing roads as well as the travel lanes so that they are
                          suitable for bicycle travel, regardless of whether or not bikeways are designated.
                          Action 14.G
                          Roadway Design. Encourage the design of all future roads, bridges and facilities in
                          residential and commercial areas to accommodate bicycle and pedestrian travel.
                          Action 14.H
                          On-Street Parking. If all other appropriate street modifications are determined to
                          be infeasible, consider removinge or restricting existing on-street parking in areas
                          of critical width in order to facilitate traffic flow and accommodate bike lanes.
6-10                    Gilroy General Plan                                                Revised December 2016
                                                                                Transportation and Circulation
Action 14.I
Bike Paths for Emergency Access. Design bike paths to be wide enough for
emergency vehicles where other emergency routes do not exist, located and de-
signed to enhance the personal safety of bicyclists. Use removable bollards or other
devices to prevent vehicles other than emergency and maintenance vehicles from
using the bike paths.
Action 14.J
Bikeway Planning and Design Criteria. Follow the criteria for bikeways out-
lined in the California Department of Transportation’s publication Planning and
Design Criteria for Bikeways in California.
Action 14.K
Bicycle and Pedestrian Improvements to Improve Air Quality. Implement the
following bicycle-related improvements to implement the recommendations of
the Bay Area Air Quality Management District in the 2000 Clean Air Plan:
a) Establish and maintain a bicycle advisory committee.
b) Designate a staff person as a Bicycle Program Manager.
c) Designate a staff person as a Pedestrian Program Manager.
d) Provide bicycle safety education.
Revised December 2016                                               Gilroy General Plan                   6-11

oy 2020
eral Plan


[BLANK PAGE
                                                                                  Public Facilities and Services
                                                C H A P T E R        S E V E N
                                   Public Facilities
                                           and Services
Introduction
This chapter of the General Plan sets forth the City’s goals, policies and imple-
menting actions for Public Facilities and Services, including:
 Civic and Community Facilities and Programs
 Parks and Recreation
 Educational Facilities
 Public Safety Services (fire and police; emergency services)
 Infrastructure (water supply; sewer; storm drain; utilities; lighting)
Adopted June 2002                                                 Gilroy General Plan                        7-1

Public Facilities and Services
                             Goals and Policies
                              15       Civic and Community Facilities
                             GOAL: Adequate, varied and high quality public facilities and programs to meet
                             residents’ current and future needs and contribute to a high quality of life.
                             Policy 15.01
Action 15.A                  Public Facilities and Development. Develop a system of public facilities that will:
Capital Improvement Program
                             a) Support and encourage infill development and a contiguous pattern of land
                                  use, and discourage premature development or over-development in the ab-
                                  sence of necessary municipal improvements;
                             b) Minimize adverse impacts on the environment, and adverse fiscal, economic
                                  and social impacts on the community;
                             c) Protect the health, safety and general welfare of Gilroy’s residents by providing
                                  a level of service consistent with the needs of individual neighborhoods and the
                                  community as a whole.
                             Policy 15.02
Action 15.B                  Civic Center. Expand the Civic Center complex as necessary to meet the City’s
Civic Center Master Plan
                             long-term work space needs, giving priority to expansion efforts that create a stron-
                             ger link between the civic center area and the Downtown.
                             Policy 15.03
Action 15.C                  Public Library. Work with the Joint Powers Authority of the Santa Clara County
Library Expansion Plan
                             Library system to expand the Gilroy Public Library as an important component of
                             the City’s Civic Center complex and an essential ingredient for meeting residents’
                             long-term literacy and information access needs. As part of this effort, establish a
                             Library Impact Fund so that new residential, commercial, and industrial develop-
                             ments contribute accordingly to the cumulative need for expansion and improve-
                             ment of Library facilities.
                             Policy 15.04
                             Partnering. Seek opportunities to partner or form joint ventures with commercial
                             and nonprofit organizations to facilitate the development of community facilities,
                             programs and services.
7-2                         Gilroy General Plan                                                     Adopted June 2002

                                                                                      Public Facilities and Services
Policy 15.05
Volunteerism. Continue to encourage volunteerism as a means of meeting com-
munity needs and promoting civic responsibility.
Policy 15.06
Service Delivery. Provide adequate staffing and program support to maintain                Annual City Budget Process
high quality service to residents at all community facilities.
16        Parks and Recreation
GOAL: A comprehensive and coordinated system of convenient, efficient, and high-
quality park and recreation facilities and programs to meet the current and future
needs of Gilroy residents, integrating important natural features and contributing to
the City’s identity and livability.
System Standards
Policy 16.01
Park Land Standard. Maintain the City’s established standard of 5 acres of devel-          Land Use Plan Map
                                                                                           Action 1.A
oped park land per thousand population.
                                                                                           Zoning Ordinance
                                                                                           Action 16.A
a) This standard includes mini-parks, neighborhood/school parks, community                 Implementation and Action Plan
     and community/school parks, sports parks, trails/linear parkways, and special         of the Parks and Recreation
                                                                                           System Master Plan
     use facilities (see Park and Recreation Classification System, page 7-7).
b) Park preserves and limited active recreation use areas are valued at 5 percent
     of their total acreage toward meeting this standard.
c) Golf courses non-accessible open spaces, and private recreational facilities are
     not included in this standard. School lands are not included unless there is a
     long-term lease agreement for their use as City recreational facilities.
Policy 16.02
Land Dedication or Fees. Require developers of new residential subdivisions to             Action 1.A
                                                                                           Zoning Ordinance
dedicate land for development of recreation facilities, which may include cultural
                                                                                           Action 1.C
facilities, to serve the subdivision, neighborhood, and community. At the City’s           Neighborhood Districts Implemen-
discretion, the developer may pay fees in lieu of dedication to assist in land acqui-      tation Strategy
                                                                                           Action 1.J
sition and facility development in other locations.                                        Design Review
Adopted June 2002                                                     Gilroy General Plan                               7-3

Public Facilities and Services
                                  Policy 16.03
                                  Cultural Facilities and Programs as Part of the Park and Recreation System.
Action 16.A
Implementation and Action Plan    Recognizing the cultural and artistic aspirations of all individuals in Gilroy, in-
of the Parks and Recreation       clude cultural facilities and programs, as set forth in the Gilroy Cultural Plan
System Master Plan
                                  (1997) and the Cultural Facilities Needs Analysis (1998), as part of the Parks and
                                  Recreation System.
                                  Policy 16.04
Action 16.A                       Parks and Recreation System Master Plan. Develop and regularly update a Parks
Implementation and Action Plan
                                  and Recreation System Master Plan to guide the planning, design and implementa-
of the Parks and Recreation
System Master Plan                tion of a citywide system of parks and recreation facilities and programs, includ-
Action 16.E                       ing cultural and other special use facilities, in keeping with the goals and policies
Master Plan Review and Update
                                  of the General Plan. The Parks and Recreation System Master Plan should be
                                  reviewed and updated every 5 years, in coordination with the General Plan when
                                  feasible.
                                  Policy 16.05
Action 16.B                       Trails Master Plan. Develop a Trails Master Plan to guide the planning, design
Trails Master Plan
Action 14.A                       and implementation of a citywide trail network. The Plan should indicate spe-
Trail and Pathway Implementation  cific trail alignments and opportunities, identify private and public property with
Action 14.E
                                  trails potential, and set forth acquisition/easement priorities. To support imple-
Easements for Pedestrian and
Bicycle Access                    mentation of the Trails Master Plan, encourage incentive points for on-site trails
                                  dedication or contribution to off-site trails as part of the RDO process.
                                  Facility and Program Access
                                  Policy 16.06
Action 16.A                       Facility Distribution. Distribute parks and recreation facilities geographically
Implementation and Action Plan
of the Parks and Recreation
                                  throughout the community. A neighborhood park or park facility with similar
System Master Plan                features shall be provided within walking distance of all residents, as defined in
Existing and Identified           Parks and Recreation Classification System on page 7-9 and 7-10. “Walking dis-
Future Parks Map
                                  tance” is defined as a distance of 0.5 miles (translating into a one-way travel time
                                  of approximately 15 minutes by foot).
                                  Policy 16.07
Action 16.A                       Facility Design. Ensure that parks, recreational facilities, and special use facilities
Implementation and Action Plan
of the Parks and Recreation
                                  are planned, designed and implemented in accordance with the policies set forth
System Master Plan                in the City of Gilroy Parks and Recreation System Master Plan.
7-4                              Gilroy General Plan                                                   Adopted June 2002

                                                                                      Public Facilities and Services
Policy 16.08
Staffing. As programs and facilities expand, hire and train adequate staff to main-        ongoing implementation
tain the high level of service expected by the community. Recreation staff shall           by City staff
have the necessary skills to meet the needs of Gilroy’s diverse population.
Policy 16.09
Physical Access. Ensure that all facilities and parks comply with State and Federal        Action 16.A
                                                                                           Implementation and Action Plan
accessibility codes and standards, such as those established by the Americans with
                                                                                           of the Parks and Recreation
Disabilities Act (ADA), and California Building Standards Code (Title 24, Cali-            System Master Plan
fornia Code of Regulations).                                                               Action 1.J
                                                                                           Design Review
Policy 16.10
Social Access. Provide recreation facilities and programs that are responsive and          Action 16.A
                                                                                           Implementation and Action Plan
accessible to the diverse cultures and age groups that comprise the Gilroy com-            of the Parks and Recreation
munity.                                                                                    System Master Plan
Policy 16.11
Financial Access. Continue partial subsidies of some recreation programs de-               Annual City Budget Process and
                                                                                           ongoing implementation by City
pending on the user group and facility type. User fees shall be charged for use of         staff
some facilities and participation in many recreation programs, but fee rates shall
be reasonable so that most residents are not excluded for financial reasons. Schol-
arships shall be available for residents who cannot participate in recreation pro-
grams due to financial hardship.
Policy 16.12
Pathway Network and Facility Connections. Create a linked network of bicycle               Action 16.B
                                                                                           Trails Master Plan
and pedestrian pathways to connect the City’s parks, park preserves, and commu-            Action 14.A
nity facilities, coordinated with the County Trails Master Plan to provide link-           Trail and Pathway Implementation
                                                                                           Action 14.B
ages to State and County facilities. The network system shall consist of linear
                                                                                           Bicycle Transportation Plan
parkways and off-road trails when feasible, interconnected with the citywide bike          Action 14.E
path and route system set forth in the Bicycle Transportation Plan and Trails Master       Easements for Pedestrian and
                                                                                           Bicycle Access
Plan documents. System design shall conform to the policies and standards set
forth in the Bicycle Transportation Plan, Trails Master Plan and the Parks and Recre-
ation System Master Plan. See also Policy 14.03
Adopted June 2002                                                     Gilroy General Plan                               7-5

Public Facilities and Services
                                Policy 16.13
                                Gated Residential Developments. Locate public parks and recreation facilities
Existing and Identified         near but not within privately gated residential developments unless public access
Future Parks Map
Action 1.J                      and use of the facilities is unrestricted. Private recreation facilities will be encour-
Design Review                   aged in gated neighborhoods through the development review process. Park de-
                                velopment impact fees will be assessed on privately gated developments even if
                                private recreation facilities are provided to address cumulative neighborhood and
                                community recreation needs.
                                New or Expanded Facilities
                                Policy 16.14
Action 16.A                     Facility Priorities. In addition to updates and completion of existing parks and
Implementation and Action Plan
of the Parks and Recreation
                                facilities, initiate the following new facilities by the year 2020. (These are not
System Master Plan              listed in priority order; implementation will be guided by the “Implementation
                                and Action Plan set forth in the Parks and Recreation System Master Plan.)
                                 Aquatics facility
                                 Indoor recreation and sports facility
                                 Performing and visual arts facility
                                 Expanded trails system
                                 New community and neighborhood parks in areas not currently served by
                                     parks
                                 Downtown park, plaza, or town square that is integral to the functions of
                                     Downtown.
                                 Expansion of Uvas Creek Park Preserve, extending from Burchell Road in the
                                     Hecker Pass area downstream to Highway 101 and Gavilan College, via the
                                     Gilroy Sports Park.
                                Some of these facilities may be developed in partnership with other agencies and
                                organizations.
                                Policy 16.15
Action 16.A                     Youth Center. Continue to support programs and improved facilities at the Gilroy
Implementation and Action Plan
                                Youth Center, giving priority to physical improvements at the Youth Center during
of the Parks and Recreation
System Master Plan              the first 5-year action plan of the Parks and Recreation System Master Plan.
7-6                            Gilroy General Plan                                                       Adopted June 2002

                                                                                    Public Facilities and Services
Policy 16.16
Senior Center. In accordance with the policies and implementation program of             Action 16.A
                                                                                         Implementation and Action Plan
the Parks and Recreation System Master Plan, expand the Senior Center to meet            of the Parks and Recreation
the recreation, health, social and supportive program needs of Gilroy’s growing          System Master Plan
senior population.
Policy 16.17
Temporary Facilities. When needed recreation and cultural arts programs cannot           Action 16.A
                                                                                         Implementation and Action Plan
be expanded or provided due to fully impacted existing facilities, the City should       of the Parks and Recreation
consider temporary rental or lease of spaces. This should occur only when:               System Master Plan
a) There is consistently a waiting list or other demonstrated need for programs
    that cannot be met with existing facilities.
b) Temporary or permanent use of space cannot be found through joint use
    agreements with GUSD and/or Gavilan College.
c) Available rental space can safely and adequately accommodate the impacted
    program(s).
d) The temporary arrangement will not adversely impact the City’s financial
    ability to provide recreation programs and facilities.
Partnerships
Policy 16.18
Youth Partnerships. Actively encourage partnerships with community groups                Action 16.C
                                                                                         Friends of Gilroy Recreation
that can assist with outreach to youth populations, including the Mexican American       Foundation
Community Services Agency (MACSA), Gilroy Policy Activities League (GPAL),               as well as ongoing implementation
Gilroy Unified School District (GUSD), Neighborhood Accountability Board,                by City staff
Mothers Against Gangs, and other groups.
Policy 16.19
Gilroy Unified School District Partnership. Continue and enhance the model               Action 17.A
                                                                                         Interagency Meetings with
partnership agreement between the City and GUSD. Areas for further consider-
                                                                                         Educational Organizations
ation include shared maintenance and development of facilities for community
recreational use at existing and future school sites.
Adopted June 2002                                                   Gilroy General Plan                               7-7

Public Facilities and Services
                                   Policy 16.20
                                   Gavilan College Partnership. Consider expansion of the partnership between the
Action 17.A
Interagency Meetings with          City and Gavilan College to allow for greater community use of college facilities.
Educational Organizations
                                   Policy 16.21
                                   Partnerships with Local and Regional Public Agencies. Consider expanded part-
ongoing implementation by City     nerships with local and regional public agencies that can assist in providing recre-
staff
                                   ational facilities and programs, including Santa Clara County Parks, California
                                   State Parks, Santa Clara Valley Water District, Santa Clara County Open Space
                                   Authority, and the Gilroy Police Department.
                                   Policy 16.22
                                   Partnerships with Nonprofit Organizations. Continue partnerships with non-
Action 16.C                        profit organizations that can assist in:
Friends of Gilroy Recreation
                                   a) Providing recreation programs
Foundation
as well as ongoing implementation  b) Reaching populations that could benefit from but do not regularly partici-
by City staff                           pate in recreation programs
                                   c) Fundraising for facilities and program development
                                   d) Operating special use facilities
                                   Policy 16.23
                                   Private Sector Services and Partnerships. Recognizing that some recreation ser-
Action 16.C                        vices are best provided by the private sector, consider public/private partnerships
Friends of Gilroy Recreation
Foundation
                                   where such partnerships are beneficial to the community. Examples of potential
as well as ongoing implementation  partnerships include:
by City staff                      a) Concessions and leases of public facilities to private organizations.
                                   b) Leasing of private facilities for the operation of City programs.
                                   c) Private donations and sponsorship of public facilities and programs.
                                   d) Contract maintenance services.
7-8                               Gilroy General Plan                                                   Adopted June 2002
                                                                                                          Public Facilities and Services
  Parks and Recreation Definition
  and Facility Classification System
  Park and recreation facilities and programs include the following: park facilities; historic and
  cultural facilities; visual and performing arts facilities; and recreation, leisure, educational, and
  artistic programs.
  Mini-Park; 1 acre or smaller
  Mini-parks, due to their size, are of limited recreational value. However, they can have a visual
  value by providing a green space in the urban landscape. If seating is included, mini-parks can
  also be a social gathering place, particularly in areas of high activity or population density.
  Neighborhood Park; 3 to 10 acres
  Neighborhood parks are the basic unit of the park system and serve as the traditional urban
  recreational and social focus of the neighborhood. Neighborhood parks should serve as extensions
  of the residential fabric, allowing for recreational and social activities that cannot be accommo-
  dated in residential yards due to size or density limitations. They should be designed for both
  active and passive recreation activities tailored to the specific needs of the neighborhood, and
  should address the needs of all age groups and physical abilities. Park design should create a
  “sense of place” that enhances neighborhood and community identity. Park features that would
  create a community-wide “destination” should not be included in a neighborhood park. Restrooms,
  off-street parking, and lit recreation facilities would generally not be considered for neighborhood
  parks because they encourage park use by those beyond the intended service area. However, such
  facilities may be considered if specific park program needs dictate.
  Neighborhood/School Park; 2 to 10 acres
  The neighborhood/school park is similar in size and function to a neighborhood park, but is
  located immediately adjacent to a school. Some of the recreational functions can be combined with
  the school site, such as hard courts, sports fields, and play areas, to maximize efficient use of
  resources. As part of the park master planning process, scheduling and use allocations need to be
  determined, to minimize scheduling conflicts between school and neighborhood use of facilities,
  and to coordinate operations issues such as maintenance.
  Community Park; 20 acre minimum
  Community parks focus on meeting the recreational needs of the community-at-large. They allow
  for group activities and other recreational pursuits that are not recommended at neighborhood
  parks. While community parks also often meet the needs of neighborhoods, frequently community
  parks are “destination” parks with special facilities, such as lit sports fields, amphitheaters,
  gymnasiums, etc. that serve the entire community. Restrooms, off-street parking, night lighting of
  facilities and other active recreation facilities are typical park elements that encourage higher
  levels of public use and longer user-days when compared to neighborhood parks. In addition,
  community parks may have unique landscape features that enhance community identity.
                                                                                   continued on next page
Adopted June 2002                                                                       Gilroy General Plan                          7-9

Public Facilities and Services
                               Parks and Recreation Definition
                               and Facility Classification System
                               continued from previous page
                               Community/School Park; 20 acre minimum
                               The community/school park is similar in size and function to a community park, but is located
                               immediately adjacent to a school. Some of the recreational functions can be combined with the
                               school site, such as hard courts, sports fields, play areas and off-street parking, to maximize
                               efficient use of resources. As part of the park master planning process, scheduling and use
                               allocations need to be determined, to minimize scheduling conflicts between school and community
                               use of facilities, and to coordinate operations issues such as maintenance.
                               Park Preserve; no minimum or maximum size; depends on resource to be preserved
                               The primary purpose of the park preserve is to protect unique natural resources while providing
                               for compatible, limited public recreation use. Passive recreational uses, such as hiking, nature
                               appreciation, picnicking, etc., that are not in conflict with the intended resource protection are
                               encouraged. Natural resource open space areas that are not intended to allow for compatible
                               public recreation use would not qualify as a park preserve and would not be included in the park
                               land classification system.
                               Trails/Linear Parkways; no minimum or maximum length
                               Trails should be grade-separated for pedestrian and/or bicycle use. Some trails may be appropriate
                               for equestrian use, although equestrian use of City parks is not currently allowed. Trails should
                               connect various areas of the City, as well as parks and park preserves. Trails may serve as part
                               of a regional trail network. They should connect to the City’s on-street bicycle route system for
                               recreational use as well as providing a means of alternative transportation. City trails should be
                               coordinated with the County Trails Master Plan. A citywide Bicycle Transportation Plan should be
                               maintained that serves as a 20-year master plan for both the on-street bicycle route system and
                               the Class I off-street bicycle trail system. Walking trails within a park or park preserve would not
                               be classified separately as a trail/linear parkway, except that major connecting trails in parks and
                               park preserves would include trail route identification and would be included in total City trail mile
                               calculations.
                               Sports Park; 20 acre minimum
                               Sports Parks focus on active recreational facilities, especially for organized sports. Consolidation of
                               multiple sports fields at one location allows for efficiencies of maintenance and scheduling. With a
                               focus on active sports, sports parks do not have all of the amenities of community parks.
                               Special Use Facility; depends on facility
                               Special use facilities meet citywide recreational needs and are not necessarily located in parks.
                               Special use facilities generally meet a specific recreation or cultural function and do not fall into
                               one of the other classification categories. Multipurpose uses should be encouraged, provided that
                               additional uses do not conflict with the intended special use.
7-10                       Gilroy General Plan                                                                       Adopted June 2002

                                                                                     Public Facilities and Services
17       Educational Facilities
GOAL: Coordination between new residential development and the development of
new educational facilities; educational excellence in support of community and eco-
nomic development; and enhancement of the role of schools as a community resource.
Policy 17.01
Educational Values. Ensure that the policies and actions of the City in relation to       Action 17.A
                                                                                          Interagency Meetings with
educational facilities and community development help to reinforce educational            Educational Organizations
values as expressed in the Gilroy Unified School District Mission Statement.
Policy 17.02
New Residential Development. Control the timing and location of new residen-              Action 17.B
                                                                                          Development Review and Approval
tial development in a way that allows the Gilroy Unified School District to plan          Process
and finance facilities in an orderly fashion.
Policy 17.03
Development Approvals and School Capacity. Verify the remaining capacity in               Action 17.B
                                                                                          Development Review and Approval
local schools as part of the review process for residential subdivisions, with ad-        Process
equate school capacity being a condition for development approval. When capac-
ity is limited, coordinate development approvals with the scheduling of capital
funds for school expansion and/or improvements.
Policy 17.04
Land Dedication or Fees. Require developers of new residential subdivisions to            Action 17.B
                                                                                          Development Review and Approval
dedicate land and/or pay fees (at the discretion of the City and School District) to      Process
offset the costs of providing new elementary and secondary schools resulting
from their developments.
Policy 17.05
Inter-Agency Cooperation. Maintain and enhance a spirit of maximum coop-                  Action 17.A
                                                                                          Interagency Meetings with
eration between the City of Gilroy, Gilroy Unified School District, Gavilan Col-          Educational Organizations
lege, Santa Clara County, and other educational organizations. Hold regular joint
meetings to coordinate long-range planning, discuss development decision mak-
ing, and address issues of common concern.
Adopted June 2002                                                    Gilroy General Plan                            7-11
Public Facilities and Services
                                  Policy 17.06
                                  School Sites. Coordinate and provide high quality school sites (based on size, loca-
Action 17.C
School Siting                     tion, and terrain) to optimize educational goals. In areas of new residential devel-
Action 1.C                        opment, ensure that sites are identified and dedicated as a condition of develop-
Neighborhood Districts Implemen-
                                  ment approval, incorporated as part of the Neighborhood District planning pro-
tation Strategy
                                  cess whenever feasible. Site location considerations include adjacency to planned
                                  open space corridors, neighborhood park sites, and bike and pedestrian pathways.
                                  Policy 17.07
Action 17.C                       Schools and Transportation. Coordinate the siting and design of new school
School Siting
                                  facilities with the transportation network and street hierarchy to ensure (1) the
                                  safety of pedestrians and children at play, especially young children; (2) minimal
                                  traffic impacts on adjacent residential areas; (3) access to transit, where feasible; and
                                  (4) convenient and safe routes of travel for school buses entering and leaving the
                                  school site.
                                  Policy 17.08
Action 17.C                       Joint Use Facilities. Encourage shared use and/or joint development of school
School Siting
Action 17.A
                                  facilities and programs in coordination with other community facility and pro-
Interagency Meetings with         gram needs, to minimize capital costs and/or operational and maintenance costs.
Educational Organizations         Examples of joint use facility opportunities include shared park/schoolyard areas;
                                  shared athletic/recreational facilities; shared cultural and performing arts facili-
                                  ties; use of school facilities for community events or adult education programs;
                                  and joint development of environmental education and community garden pro-
                                  grams.
                                  Policy 17.9
Action 23.C                       Conservation in School Facility Design. Utilize passive solar features and other
Energy Efficiency Standards
                                  energy conservation measures to the maximum extent feasible in the design of
                                  school facilities. Landscaping should utilize native and other climatically appro-
                                  priate plant species to conserve water and minimize ongoing maintenance re-
                                  quirements.
                                  See also South County Joint Area Plan policies 4.00 through 4.18.
7-12                             Gilroy General Plan                                                      Adopted June 2002
                                                                                     Public Facilities and Services
18       Public Safety
GOAL: Public health and safety through (1) the provision of high quality police, fire,
and emergency-response services that respond to community needs and issues; (2) edu-
cation programs that raise community awareness about public safety issues; and (3)
preventive programs that involve residents in deterring crime, reducing fire hazards,
and addressing other threats to public health and safety.
Police and Fire
Policy 18.01
Standards of Service. Continue to provide and maintain police and fire services           Action 18.A
                                                                                          Level of Service Monitoring
that are adequate in manpower, equipment, and resources to respond to localized
                                                                                          Action 18.B
emergencies and calls for service within the City. The departments’ current levels of     Public Facility Impact Fees
service should be maintained or improved as the City continues to grow, with              Action 18.C
                                                                                          Capital Improvement Program
average emergency response times for police services of approximately 4.5 minutes
and average emergency response times for fire services of less than 5.0 minutes.
Policy 18.02
Public Education. Encourage a pro-active approach to crime and fire prevention            Action 18.E
                                                                                          Public Information and Education
by providing education programs that raise community awareness and promote                Programs
citizen involvement in crime and hazard prevention activities.
See also policies regarding fire hazards reduction and abatement in Chapter 8.
Emergency Services
Policy 18.03
Emergency Services Facilities. Ensure that facilities designated as local command         Action 18.C
                                                                                          Capital Improvement Program
control centers for emergency/disaster services are designed to withstand a “maxi-
mum probable seismic event” and remain operational. Secondary facilities should
be identified and equipped as back up.
Policy 18.04
Hazard Awareness and Prevention. Promote hazard awareness and prevention                  Action 18.E
                                                                                          Public Information and Education
through community education programs.                                                     Programs
Adopted June 2002                                                    Gilroy General Plan                              7-13

Public Facilities and Services
                                   Policy 18.05
                                   Emergency Response and Preparedness. Continue to provide essential emer-
Action 18.D
“Mutual Aid Agreements”            gency public services during natural catastrophes. Promote emergency prepared-
ongoing implementation by City     ness through staff training and planning in cooperation with other public agencies
staff
                                   and appropriate public interest organizations.
                                   Policy 18.06
Action 25.A                        High Occupancy Structures. Ensure that high-occupancy structures (such as
Hazard Maps
                                   schools, hospitals, office buildings, and apartments) and critical emergency facili-
Action 25.B
Building Codes                     ties (such as fire and police stations, emergency relief facilities, and water storage
Action 25.C                        facilities) are not located in areas of high seismic risk. Additionally, ensure that
Building Inspection
Action 25.D                        such structures are designed to protect human life to the highest degree possible
Unreinforced Masonry Buildings     during a “maximum probable event” of seismic activity, and that they have emer-
                                   gency plans approved by the City.
                                   Policy 18.07
Action 12.E                        Access for Emergency Vehicles. Ensure adequate access for emergency vehicles
Access for Public Safety Vehicles
                                   and equipment, providing a second means of ingress and egress in all development.
                                   19        Infrastructure
                                   GOAL: Infrastructure systems that meet residents’ needs; conserve resources; protect the
                                   environment; and protect public health and safety.
                                   Water Supply
                                   Policy 19.01
Action 19.B                        Resource Limits. Work with the Santa Clara Valley Water District to ensure that
Water Agency Coordination
                                   water demand created by new development does not exceed the groundwater
                                   supply that can be economically and legally withdrawn from the aquifer on a
                                   sustained basis. Restrict groundwater pumping to rates that will not impair ground-
                                   water quality or create other environmental damage, such as subsidence.
                                   Policy 19.02
Action 19.C                        Location of Development. Locate new development in the areas that are most
Water Master Plan
                                   easily supplied by Gilroy’s current water system.
                                   See also South County Joint Area Plan policies 7.00 through 7.09.
7-14                              Gilroy General Plan                                                     Adopted June 2002

                                                                                    Public Facilities and Services
Sewer
Policy 19.03
Sewer, Treatment, and Disposal Capacities. Provide and maintain adequate sew-            Action 19.D
                                                                                         Long Term Wastewater Management
ers, wastewater treatment, and treated water disposal capacities to meet the needs       Plan
of future growth (residential, industrial, and other).
Policy 19.04
Timing and Location of Development. Manage the timing and location of new                Action 19.D
                                                                                         Long Term Wastewater Management
development according to the ability of the sewer system and treatment plant to
                                                                                         Plan
accommodate the effluent generated by the proposed development. Ensure that
adequate sewer and treatment capacity is funded and in place prior to occupation
of new buildings.
Policy 19.05
Wastewater Treatment. Provide state-of-the-art treatment and disposal facilities         Action 19.D
                                                                                         Long Term Wastewater Management
to protect groundwater and other natural resources from contamination and to
                                                                                         Plan
minimize unpleasant odors. Locate and operate facilities in a manner that mini-
mizes unpleasant odors.
Policy 19.06
Sewer Connections. Require that new development connect to the City’s princi-            Action 19.D
                                                                                         Long Term Wastewater Management
pal wastewater treatment plant. Require pre-treatment of wastes if necessary, and        Plan
continue to discourage the development of package treatment plants (see glossary).
Policy 19.07
Lift Stations. Minimize and eliminate where feasible the need for lift stations (see     Action 19.D
                                                                                         Long Term Wastewater Management
glossary). New sewer lines should be planned and coordinated to minimize cross-          Plan
ings and lift stations across Uvas Creek in advance of development west of the
creek.
Policy 19.08
Areas of Future Development. In areas where future development is expected to            Action 2.D
                                                                                         Interagency Coordination for Growth
be served by sewers, large lot policies (that allow minimal development and lim-
                                                                                         Management
ited numbers of septic systems) should be continued. This approach increases the
feasibility of designing future urban density subdivisions with smaller lots, which
are more efficient for sewers in terms of service and cost.
See also South County Joint Area Plan policies 6.00 through 6.04.
Adopted June 2002                                                   Gilroy General Plan                                7-15

Public Facilities and Services
                                  Storm Drains
                                  Policy 19.09
Action 19.E                       Storm Drain System. Provide and maintain a system of storm drains to protect
Storm Drain Master Plan
                                  areas of development from localized flooding.
                                  Utilities
                                  Policy 19.10
ongoing implementation by City    Provision of Utilities. Work with public, quasi-public and private utility provid-
staff
                                  ers to ensure adequate levels of service to City residents.
                                  Policy 19.11
Action 19.F                       Undergrounding. Encourage the undergrounding of utilities in older areas, espe-
Utilities Undergrounding Program
                                  cially when an area is undergoing extensive redevelopment or significant construc-
                                  tion. Continue to require the undergrounding of utilities in areas of new develop-
                                  ment.
                                  Policy 19.12
                                  New Technologies. Support the implementation of new telecommunication tech-
                                  nologies (such as high-volume voice/data lines), recognizing the potential for at-
                                  tracting new businesses, reducing vehicle trips (through telecommuting),and meet-
                                  ing the changing communication needs of City residents.
                                  Lighting
                                  Policy 19.13
Action 19.G                       Outdoor Lighting. Provide appropriate lighting on sidewalks and pathways to
Lighting Standards
                                  protect public safety.
                                  Policy 19.14
Action 19.G                       Outdoor Lighting Energy Efficiency. Select outdoor lamps and light fixtures to
Lighting Standards
                                  provide energy efficiency as well as effective lighting. Preference should be given to
                                  newer types of light sources such as Low Pressure Sodium, High Pressure Sodium,
                                  or Metal Halide lamps that can provide more “lumens per watt” as well as a longer
                                  lamp life. Lighting controls (such as timers or photo-sensors) should be used when
                                  possible to turn lights off when they are not needed.
7-16                             Gilroy General Plan                                                    Adopted June 2002

                                                                                       Public Facilities and Services
Policy 19.15
Glare and “Light Pollution.” Require that light sources and fixtures be selected,           Action 19.G
                                                                                            Lighting Standards
designed, and located to minimize glare and limit light pollution (including “light
trespass” and “uplighting”). “Light trespass” is light emitted by a lamp or lighting
installation that falls outside the boundaries of the property intended for illumi-
nation. “Uplighting” is light that is unnecessarily thrown into the night sky. Such
excess lighting can effect adjacent residents, passing drivers or pedestrians, the
natural environment, and astronomical observations. Encourage the use of light
fixtures that minimize glare and light pollution, specifically using hoods and shields
to direct the light beam onto the area intended for illumination.
Adopted June 2002                                                      Gilroy General Plan                      7-17

Public Facilities and Services
                            Implementing Actions
                            15       Civic and Community Facilities
                            Action 15.A
                            Capital Improvement Program. Utilize the Capital Improvement Program as
                            the vehicle for prioritizing facility improvements, based on facility master plans
                            and in light of the City’s financial resources and commitments.
                            Action 15.B
                            Civic Center Master Plan. Update the Civic Center Master Plan to reflect pro-
                            jected facility needs through the year 2020, in keeping with the projections, goals,
                            and policies of the General Plan.
                            Action 15.C
                            Library Expansion Plan and Impact Fund. Work with the Joint Powers Author-
                            ity of the Santa Clara County Library system to develop, agree to, and fund an
                            expansion plan for the Gilroy Public Library to meet the short- and long-term
                            library needs of Gilroy residents. To help defray the costs of Library expansion and
                            improvements needed to the meet the community’s growing needs and maintain
                            approved levels of library service, establish a Library Impact Fund and require that
                            each new residential, commercial and industrial development contribute to the
                            fund accordingly.
                            16       Parks and Recreation
                            Action 16.A
                            Implementation and Action Plan of the Parks and Recreation System Master
                            Plan. Use the Implementation and Action Plan set forth in the Parks and Recre-
                            ation System Master Plan to establish citywide parks and recreation priorities and
                            resource allocation decisions.
7-18                       Gilroy General Plan                                                    Adopted June 2002

                                                                                      Public Facilities and Services
Action 16.B
Trails Master Plan. Establish specific trail alignments and acquisition targets based
on a Gilroy Trails Master Plan and the Bicycle Transportation Plan.
Action 16.C
“Friends of Gilroy Recreation” Foundation. Work with the private sector and
existing organizations to establish a nonprofit foundation to develop and support
Gilroy’s parks and recreation facilities and programs.
Action 16.D
Other Financing Methods. Explore other financing methods to support imple-
mentation of parks and recreation facility improvements and ongoing mainte-
nance, including grants, joint use, private donations, corporate sponsorships,
endowments, in-kind services, user fees, bonding and establishment of special
districts.
Action 16.E
Master Plan Review and Update. Review and update the Parks and Recreation
System Master Plan a minimum of once every 5 years.When feasible, this review
shall be coordinated with review of the General Plan. The Master Plan review
shall include the following:
a) Evaluate progress in implementing recommended projects.
b) Verify accuracy of population and land use projections.
c) Adjust capital projects funding based on identified additional funding sources
    and unforeseen opportunities.
d) Review user needs at all parks and facilities and provide appropriate responses
    through specific facility or park master plan revisions.
Review and adjust operations and maintenance budgets including cost recovery
goals.
Adopted June 2002                                                     Gilroy General Plan                      7-19

Public Facilities and Services
                            17       Educational Facilities
                            Action 17.A
                            Interagency Meetings with Educational Organizations. Continue to meet with
                            representatives from the Gilroy Unified School District, Gavilan College, Santa
                            Clara County, and other educational organizations as necessary to achieve the goals
                            and policies of the General Plan.
                            Action 17.B
                            Development Review and Approval Process. Continue to include school facility
                            impacts in the review of development proposals, ensuring adequate school facility
                            capacity as a condition for development approval.
                            Action 17.C
                            School Siting. Work with the Gilroy Unified School District, Gavilan College,
                            and other appropriate agencies to identify and designate appropriate and adequate
                            sites for future educational facilities, in keeping with the goals and policies of the
                            General Plan. To the extent feasible, continue to encourage the development of
                            City parks and recreation facilities adjacent to school sites.
                            Action 17.D
                            Neighborhood Districts Implementation. Include representatives from the Gilroy
                            Unified School District in discussions regarding implementation of new Neigh-
                            borhood Districts to ensure the successful integration of new school facilities as a
                            visual and functional focal point in new neighborhoods.
                            18       Public Safety
                            Action 18.A
                            Level of Service Monitoring. Monitor the emergency response times of police
                            and fire services to ensure that adequate levels of service are being maintained, in
                            accordance with General Plan Policy 18.01, Standards of Service.
                            Action 18.B
                            Public Facility Impact Fees. Update the Impact Fee Schedule on a regular basis to
                            ensure that public safety facilities and services required by new development are
                            paid for by those developments.
7-20                       Gilroy General Plan                                                   Adopted June 2002
                                                                                    Public Facilities and Services
Action 18.C
Capital Improvement Program. Give priority to the capital improvements re-
quired to maintain the established standards of service for police and fire services
and ensure an acceptable level of safety throughout the community.
Action 18.D
“Mutual Aid Agreements.” Maintain the City’s mutual aid agreements with the
County and surrounding cities to ensure adequate response to large-scale emer-
gencies and multiple, simultaneous incidents that might exceed the capabilities of
local resources.
Action 18.E
Public Information and Education Programs. Continue to provide public infor-
mation and education programs to promote safety awareness, hazard prevention,
and emergency preparedness.
19       Infrastructure
Action 19.A
Infrastructure Impact Fees. Require developers to pay fees to offset the costs of
expanding the waster supply system, sewer system and wastewater treatment plant
to accommodate their development. These fees will be paid on a proportional
basis in relation to the capacity demanded, and will reflect the total fees for im-
provements.
Action 19.B
Water Agency Coordination. Work closely with the Santa Clara Valley Water
District and other relevant jurisdictions to monitor and control development in
light of the resource limits posed by the Llagas subbasin groundwater supply.
Action 19.C
Water Master Plan. Regularly update the City’s Water Master Plan to reflect
current conditions and projections and to achieve the goals and policies set forth in
the General Plan. Use the Water Master Plan to guide service expansion and im-
provements, and as the basis for establishing impact fees for water supply.
Adopted June 2002                                                   Gilroy General Plan                      7-21

Public Facilities and Services
                            Action 19.D
                            Long Term Wastewater Management Plan. Work with the South County Re-
                            gional Wastewater Authority to regularly update its Long Term Wastewater Man-
                            agement Plan to reflect current conditions and projections and to achieve the
                            goals and policies set forth in the General Plan. Use the Long Term Wastewater
                            Management Plan to guide service expansion and improvements, and as the basis
                            for establishing associated impact fees.
                            Action 19.E
                            Storm Drain Master Plan. Regularly update the City’s Storm Drain Master Plan
                            to reflect current conditions and projections and to achieve the goals and policies
                            set forth in the General Plan. Use the Storm Drain Master Plan to guide facility
                            expansion and improvements, and as the basis for establishing impact fees for
                            storm drain facilities.
                            Action 19.F
                            Utilities Undergrounding Program. Continue the City’s program to place utility
                            lines underground.
                            Action 19.G
                            Lighting Standards. Review and update the City’s Lighting Standards to ensure
                            appropriate lighting controls as part of the City’s development review and ap-
                            proval process. Include guidelines for selection of outdoor lamps and fixtures to
                            achieve energy efficiency goals and protect against glare and light pollution.
7-22                       Gilroy General Plan                                                 Adopted June 2002

                                                                                   Public Facilities and Services
A Note on the Public Facility Maps
The maps on the following two pages have been reproduced from the Draft City
of Gilroy Parks and Recreation System Master Plan (April 2, 1999).
“Geographical Park Service Needs” (page 63 of the Parks and Recreation Master
Plan) presents:
 Existing and Identified Future Parks
 Existing and Identified Future Schools
“Gilroy Trails Conceptual Master Plan” (page 73 of the Parks and Recreation Mas-
ter Plan) presents the Draft Trails Master Plan Map.
An 11” x 17” version of both maps is available in the Parks and Recreation System
Master Plan document, available at City Hall.
Adopted June 2002                                                  Gilroy General Plan                      7-23

                                              mono-
Exhibit H                                            Existing City Limit
This map was updated in 2016 by the
Gilroy         •          Boundary Initiative                                             a`, ,`  i*                      may
                                                   F                                                                                I•, . 111     • I. W
                                                1/                                     pi                                     O`
                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                  Ira
                            ur l>  4
                                     u •                                                                art                               1.
                                                                                                                                                               I ..   is
       JJ,,
                                                         1 , , .__ :                 i               f/.
            11
                 tl t                                                                                                            3:
                 41, 7.                                              I
                                                                                NPi
                                                                         y• j
                                                                                                      t  -'•        y" Y.                    11 Ir         1 I      I
                                                                                                               0
    yj
                                     API                               J     li                                   i+
                                  r_                                      p
                                                                                                             lipOKI
                                                                                                 AI
                                                                                               Ok                                       1
                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                       1
          I11           1            111             ill


[BLANK PAGE
                                                               Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                                               C H A P T E R E I G H T
                Community Resources
                  and Potential Hazards
Introduction
This chapter of the General Plan sets forth the City’s goals, policies and imple-
menting actions for Community Resources and Potential Hazards, including:
 Open Space and Habitat Areas
 Air Quality
 Water Quality
 Natural Resource Conservation (water, energy, and mineral resources)
 Waste Management and Recycling
 Natural Hazards (seismic, soils and geology, fire, flooding)
 Noise
 Hazardous Materials
Revised February 2017                                             Gilroy General Plan                8-1

Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                              Goals and Policies
                              20       Open Space and Habitat Areas
                              GOAL: Preservation, protection, and maintenance of Gilroy’s natural open space re-
                              sources (including creeks, meadows, hills, woodlands, and vistas) for their watershed
                              protection, habitat preservation, recreation, and aesthetic value, ensuring that they
                              retain their natural qualities and beauty in perpetuity.
                              Policy 20.01
Actions 20.A thru 20.J        Open Space Areas. Preserve and protect the following open space areas:
Open Space and Habitat Areas
                              a) Natural resource and wildlife habitat areas, such as the Uvas Creek and Llagas
                                   Creek riparian communities; the heavily vegetated portions of the Santa Cruz
                                   mountains; steep hillsides and significant hillside features (such as serpentinite
                                   barrens); and natural features of high community value (e.g., the stands of
                                   trees along Miller Avenue and cedar trees bordering Hecker Pass).
                              b) Hazardous areas, such as fault zones, areas subject to strong groundshaking
                                   during earthquakes, and floodways.
                              c) Lands around reservoirs.
                              d) Lands which provide greenbelts for the South County cities.
                              e) Recreational lands, including community, neighborhood, and linear parks;
                                   expanded linear parks along Uvas and Llagas Creek; and the Gilroy Munici-
                                   pal Golf Course.
                              Policy 20.02
Action 20.B                   Creek Protection. Protect the ecological, aesthetic and recreational value of the
Creek Protection
                              creeks that flow through the Gilroy Planning Area from urban encroachment and
                              degradation. Ensure that new development preserves the function of natural drain-
                              ages, including small canyons and seasonal creeks. The easements and setbacks
                              adjacent to these creeks shall be maintained in open space. Access to creeks should
                              be of sufficient width to accommodate trails, flood control access, and protection
                              of riparian habitat.
8-2                          Gilroy General Plan                                                     Revised February 2017

                                                                  Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Policy 20.03
Plant and Wildlife Habitats. Preserve important plant and wildlife habitats, in-         Action 20.C
                                                                                         Habitat Protection Ordinance
cluding riparian communities, heavily vegetated hillside areas, unique hillside          Action 20.D
ecosystems (e.g., serpentinite barrens), creeks, and sensitive nesting sites. Loss of    Consultation on Fish and Wildlife
these habitats should be fully offset through creation of habitat of equal value,        Impacts
with the compensation rate for habitat creation determined by a qualified biolo-
gist.
Policy 20.04
Rare and Endangered Species. Limit development in areas that support the Cali-           Action 20.C
                                                                                         Habitat Protection Ordinance
fornia Tiger Salamander and other rare or endangered species. If development of          Action 20.D
these areas must occur, any loss of habitat should be fully compensated onsite. If       Consultation on Fish and Wildlife
off-site mitigation is necessary, it should occur within the Gilroy Planning Area        Impacts
whenever possible, and must be accompanied by plans and a monitoring program
prepared by a qualified biologist.
Policy 20.05
Greenbelts. Designate protected open space areas in conjunction with agricul-            Action 20.E
                                                                                         Greenbelt Definition and
tural lands to create significant natural buffers, or “greenbelts,” between Gilroy       Protection
and surrounding communities, helping to retain the city’s semi-rural, small town         Action 20.F
                                                                                         Gilroy-San Martin Greenbelt
quality. Land uses within a greenbelt should be determined by joint planning
activities of the South County cities and the County, but might include very low
density residential development; public parks and recreation areas; privately op-
erated recreation areas; and agriculture. Of special concern is the area separating
the northern part of the Gilroy Planning Area from the community of San Mar-
tin. If an adequate greenbelt cannot be established in the area north of Masten
and Fitzgerald Roads, then the Gilroy General Plan Land Use Map should be
amended to include a greenbelt strip in the northern part of the Planning Area.
Policy 20.06
Open Space Access and Management. Manage and maintain public open space                  Action 20.G
                                                                                         Open Space Access
areas and encourage the management and maintenance of private open space                 Action 20.H
areas in a manner that ensures habitat protection, provides for public access,           Open Space Management
addresses public safety concerns, and meets low-impact recreation needs.
Revised February 2017                                                Gilroy General Plan                              8-3

Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                               Policy 20.07
                               Preservation Techniques. Develop and apply a variety of preservation tools to
Action 20.I                    protect open space in and around the City. These might include:
Open Space Preservation Tools
Action 20.J
                               a) Public acquisition
Santa Clara County Open Space  b) Land use regulation
District                       c) Planning and urban development policies
                               d) Economic incentives to landowners
                               e) Open space easements
                               f ) Transfer of development rights
                               g) Planned cluster development
                               h) Assessment districts
                               i) Dedication of additional lands upon development
                               In the selection and application of preservation methods, emphasis should be
                               given, in no particular order, to (1) minimizing public costs and liability expo-
                               sure; (2) consideration of long-term management and maintenance issues; (3)
                               consideration of public access issues; and (4) ensuring preservation in perpetuity.
                               Policy 20.08
Action 20.I                    Open Space Areas and the Parks and Recreation System. Open space areas have
Open Space Preservation Tools
Action 20.J
                               important community value, but may have limited or no recreational value due
Santa Clara County Open Space  to public safety and access issues. While preservation of these lands should be
District                       strongly encouraged, they should not be dedicated as part of the City’s Parks and
                               Recreation System, due to long-term management and liability issues, unless a
                               recreational value can be demonstrated consistent with the Parks and Recreation
                               Facility Classification System (page 7-9). Participation in the Santa Clara County
                               Open Space Authority, and dedication of these open space lands to the Authority
                               or other public agencies, should be further explored as a means of ensuring long-
                               term preservation and management of non-recreational open space.
                               Land owners who prefer not to dedicate open space land to a public agency are
                               encouraged to consider land dedication to a private land trust such as the Land
                               Trust for Santa Clara County.
                               Policy 20.09
Action 20.I                    Preservation in Perpetuity. When open space easements, dedications or other
Open Space Preservation Tools
                               land preservation measures are required as a condition of project approval, ensure
                               that dedicated lands are preserved in perpetuity.
8-4                           Gilroy General Plan                                                  Revised February 2017

                                                                   Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Policy 20.10
Regional Preservation Efforts. Support and participate in regional open space              Action 20.E
                                                                                           Greenbelt Definition and
preservation programs and efforts to (a) establish policies and implementation             Protection
plans for greenbelts between the South County cities; and (b) to identify and              Action 20.I
help establish a viable source of funding for acquiring and developing regional            Open Space Preservation Tools
                                                                                           Action 20.J
parks, pathways, and open space.                                                           Santa Clara County Open Space
                                                                                           District
21       Air Quality
GOAL: Achievement of federal and state air quality standards by managing locally
generated pollutants, coordinating with other jurisdictions, and implementing land
use and transportation measures to reduce automobile trips and congestion, encourag-
ing more walking, biking, and transit use.
Policy 21.01
“Sensitive Receptors.” Use land use planning and project siting to separate air            Land Use Plan Map
pollution sources (such as freeways, arterials, industrial sites, etc.) from residen-
tial areas and other “sensitive receptors” (such as schools, hospital, and nursing
homes) that would be adversely affected by close proximity to air pollutants.
Policy 21.02
Landscaping to Reduce Pollutants. Promote the use of trees and plants in land-             Action 21.A
                                                                                           Air Quality Mitigation
scaping to reduce air pollutant levels.                                                    Action 1.I
                                                                                           Community Beautification
Policy 21.03
Trip Reduction and Congestion Management. Reduce the frequency and length                  Action 21.A
                                                                                           Air Quality Mitigation
of automobile trips and the amount of traffic congestion by controlling urban              see also Chapter 6, Transportation
sprawl, promoting infill development, and encouraging higher density develop-              and Circulation
ment with access to public transit. Also, promote mixed use developments that
locate support services such as day care, restaurants, banks, and stores within
walking distance of employment centers, and neighborhood-serving uses such as
parks, day care, small-scale stores, and cafes within walking distance of residential
developments.
Policy 21.04
Regional Collaboration. Cooperate with the Bay Area Air Quality Management                 Ongoing implementation by City
                                                                                           staff
District and other agencies that deal with issues related to air quality (e.g., the
Metropolitan Transportation Commission and the Association of Bay Area Govern-
Revised February 2017                                                  Gilroy General Plan                               8-5

Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                                 ments) to develop and implement regional air quality strategies. Also, support
                                 subregional coordination with other cities, counties and agencies in Santa Clara
                                 Valley and adjacent areas to address land use, jobs/housing balance, and transporta-
                                 tion planning issues as a means of improving air quality.
                                 Policy 21.05
Action 21.B                      Air Quality Impacts from Construction Activity. Reduce the air quality impacts
Emission Reductions for
                                 associated with construction activity by reducing the exhaust emissions through
Construction-Related Equipment
                                 appropriate mitigation actions.
                                 Policy 21.06
Action 12.J                      Traffic Control Measures. Implement the Transportation Control Measures rec-
Signal Timing
Action 13.D                      ommended by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District in the 2000 Clean
Signal Preemption for Buses      Air Plan to reduce pollutant emissions.
Action 14.K
Bicycle and Pedestrian
Improvements
Action 21.C                       22      Water Quality
Implementing the Clean Air Plan
                                 GOAL: Protection of groundwater in the Llagas subbasin from contamination and a
                                 clean and healthy supply of potable water in compliance with State and Federal
                                 water quality standards.
                                 Policy 22.01
Action 22.A                      Inter-Agency Coordination. Maintain close coordination with the agencies and
Comprehensive Groundwater
Management Program               organizations that share jurisdiction and interest relative to South County’s water
                                 supply and water quality, including: the Regional Water Quality Control Board;
                                 Santa Clara Valley Water District; County Health Department; County Executive’s
                                 Office; County Planning Office; Morgan Hill Planning Department; and the San
                                 Martin Planning Committee.
                                 Policy 22.02
Action 22.B                      Compatible Ordinances, Standards, and Enforcement Procedures. Ensure com-
Water Quality Ordinances,
                                 patible ordinances, standards, and enforcement procedures regarding water quality
Standards and Enforcement
Procedures                       in all South County jurisdictions so that there is no advantage for a company to
                                 locate in an area with lower standards. Also, encourage the two Regional Water
                                 Quality Control Boards that have jurisdiction in South County to agree on com-
                                 patible water quality standards for South County and consistent approaches to
                                 implementing the State Board’s non-degradation policy.
8-6                             Gilroy General Plan                                                   Revised February 2017

                                                                    Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Policy 22.03
Land Use Controls. Prohibit development of waste facilities, septic systems, and            Action 22.A
                                                                                            Comprehensive Groundwater
industries using toxic chemicals in areas where polluting substances may come in            Management Program
contact with groundwater, floodwaters, creeks, or reservoir waters. Within the
Gilroy Planning Area, identify land uses that may contribute to the degradation of
groundwater quality and ensure adequate monitoring, controls and enforcement
to protect groundwater quality.
Policy 22.04
Drinking Water Quality. Ensure that City drinking water exceeds the required                Action 22.C
                                                                                            Water Quality Monitoring Program
and recommended standards set forth by the State of California Department of
Environmental Protection.
Policy 22.05
Water Quality Monitoring. Continue to monitor groundwater and surface wa-                   Action 22.C
                                                                                            Water Quality Monitoring Program
ter quality conditions to ensure that water quality standards are being main-
tained and to determine if changes in regulations regarding septic systems and
land use are needed. Provide monitoring results to a central agency that will
coordinate the data and make it available to all jurisdictions and agencies.
Policy 22.06
Private Well Monitoring. Continue to monitor private wells and expand the                   Action 22.C
                                                                                            Water Quality Monitoring Program
scope of testing to include tests of more wells, tests on constituents not yet tested
in private wells (i.e., volatile organics, bacteriological, radiological, etc.), and pe-
riodic retesting of selected private wells.
Policy 22.07
Abandoned and Unused Wells. Continue programs to identify and seal aban-                    Action 22.D
                                                                                            Abandoned and Unused Wells
doned and unused wells, as such wells may be prime sources for transferring                 Program
contaminants from the upper to the lower aquifer.
Policy 22.08
Septic Systems. Continue land use policies that limit the number of individual              Action 22.A
                                                                                            Comprehensive Groundwater
septic systems in areas vulnerable to groundwater contamination because of the              Management Program
potential for cumulative degradation of water quality.
Revised February 2017                                                   Gilroy General Plan                             8-7
Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                              Policy 22.09
Action 22.A                   High Percolation Soils. Restrict development on properties that have soils with
Comprehensive Groundwater     “rapid water percolation” to protect water quality. Commercial and industrial de-
Management Program
                              velopments in such areas shall only be permitted under the strict safety limitations
                              required by the City’s and/or County’s Hazardous Materials Specialists.
                              Policy 22.10
Action 22.A                   Groundwater Recharge Areas. To provide greater protection of the aquifers that
Comprehensive Groundwater
Management Program
                              supply drinking water to South County, give special consideration to the manage-
                              ment of contaminants (e.g., hazardous materials, sanitary effluents) in groundwa-
                              ter recharge areas where no protective aquitard layer exists.
                               23       Natural Resource Conservation
                              GOAL: Conservation of natural resources and high levels of environmental quality for
                              current and future generations.
                              Policy 23.01
Action 23.A
                              Water Conservation and Reclamation. Promote water conservation and encour-
Water Reclamation Program
Action 23.B                   age the use of reclaimed or recycled water to reduce the overall demand on water
Water Conservation Education  resources. Ensure that recycled wastewater is treated in accordance with state and
Program
                              federal standards.
                              Policy 23.02
Action 23.A                   Water Reclamation Facilities. Encourage development of water reclamation fa-
Water Reclamation Program
                              cilities, where feasible, in order to make reclaimed water available to help meet the
                              growing water needs of the South County region.
                              Policy 23.03
Action 23.B                   Drought-Resistant Landscaping. Encourage the use of drought-resistant land-
Water Conservation Education
Program
                              scaping and low-flow irrigation systems to help reduce overall demand.
                              Policy 23.04
Action 23.A                   Irrigation with Reclaimed Water. Use reclaimed water for landscape irrigation,
Water Reclamation Program
                              especially for large water users such as golf courses.
8-8                          Gilroy General Plan                                                    Revised February 2017

                                                                     Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Policy 23.05
Energy Conservation. Reduce energy consumption through appropriate building                  Action 23.C
                                                                                             Energy Efficiency Standards
technologies, promotion of non-auto transportation modes, support for greater
                                                                                             Action 23.D
use of alternative energy sources, and dissemination of public information regard-           Energy Conservation Information
ing energy conservation techniques.                                                          Action 23.E
                                                                                             Alternative Energy Ordinance
Policy 23.06
Mineral Resources. Conserve the mineral resources along Uvas Creek that have                 Action 23.F
                                                                                             Mineral Resource Area Designa-
been designated by the State Mining and Geology Board as having statewide or
                                                                                             tions
regional significance. Protect these resource areas from urban encroachment and              Action 23.G
premature development that may be incompatible with mining. Undeveloped lands                Mineral Resource Mining
                                                                                             Operations
that may be recognized in the future as possessing mineral resources of statewide or         Action 23.H
regional significance shall also be examined to determine the feasibility of conserv-        Mineral Resource Status
                                                                                             Termination
ing those lands for future mineral extraction.
24       Waste Management and Recycling
GOAL: Cooperation with South Valley Disposal and Recycling, the County and other
South County cities to address potential landfill capacity issues; continued implemen-
tation of waste-reduction activities; and increased recycling to meet the State-man-
dated reduction in the City’s waste stream.
Policy 24.01
Recycling. Enhance the long-term viability of natural resources and reduce the               Action 24.A
                                                                                             Source Reduction and Recycling
volume of material sent to solid waste sites by continuing source reduction and              Element
recycling programs, encouraging the participation of all residents and businesses.
Policy 24.02
Source Reduction. Reduce the volume of disposed waste by encouraging efforts                 Action 24.A
                                                                                             Source Reduction and Recycling
to decrease consumption; reduce material weight and volume; reuse products and               Element
materials; and increase the durability of products and materials.
Policy 24.03
Landfill Siting. As the current Pacheco Pass landfill nears capacity, ensure that a          Action 24.B
                                                                                             Landfill Siting Process
new landfill site is designated to meet the City’s medium- to long-term waste
disposal needs.
Revised February 2017                                                    Gilroy General Plan                              8-9

Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                                    25      Natural Hazards
                                   GOAL: (a) Minimal potential for loss of life, injury, damage to property, economic and
                                   social dislocation, and unusual public expense due to natural hazards. (b) Develop-
                                   ment and use controls to protect the public from the risk of flood damage and to
                                   minimize hazards posed by fire, seismic activity, geologic instability, soil erosion, weak
                                   and expansive soils, and potentially hazardous soils materials.
                                   Policy 25.01
Action 25.A                        Location of Future Development. Permit development only in those areas where
Hazards Maps
Action 25.H
                                   potential danger to the health, safety, and welfare of residents can be adequately
Ordinance Regulating Development   mitigated to an “acceptable level of risk” (see Policy 25.04). This applies to devel-
in Very High Fire Hazard Severity  opment in areas subject to flood damage or geological hazard due to their location
Zones
Action 25.M                        and/or design. Development should be prohibited in areas where emergency ser-
Flood Control Ordinance            vices, including fire protection, cannot be provided.
                                   Policy 25.02
Action 1.A                         Zoning and Development Regulations. Use zoning and other land use and devel-
Zoning Ordinance
                                   opment controls to regulate development in hazardous areas. Such restrictions
Action 25.A
Hazards Maps                       should be determined based on the potential degree of hazard involved and the
                                   potential public costs that would be incurred in the event of an emergency.
                                   Policy 25.03
Action 25.A                        Development Review. Require appropriate studies as part of the development
Hazards Maps
                                   review process to assess potential hazards and assure that impacts are adequately
Action 25.B
Building Codes                     mitigated.
Action 25.G
Fire Safety Plan Checks
                                   Policy 25.04
Action 25.B                        “Acceptable Risk.” Enact development controls to ensure “an acceptable level of
Building Codes
                                   risk” in those areas where life and property are subject to seismic, geologic, and
                                   flooding hazards. “Acceptable risk” in this instance describes the level of risk that
                                   the majority of citizens will accept without expecting governmental action to pro-
                                   vide protection. This definition considers acceptable risk only from the point of
                                   view of the public agency; individual concepts of acceptable risk may vary widely.
                                   Levels of acceptable risk and damage related to kind of facility and occupancy are
                                   presented in Figure 8-1.
8-10                              Gilroy General Plan                                                       Revised February 2017

                                                                                           Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Figure 8-1. Levels of Acceptable Risk and Damage Related to Kind of Facility and Occupancy
Level of               Kinds of Structure                                                                Acceptable Damage
Acceptable Risk
Near Zero              Highly Critical Structures and Occupancies                                        None of which would expose large population to
                       Structures whose continued functioning is critical, or whose failure might        death or serious injury or impair the safety of
                       be catastrophic: large dams, power/energy systems, plants with explosive,         the facility or disrupt its function.
                       toxic or highly flammable materials.
                       Examples: Anderson Reservoir Dam, electric transmission lines, natural gas
                       transmission lines.
Extremely Low            Structures Critically Needed After Disaster                                     Minor non-structural; facility should remain
                         Structures the use of which is critically needed after a disaster:              operational and/or be susceptible to quick
                         important utility centers; hospitals; fire, police, and emergency               restoration or service.
                         communication facilities; critical transportation facilities, such as bridges
                         and overpasses; and smaller dams.
                         Examples: South Valley Hospital, fire stations, City Hall, Uvas Reservoir
                         Dam, Highways 101 and 152, major railroad crossings, electrical
                         substations, etc.
Low                    High Occupancy Structures                                                         No structural damage which would materially
                       Structures of high occupancy, or whose use after a disaster would be              impair safety; strutures should remain usable;
                       particularly convenient: schools, churches, theaters, large hotels, and other     some impairment of function acceptable.
                       high-rise buildings housing large numbers of people, other places
                       normally attracting large concentrations of people, civic buildings,
                       secondary utility structures, extremely large commercial enterprises, most
                       roads, alternative or non-critical bridges and overpasses.
Ordinary                 Ordinary Risk Tolerance                                                         Buildings should be able to:
                         The vast majority of structures in urban areas, including most                  a) resist minor earthquakes without damage;
                         commercial, industrial and residential buildings that don’t fall into one       b) resist moderate earthquakes without struc-
                         of the preceding categories.                                                        tural damage, but with non-structural dam-
                                                                                                             age;
                                                                                                         c) resist major earthquakes, of the intensity and
                                                                                                             severity of the strongest experienced in Cali-
                                                                                                             fornia, without collapse, but with some struc-
                                                                                                             tural as well as non-structural damage.
Moderate to High       Moderate to High Risk Tolerance                                                   Structures for human occupancy should meet
                       Open space uses, such as farms, ranches, and parks without high                   the damage criteria specified for the “ordinary”
                       occupancy structures; warehouses with low intensity employment storing            risk class, except where occupancy is high,
                       non-hazardous materials.                                                          which case the “low” risk criteria apply.
Revised February 2017                                                                          Gilroy General Plan                                  8-11

Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                                Seismic
                                Policy 25.05
                                Definition of Active Faults. Consider all faults in the area to be active faults,
                                unless and until evidence to the contrary is developed through field investigation.
                                Policy 25.06
Action 25.A                     Seismic Hazards Map. Use the Seismic Hazards Map to identify areas of poten-
Hazards Maps
                                tial seismic risk. Update the map and related data as necessary to reflect the most
                                recent and accurate geologic data, in accordance with the State of California’s
                                Seismic Hazards Mapping Act.
                                Policy 25.07
Action 25.A                     Development in Seismic Risk Areas. Allow only low intensity, low occupancy
Hazards Maps
Action 25.B
                                development in areas subject to high seismic risk.
Building Codes
                                Policy 25.08
Action 25.B                     Structural Standards. Assure that structures for human occupancy are designed
Building Codes
                                and constructed to retain their structural integrity when subjected to seismic
Action 25.C
Building Inspection             activity in accordance with the Uniform Building Code of the State of California.
                                Policy 25.09
Action 25.E                     Site Investigation and Mitigation. Ensure proper site investigation and appro-
Soils Reports
                                priate mitigation for development proposals in areas of unconsolidated fill, in
                                former streambeds, and in areas subject to seasonal high groundwater tables. Site
                                and building design and engineering must minimize potential damage to an “ac-
                                ceptable level of risk” from hazards posed by liquefaction, differential settlement,
                                and severe ground shaking.
                                Policy 25.10
ongoing implementation by City  Roads, Bridges, and Utility Lines. Ensure that the design and engineering of
and other agency staff
                                new roads, bridges and utility lines (public and private) that cross active or poten-
                                tially active fault traces, streams, or other areas of high seismic risk respond to the
                                potential hazards posed by movement or ground failure along these corridors.
                                Equip water, gas, and electric lines with shut-off devices which utilize the best
                                technology for quick shut-off consistent with providing reliable service. Also, en-
                                sure that new water storage tanks are constructed and anchored to prevent toppling
                                and displacement during periods of strong seismic activity.
8-12                           Gilroy General Plan                                                      Revised February 2017

                                                                  Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Soils and Geology
Policy 25.11
Slope Restrictions. Restrict development on steep slopes and on slopes suscep-           Action 25.E
                                                                                         Soils Reports
tible to landslides and soil creep. Slopes of 10 to 30 percent may be suitable for
                                                                                         Action 25.F
low intensity, low density development, subject to site-specific review and ap-          Erosion and Deposition Control
proval. Slopes greater than 30 percent, areas of high landslide risk, and areas with
highly expansive soils on slopes greater than 10 percent are not suitable for devel-
opment and will remain open space.
Fire
Policy 25.12
Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone. Restrict development in the Very High               Action 25.H
                                                                                         Ordinance Regulating Development
Fire Hazard Severity Zone (or “Mutual Threat Zone”) as designated by the South           in Very High Fire Hazard Severity
Santa Clara County Fire Protection District and illustrated in Figure 8-2.               Zones
Figure 8-2. Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone, or “Mutual Threat Zone”
Revised February 2017                                                Gilroy General Plan                            8-13

Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                                  Policy 25.13
Action 25.G
                                  Fire Prevention and Hazard Reduction. Ensure that new and existing construc-
Fire Safety Plan Checks           tion complies with applicable State and local codes, ordinances and regulations
Action 25.I                       regarding fire and life safety.
Fire and Life Safety Inspections
Action 25.J
Fire Hazard Abatement             Policy 25.14
Action 25.G                       Roofing Requirements. Require “Class A” roofs on all new construction or re-
Fire Safety Plan Checks
Action 25.I
                                  roofing in the area west of Santa Teresa Boulevard, south of Mantelli Drive, and
Fire and Life Safety Inspections  west of Rancho Hills Drive. In all other areas, “Class C” roofs shall be required for
                                  new construction and re-roofing.
                                  Policy 25.15
Action 19.C                       Water Flows for Fire Suppression. Ensure adequate water flows in all areas of
Water Master Plan
                                  urban development to provide the level of fire suppression necessary for the types
                                  of structures and occupancies anticipated. Limit new development to areas where
                                  adequate flows for fire suppression are provided, and require improvement mea-
                                  sures in existing subdivided areas to where flows are insufficient.
                                  Policy 25.16
Action 25.G                       Hillside Areas. Require developments in hillside areas to comply with the fire
Fire Safety Plan Checks
                                  hazard policies of the Hillside Development Guidelines and the criteria set forth
Action 1.B
Hillside Development Guidelines   on the “Plan Checklist for Hillside Construction” of the Gilroy Fire Department.
                                  Flooding
                                  Policy 25.17
Ongoing implementation by City    Flood Control Coordination. Work closely with the Santa Clara Valley Water
staff
                                  District to alleviate flooding and drainage problems in the Planning Area, ensuring
                                  that new flood control measures are designed and implemented in accordance “Best
                                  Management Practices (BMPs) and in keeping with the goals and policies of the
                                  General Plan.
                                  Policy 25.18
Action 25.M                       Development Restrictions in Flood Areas. Restrict urban development and ex-
Flood Control Ordinance
                                  pansion in areas prone to flooding (as indicated on the Flood Hazards Map) or on
                                  properties where drainage problems or saturated soil conditions create flood haz-
                                  ards. Allow development in such areas only if measures are enacted to reduce these
                                  hazards to an acceptable level of risk.
8-14                             Gilroy General Plan                                                   Revised February 2017

                                                                   Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Policy 25.19
Floodway Use. Discourage the construction of expensive flood prevention facili-           Land Use Plan Map
ties by leaving high-risk floodways in agricultural and recreational uses.                Action 25.M
                                                                                          Flood Control Ordinance
Policy 25.20
Flood Control Costs and Impacts. Minimize the long-term public costs of flood             Action 25.M
                                                                                          Flood Control Ordinance
control improvements and mitigate potential adverse environmental impacts. Also
ensure that measures to reduce flood damage to individual properties do not in-
crease erosion and/or flood hazards on other properties.
Policy 25.21
Multiple Use of Flood Control Projects. Design flood control measures and drain-          Implemented on a project-specific
                                                                                          basis by City staff
age channel improvements as part of an overall community improvement pro-
gram with provision for multiple use, including recreational open space, trails,
bikeways, groundwater recharge, protection and restoration of riparian vegetation
and wildlife habitats, and enhancement of scenic qualities.
Policy 25.22
Drainage Channel Design. Design new drainage channels with gently sloping                 Implemented on a project-specific
                                                                                          basis by City staff
and curving banks to maximize safety, ease of maintenance, and natural appear-
ance. To the greatest extent feasible, use riparian vegetation to stabilize the banks
and to landscape the channels in a manner that is natural in character and easy to
maintain, creating a scenic asset for the enjoyment of City residents.
Policy 25.23
Green Areas and Permeable Surfaces for Runoff Reduction and Absorption.                   Action 25.M
                                                                                          Flood Control Ordinance
Require new development to include green areas for reducing runoff and increas-
ing runoff absorption capacities. Similarly, encourage the removal of pavement
that is not directly serve traffic parking needs; maintain unpaved parkways be-
tween sidewalks and streets; encourage the use of permeable paving materials; and
require the use of landscaped strips and islands to break-up large paved areas.
Policy 25.24
Flood Control Issues in Hillside Areas. Require new developments in hillside              Action 25.M
                                                                                          Flood Control Ordinance
areas to retain and protect areas of native vegetation to help reduce erosion and         Action 1.B
slow the speed of rainfall runoff, thereby retaining the hillside areas’ natural flood    Hillside Development Guidelines
control characteristics. Ensure that retention and protection of vegetated areas is
also in keeping with fire hazard management goals.
Revised February 2017                                                 Gilroy General Plan                             8-15

      Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                                  26         Noise
                                 GOAL: Protection of Gilroy residents from exposure to excessive noise and its effects through
                                 appropriate mitigation measures and responsive land use planning, especially in regard to
                                 noise-sensitive land uses such as schools, hospitals, and housing for seniors.
                                 Policy 26.01
 Action 26.B                     Noise and Land Use. Establish a physical development pattern that is
 ZoningOrdinance NoiseStandards  compatible with the noise environment of Gilroy, ensuring that residential
                                 neighborhoods and park areas are the quietest areas in the community.
                                 Policy 26.02
 Action 26.A                     Maximum Permissible Noise Levels. Ensure that outdoor and indoor noise
 Noise Ordinance                 levels are within the maximum permitted levels (see Figure 8-3). Prohibit
                                 further development in areas where noise levels currently exceed these
                                 standards or where such development will cause levels to exceed the permitted
                                 maximum.
                                 Policy 26.03
Action 26.C                      Buffering Standards. Enforce stringent buffering standards to protect
UseofNoiseStandards              residents from freeway, expressway, highway, and industrial noise. Use open
                                 land as a buffer between residential areas and highways or industrial areas
                                 wherever possible.
                                 Policy 26.04
Action 26.B                      Acoustical Design. Consider the acoustical design of projects in the
Zoning Ordinance Noise           development review process to reduce noise to an acceptable level. Ensure that
Standards
Action 26.D                      noise mitigation features are designed and implemented in an aesthetically
State Noise Insulation Standards pleasing and consistent manner.
                                 Policy 26.05
                                 Earth Berms. Require landscaped earth berms as an alternative to soundwalls
Action 26.C
Noise Ordinance
                                 where feasible to buffer noise along major thoroughfares adjacent to residential
                                 areas. Where an earth berm is not feasible, a masonry wall screened with
                                 drought tolerant, low maintenance landscaping that is sensitive to the natural
                                 and man-made environment should be explored.
                                 Policy 26.06
Ongoing implementation by City
staff                            Interagency Coordination. Coordinate with other agencies in the region in
                                 noise abatement measures.
        8-16                      Gilroy General Plan                                                           Revised February 2017
                                                                                                           Community Resources and Potential Hazards
1 The outdoor sound levels for residential properties shall be held to 60-dBA, or a maximum of 70 dBA ifd ALL of the following
findings can be made:
              That potential noise levels, exceeding the 60 dBA standard, are generally limited to less than 10% of the entire
               project site;
              That reasonably accepted sound attention measures have been incorporated into the project design;
              That potential noise levels are part of the developer’s disclosure to future residents;
              That interior noise limits established by the General Plan are strictly maintained; and
              Potential noise levels will not jeopardize the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
       Nevertheless, a 60-dBA outdoor noise threshold shall be maintained for active living/recreation areas FOR ALL
       DWELLINGS, rather than all yards surrounding an entire dwelling. All residents should be afforded a private outdoor
       living/recreation area [i.e.; rear yard space, courtyard, patio, terrace, deck, extended porch, veranda, etc.].
2 The indoor standards for industrial land uses have been set by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. The
maximum level to be exceeded no more than 10 percent of the time (L10) is 65 dBA while the maximum level to be exceeded
no more than 50 percent of the time (L50) is 60 dBA.
Policy 26.07
Public Input. Provide opportunities for public input on noise issues and
                                                                                                                                     Ongoing implementation by City staff
publicize the existence of avenues by which citizen noise problems can be
measured and mitigated.
   27              Hazardous Materials
GOAL: Minimal risks associated with the use and handling of hazardous materials and
wastes, ensuring compliance with local, state and federal regulations.
Policy 27.01
Hazardous Materials Inspections and Monitoring. Continue to provide                                                                    Action 27.B
                                                                                                                                       Hazardous Materials
inspections and monitoring to ensure compliance with local, state, and federal                                                         Storage Ordinance
regulations and to reduce the risks associated with the use and handling of
hazardous materials and wastes.
Policy 27.02
Hazardous Waste Reduction. Minimize the potential hazards posed by the                                                                 Action 27.A
storage and transport of hazardous materials and waste by encouraging source                                                           Hazardous Materials Joint Powers
                                                                                                                                       Pretreatment Program
reduction, waste minimization, and on-site pretreatment.
Revised February 2017                                                                                            Gilroy General Plan                        8-17

Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                                  Policy 27.03
Action 27.A
                                  Hazardous Materials Transport. Work with the California Department of Trans-
Hazardous Materials Joint Powers  portation, California Highway Patrol, and other South County jurisdictions to
Pretreatment Program
                                  monitor the transportation of hazardous materials and wastes, ensuring notifica-
Action 27.C
Household Hazardous Waste         tion of the City in the event of a leak or spill.
Element
                                  Policy 27.04
Action 27.B                       Potential Hazardous Soils Conditions. Evaluate new development on sites that
Hazardous Materials Storage
                                  may have involved hazardous materials, to ensure there is no public health danger
Ordinance
                                  prior to granting development approvals.
                                  Policy 27.05
Action 27.E                       Hazardous Materials Public Education. Work with other South County jurisdic-
Hazardous Waste Education
Program
                                  tions and local groups (e.g., Chamber of Commerce, Rotary, etc.) to coordinate
                                  and implement public education programs regarding hazardous materials and waste
                                  management.
8-18                             Gilroy General Plan                                                Revised February 2017
                                                                   Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Implementing Actions
20       Open Space and Habitat Areas
Action 20.A
Open Space Review Process. Subject all development proposals in open space
areas to an environmental review process to determine if the proposed develop-
ment is compatible with identified natural processes. Do not approve develop-
ment if it is found to be incompatible with such processes, unless adequate mitiga-
tion measures are taken.
Action 20.B
Habitat and Urban Streams/Creek Protection. Require development along creeks
to be set back from the entire floodway of the creek. Require development along
Uvas Creek and the main branch of Llagas Creek to be set back either the entire
area of the floodway or 250 feet on either side of the creek centerline, whichever is
greater. (Note: This action could also use a buffer identified as 50 to 100 feet from
the top of the bank or edge of the riparian corridor, stretching outward, whichever
is greater. Alternatively, setbacks for individual developments can be established
through conditions developed during the regulatory permitting process with the
trustee or resource agencies. Development of the buffer policy shall also create an
exception or variance process for those situations where strict imposition of the
standard would be reasonably infeasible.)
Require development along tributary creeks to be set back from the entire desig-
nated floodway of the creek. Setbacks required should allow adequate room for
trails and access on both sides of the creek. The Santa Clara Valley Water District
shall be consulted regarding the determination of creek setbacks and buffers to
ensure that they will accommodate the restoration of riparian habitat, trails, flood
control access, and the protection of riparian habitat. Determination of actual lay-
out and size of these creekside linear parks is recommended for further study, which
could be addressed in the City’s Parks and Recreation Master Plan.
Setback land could be dedicated to the City by the subdivider/developer or the
City could purchase an easement over the setback area.
Revised February 2017                                                 Gilroy General Plan               8-19

Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                       In addition, the City shall continue to work with Santa Clara County and the
                       Santa Clara Valley Water District to enhance the Uvas Creek riparian corridor for
                       fish and wildlife, including the removal of arundo, or giant reed, and other invasive
                       exotics and replacement with native riparian species and enhancement efforts to
                       help protect and recover native steelhead populations. Similar protections will be
                       extended to cover Llagas Creek and the tributaries of both Uvas and Llagas Creeks.
                       Action 20.C
                       Habitat Protection Ordinance. Comply with State and Federal laws regarding
                       habitat protection to identify and protect areas of biological value, including creeks,
                       native grasslands, oak woodlands, and native riparian communities. The ordinance
                       should include setback requirements, guidelines for impact avoidance and mitiga-
                       tion, standards for compensation of habitat loss (as established by a qualified
                       biologist), and requirements for monitoring and habitat enhancement plans. The
                       ordinance should also strive to eliminate exotic, invasive pest plants in new projects,
                       where feasible and practical, and should promote the use of native plants and non-
                       invasive exotics in landscape plans for new development. The City should also
                       review and revise its Street Tree Ordinance and Landscape Policy to include specific
                       lists and landscape guidelines emphasizing native species for use in special habitat
                       areas (i.e., riparian corridors and hillside areas).
                       Proposed projects, including City-initiated projects, that may affect jurisdictional
                       wetlands should be required to complete appropriate wetland delineation studies.
                       Future development should avoid substantial adverse impacts on emergent wet-
                       land habitats. Unavoidable impacts to these habitats should be mitigated at a 3:1
                       ratio or as determined in consultation with the appropriate resource agencies. Any
                       developments along Uvas and Llagas Creeks should include an appropriate setback
                       or buffer from the top of the creek bank and planting of native riparian species
                       within disturbed or non-native areas of this buffer. In addition, project-specific
                       biological surveys should be undertaken along natural tributaries to Uvas and Llagas
                       Creeks to determine if setbacks or buffers are warranted for projects along other
                       natural creeks.
                       Action 20.D
                       Consultation on Fish and Wildlife Impacts. Continue to notify and consult with
                       the California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG), the Army Corps of Engi-
                       neers, National Marine Fisheries Service, and the US Fish and Wildlife Service
                       (USFWS) for developments that may impact listed species that are known to or
8-20                  Gilroy General Plan                                                     Revised February 2017
                                                                     Community Resources and Potential Hazards
may potentially occur within the Gilroy Planning Area, including special status
plant and wildlife species regulated by CDFG. Standardized or general mitigation
measures for specific special status species can be accessed through the appropriate
agencies. Prior to construction of a project in areas where special status species may
be impacted, the appropriate jurisdiction shall require preparation of a biological
assessment to determine the presence or absence of any special status plant or wild-
life species. If special status species are known to occur or have the potential to
occur, appropriate resource agency contacts shall be made and mitigation devel-
oped in consultation with a qualified biologist and the resource agencies. If initial
biological assessments for a proposed project determine the presence or potential
presence of a state or federally listed species on the site, the project applicant shall
consult with the CDFG or USFWS, respectively, for guidance on whether or not
the project can avoid impacts to the species. The project shall avoid impacts through
re-design wherever possible. If impacts cannot be avoided, the project shall incor-
porate mitigation to reduce impacts to the extent possible based on consultation
with a qualified biologist and the resource agencies.
Action 20.E
Greenbelt Definition and Protection. Work with the other South County com-
munities and Santa Clara County to define a greenbelt of open spaces and agricul-
tural areas separating Gilroy from adjoining communities. Ensure that this greenbelt
area is protected from urban development through the policies of the South County
Joint Area Plan and the general plans of each planning entity. Work with the South
County Joint Planning Advisory Committee to define allowed land uses for the
greenbelt area.
Action 20.F
Gilroy-San Martin Greenbelt. If a greenbelt cannot be defined in the area north
of Masten and Fitzgerald Roads to separate the projected build-out area of Gilroy
from the community of San Martin, amend the Gilroy General Plan Land Use
Map to provide such a greenbelt in the area just south of Masten and Fitzgerald
Roads.
Action 20.G
Open Space Access. Use the Tentative Map process and/or other regulatory mecha-
nisms to require dedications, easements, or other measures to ensure public access
to open space areas of recreational value.
Revised February 2017                                                   Gilroy General Plan               8-21
Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                       Action 20.H
                       Open Space Management. Examine and improve management practices for the
                       City’s natural habitat and open space areas. For open space areas in public owner-
                       ship, clearly delineate areas that are appropriate for public use and access, differen-
                       tiating them from those areas to be protected from human disturbance. Where
                       appropriate, provide compatible support facilities for activities such as hiking and
                       picnicking while ensuring public safety and protection of adjacent private property.
                       Action 20.I
                       Open Space Preservation Tools. Review the potential regulatory tools, incentive
                       programs, and funding mechanisms available for preserving open space areas, and
                       develop a package of tools for use by City staff and officials in achieving the open
                       space goals and policies of the General Plan.
                       Action 20.J
                       Santa Clara County Open Space District. Pursue joining the Santa Clara County
                       Open Space District to preserve open space resources in and around the Gilroy
                       Planning Area.
                       21       Air Quality
                       Action 21.A
                       Air Quality Mitigation. As part of the environmental review process, evaluate
                       projects in response to City policies regarding air quality, identifying appropriate
                       mitigation measures to reduce air pollutant emissions. Examples of on-site mitiga-
                       tion are provision of bicycle and pedestrian amenities, or development of on-site
                       day care and commercial facilities. Examples of off-site mitigation include creation
                       of park-and-ride lots; construction of transit or pedestrian amenities; or monetary
                       support of transit.
                       Action 21.B
                       Evaluation and Mitigation of Impacts for Sensitive Receptors. Projects that are
                       proposed within one mile of sensitive receptors with the potential to generate odors
                       or toxic pollutants should be required to conduct an odor or health risk assessment
                       to evaluate the project’s compatibility with the sensitive receptor. A sufficient buffer
                       zone shall be provided when necessary.
8-22                  Gilroy General Plan                                                     Revised February 2017

                                                                     Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Action 21.C
Emission Reductions for Construction-Related Equipment. Require appropri-
ate mitigation measures as a condition of project approval to ensure that the ex-
haust emissions from constrution-related equipment are significantly reduced.
Measures that may be required include:
 (a) Limiting the idling time of all construction equipment to less than 5 min-
       utes;
 (b) Limiting the hours of operation of heavy duty equipment and/or the amount
       of equipment in use;
 (c) Requiring all equipment to be properly tuned and maintained in accordance
       with manufacturer specifications;
 (d) Requiring alternative fuel or electric construction equipment at the project
       site, when feasible;
 (e) Using the minimum practical engine size for construction equipment;
 (f ) Requiring that gasoline-powered equipment be fitted with catalytic convert-
       ers, when feasible.
Action 21.D
Implementing the Clean Air Plan. In accordance with the recommendations of
the Bay Area Air Quality Management District in the 2000 Clean Air Plan, con-
sider implementing the following programs:
 (a) Construct demonstration projects for low emissions and alternative fuel ve-
       hicles (including incorporating low-emission vehicle refueling infrastructure
       in projects).
 (b) Reduce lawn and garden equipment emissions.
 (c) Recognize and promote Spare the Air Days.
Other measures identified in the Clean Air Plan are addressed in Actions 12.J, 13.D,
14.K, and 21.B.
22        Water Quality
Action 22.A
Comprehensive Groundwater Management Program. Develop a comprehen-
sive program to track existing water quality, supply, and flow in cooperation with
the agencies and organizations that share jurisdiction over the Llagas subbasin ground-
water resources, including: the two Regional Water Quality Control Boards; the
Revised February 2017                                                    Gilroy General Plan              8-23
Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                       two Water Districts; County Health Department; County Executive’s Office;
                       County Planning Office; Morgan Hill Planning Department; and the San Martin
                       Planning Committee. Include a review of land uses that may contribute to the
                       degradation of groundwater quality and the potential impacts of septic systems.
                       Action 22.B
                       Water Quality Ordinances, Standards, and Enforcement Procedures. Work
                       with the Regional Water Quality Control Boards, City of Morgan Hill, County
                       and other local agencies to ensure compatible water quality ordinances, standards,
                       and enforcement procedures amongst all the South County jurisdictions so that
                       there is no advantage for a company to locate in an area with lower standards.
                       Action 22.C
                       Water Quality Monitoring Program. Continue to monitor groundwater and
                       surface water quality to ensure that standards are being maintained and to deter-
                       mine if changes in regulations regarding septic systems and land use are needed.
                       Include monitoring of private wells, expanding the scope to include more wells,
                       tests on constituents not yet tested in private wells (i.e., volatile organics, bacterio-
                       logical, radiological, etc.), and periodic retesting of selected private wells.
                       Action 22.D
                       Abandoned and Unused Wells Program. Identify and seal abandoned or unused
                       wells to keep them from transferring contaminants to the lower aquifer.
                       23       Natural Resource Conservation
                       Action 23.A
                       Water Reclamation Program. Continue to recycle treated wastewater from the
                       South County Regional Wastewater Authority treatment facility, in accordance
                       with state and federal standards, for use in landscape irrigation. Work with land
                       owners and developers with significant irrigation needs to provide facilities using
                       reclaimed water.
                       Action 23.B
                       Water Conservation Education Program. Work with the Santa Clara Valley Water
                       District and other agencies to educate residents on water conservation techniques
                       and the value of water conservation measures.
8-24                  Gilroy General Plan                                                       Revised February 2017

                                                                  Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Action 23.C
Energy Efficiency Standards. Require that all new buildings and additions in the
City be in compliance with the energy efficiency standards of the California Build-
ing Standards Code (Title 24, California Code of Regulations).
Action 23.D
Energy Conservation Information. Provide public information on energy con-
servation measures for residential, business, and industrial energy consumers and
support energy conservation efforts whenever feasible and appropriate.
Action 23.E
Alternative Energy Ordinance. Enact an Alternative Energy Ordinance to en-
courage the use of energy-efficient designs and alternative energy sources (solar,
wind, etc.) in new development, including the provision of setbacks for optimal
solar access and orientation.
Action 23.F
Mineral Resource Area Designations. Maintain the areas along Uvas Creek that
include mineral resources as open space or as a compatible use in the appropriate
zoning classification (Open Space, Public Facility, or Agriculture). Maintain the
lands contiguous to designated mineral resources as buffer lands with appropriate
land use designations until such time as the mineral resource designation is termi-
nated.
Action 23.G
Mineral Resource Mining Operations. Adopt a reclamation plan and reclama-
tion ordinance to ensure that adverse environmental effects are prevented or mini-
mized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition that is readily
adaptable for alternative land uses. Require mining operators to secure a special use
permit in accordance with the reclamation plan. This permit will specify condi-
tions to be met during the mining operation to ensure that the mining operation
will not create a nuisance, hazard or environmental damage.
Action 23.H
Mineral Resource Status Termination. Apply for termination of the designated
status of mineral resources when protection of such resources is no longer neces-
sary.
Revised February 2017                                                Gilroy General Plan               8-25
Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                       24       Waste Management and Recycling
                       Action 24.A
                       Source Reduction and Recycling Element. Continue implementation of the City’s
                       Source Reduction and Recycling Element to achieve the state-mandated 50 per-
                       cent reduction (based on 1990 volumes) in the City’s waste stream by the year
                       2000.
                       Action 24.B
                       Landfill Siting Process. Work with South Valley Disposal and Recycling to iden-
                       tify and contract with another landfill site when the current Pacheco Pass landfill
                       reaches capacity, providing a medium- to long-term solution for Gilroy’s future
                       waste disposal needs. Potential sites to consider include the Kirby Canyon and
                       Guadalupe landfill facilities.
                       25       Natural Hazards
                       Action 25.A
                       Hazards Maps. Maintain detailed hazard maps for use in development review,
                       ensuring that such maps and related data represent the most up-to-date informa-
                       tion and latest version available, in accordance with the State of California’s Seis-
                       mic Hazards Mapping Act.
                       Action 25.B
                       Building Codes. Regularly update the City’s building codes and other essential
                       codes as necessary to address earthquake, fire, and other hazards.
                       Action 25.C
                       Building Inspection. Continue building inspection programs to identify, abate,
                       or mitigate existing hazardous structures.
                       Action 25.D
                       Unreinforced Masonry (URM) Buildings. Implement actions to address safety
                       issues related to Unreinforced Masonry Buildings.
8-26                  Gilroy General Plan                                                  Revised February 2017

                                                                   Community Resources and Potential Hazards
Action 25.E
Soils Reports. Require soils reports for all new development applications in the
Gilroy Planning Area to assess potential geologic hazards and to determine if these
hazards can be adequately mitigated.
Action 25.F
Erosion and Deposition Control. Require all new developments to submit a site
plan detailing appropriate methods of erosion and deposition control during site
development and subsequent use.
Action 25.G
Fire Safety Plan Checks. Provide plan checks for new construction, remodels,
tenant improvements and demolitions to ensure compliance with applicable life
safety and fire protection system requirements, including special requirements for
fire safety in areas of hillside construction.
Action 25.H
Ordinance Regulating Development in Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones.
Adopt an ordinance, pursuant to the State Health and Safety Code, amending the
latest adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code and Fire Codes to regulate
hazardous fire conditions in the Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone (as desig-
nated in Policy 25.12).
Action 25.I
Fire and Life Safety Inspections. Continue to provide annual site and building
inspections of places of assembly and hazardous industries to ensure compliance
with applicable State and local codes, ordinances and regulations pertaining to fire
and life and safety. Provide similar inspections in response to complaints regarding
life safety and fire hazards, and take appropriate action to mitigate identified haz-
ards.
Action 25.J
Fire Hazard Abatement. Enforce prompt abatement of identified fire hazards.
Action 25.K
Fire Safety Education and Training. Continue to provide instruction and train-
ing on fire safety and prevention to raise public awareness on fire hazard issues and
encourage preventive measures.
Revised February 2017                                                 Gilroy General Plan               8-27
Community Resources and Potential Hazards
                       Action 25.L
                       Weed Abatement Ordinance. Continue to enforce the City’s Weed Abatement
                       Ordinance to help reduce fire hazards.
                       Action 25.M
                       Flood Control Ordinance. Update and maintain the City’s Flood Control Ordi-
                       nance to regulate construction within flood zones.
                       Action 25.N
                       Public Information. Provide information through the City’s quarterly newsletter
                       and through Channel 17 to educate the public on potential natural hazards and
                       actions they can take to help minimize those hazards.
                       26       Noise
                       Action 26.A
                       Noise Ordinance. Adopt a noise ordinance to regulate noise-generating activities
                       in the City.
                       Action 26.B
                       Zoning Ordinance Nosie Standards. Revise the City’s Zoning Ordinance to in-
                       corporate noise/land use compatibility standards as a basic requirement of new
                       development, and to prohibit new noise-sensitive uses in areas where the noise level
                       exceeds the relevant standard and cannot be adequately mitigated.
                       Action 26.C
                       Use of Noise Standards. Review development proposals to assure consistency
                       with noise standards, using the Future Noise Contours map to determine if addi-
                       tional noise studies are needed for proposed development.
                       Action 26.D
                       State Noise Insulation Standards. Use the adopted Noise Element as a guideline
                       for compliance with the State’s noise insulation standards (Chapter 2-35, Part 2,
                       Title 24, California Administrative Code).
8-28                  Gilroy General Plan                                                 Revised February 2017

                                                                  Community Resources and Potential Hazards
27       Hazardous Materials
Action 27.A
Hazardous Materials Joint Powers Pretreatment Program. Continue to imple-
ment the Joint Powers Pretreatment Program for industrial and commercial haz-
ardous material users and/or hazardous waste generators, coordinated as appropri-
ate with Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) inspections, Hazardous Mate-
rials Storage Ordinance (HMSO) regulations, and implementation of applicable
state laws.
Action 27.B
Hazardous Materials Storage Ordinance (HMSO). Continue to regularly in-
spect activities that store and/or use hazardous materials, including above-ground
and underground storage tanks and related equipment, to ensure compliance with
the City’s Hazardous Materials Storage Ordinance.
Action 27.C
Household Hazardous Waste Element. Continue implementation of the City’s
Household Hazardous Waste Element to collect and properly dispose of house-
hold hazard wastes.
Action 27.D
Household Hazardous Waste Collection Facility. Support efforts to construct a
hazardous waste facility near the San Martin Airport to serve as a collection point
and transfer facility for hazardous wastes from households, small businesses, and
government agencies.
Action 27.E
Hazardous Waste Education Program. Provide information in the City’s quar-
terly newsletter, on Channel 17, and through other venues to educate the public
Revised February 2017                                                Gilroy General Plan               8-29


[BLANK PAGE
GENERAL PLAN
   2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
      POLICY DOCUMENT AND BACKGROUND REPORT
                  ADOPTED DECEMBER 1, 2014
This page is intentionally left blank
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
             POLICY DOCUMENT
              Adopted December 1, 2014
                              Prepared by:
                            Mintier Harnish
This page is intentionally left blank
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                      OUSING ELEMENT
The Housing Element outlines the City of Gilroy’s goals, policies, and implementation programs for
the preservation, conservation, improvement, and production of housing for the 2015-2023
planning period. The Housing Element identifies the specific actions the City will take to address
existing and future housing needs.
A.       Housing Goals and Policies
HOUSING PRODUCTION
                  HOUSING PRODUCTION
 GOAL H-1         Provide adequate residential sites to accommodate projected housing needs and
                  encourage the production of a variety of housing types.
Policies
Policy H-1.1     The City shall strive to ensure adequate land is available at a range of densities to
                 meet Gilroy’s existing and projected housing needs.
Policy H-1.2     The City shall encourage the provision of a variety of housing options for Gilroy
                 residents.
Policy Document                                                                                  Page H-1
Adopted December 1, 2014

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy H-1.3     The City shall encourage a mix of housing in new development areas to avoid the
                 overconcentration of specific housing types in some areas of the city.
Policy H-1.4     The City shall support the development of workforce housing to enable the
                 manufacturing workforce to live in the community.
Policy H-1.5     The City shall encourage the development of executive housing to encourage
                 entrepreneurs to locate in Gilroy.
Policy H-1.6     The City shall continue to implement the Downtown Specific Plan and encourage
                 and coordinate activities with the Downtown Business Association and Economic
                 Development Corporation to encourage mixed-use development.
Implementation Programs
H-1.A. Publicize Residential Sites Inventory
The City shall make the residential sites inventory available to developers by publicizing it on the
City website and providing copies of the sites to developers. The City shall update the list of sites
annually, or as projects are approved on the sites.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsbile: Community Development
         Timeframe: Post on website within 6 months of adoption; update annually, or as needed
H-1.B. Residential Development Ordinance
The City shall review and revise, as appropriate, the Residential Development Ordinance to ensure
that it does not pose a constraint on the maintenance, improvement and development of housing;
and provides capacity to meet the City’s RHNA need. Furthermore, the City will encourage the
development of housing that is affordable to a variety of income groups through the Residential
Development Ordinance by comparing its features with the Neighborhood District Ordinance and
making any changes to ensure the two policies are compatible.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Review of RDO following adoption of the New General Plan (estimated FY
         2015/16)
H-1.C. Variety of Housing in Neighborhood Districts
The City shall review and revise, as appropriate, the Neighborhood District Policy to ensure that it
encourages the development of housing that is affordable to a variety of income groups by
comparing its features with the Residential Development Ordinance and making any changes to
ensure the two policies are compatible and designed to reach the same goals.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Review of Neighborhood District Policy in conjunction with the New General
         Plan preparation (estimated FY 2015/16)
Page H-2                                                                                Policy Document
                                                                            Adopted December 1, 2014

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
H-1.D. Facilitate Infill Development
The City shall coordinate efforts with private and non-profit developers, and other housing related
groups to encourage the construction of residential development through a menu of regulatory
incentives (e.g., streamlined reviewand other methods that will effectively encourage infill
development). The City shall monitor infill development on a biannual basis to ensure the
effectiveness of programs to encourage housing development. If, based on its biannual review, the
City finds that additional programs are need to facilitate infill development, the City shall revise
programs as appropriate.
         Potential Funding: General Fund/State funding
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Monitor biennially starting in 2016
H-1.E. Monitor Permit Requirements, Processing Procedures and Land Use Controls
To ensure permit requirements and processing procedures do not constrain residential
development, the City shall evaluate current requirements and procedures on a biannual basis. The
City shall consult builders and other parties engaged in housing development activities to identify
concerns. If permitting requirements, are determined to be a constraint to residential development,
the City shall modify permitting requirements and/or procedures to address constraints, as feasible.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Biennial evaluation starting in 2016 and implement changes as appropriate
H-1.F. Zoning to Encourage and Facilitate Single-Room Occupancy Units
The City shall revise the Zoning Code to establish explicit definitions for and regulatory standards
addressing single-room occupancy units.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Review and Amend Zoning Code (estimated FY 2015/16) following adoption of
         the New General Plan
H-1.G. Study Micro-Units
The City shall conduct a study of the appropriateness of “micro-units” in Gilroy and the existing
barriers in the Zoning Ordinance to the provision of micro-units. Based on the findings of the study,
the City will make a determination of the appropriateness of micro-units in Gilroy and, if determined
appropriate, identify methods for eliminating barriers, and establish appropriate development
standards.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: FY 2017/18
Policy Document                                                                               Page H-3
Adopted December 1, 2014

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
              AFFORDABLE HOUSING
 GOAL H-2     Encourage and support the provision of affordable housing in Gilroy.
Policies
Policy H-2.1 The City shall encourage the provision of new affordable housing.
Policy H-2.2 The City shall provide incentives for affordable housing, including but not limited to
             the density bonus ordinance, expedited project review, and Affordable Housing
             Exemption in the Residential Development Ordinance.
Policy H-2.3 The City shall support homeownership opportunities for low- and moderate-income
             households.
Policy H-2.4 The City shall encourage partnerships between non-profit and for-profit housing
             developers to encourage affordable housing production.
Policy H-2.5 The City shall continue to require 15 percent of new housing in the Neighborhood
             District to be affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
Policy H-2.6 The City shall consider the development of single-room occupancy units, studio
             apartments, and other similar unit types that are affordable to extremely low-
             income residents in higher-density areas of the city.
Policy H-2.7 The City shall continue to participate in programs that assist lower- and moderate-
             income households to secure affordable housing, such as the County’s Mortgage
             Credit Certificate program, Section 8 rental voucher programs, and the Housing
             Trust Fund of Santa Clara County.
Page H-4                                                                             Policy Document
                                                                           Adopted December 1, 2014

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Implementation Programs
H-2.A. Develop Affordable Housing Incentives
The City shall review and revise, as appropriate, current incentives and regulatory concessions
available to developers for the development of affordable housing throughout the city, and
especially within the Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan area and Neighborhood District. Incentives and
regulatory concessions may include, but are not limited to: parking reductions, and reduced
setbacks. The City shall also provide technical assistance, as feasible; information on State and
Federal funding opportunities; and marketing to potential developers.
The City shall continue to monitor development within the City’s Downtown area on a biannual
basis to ensure the implementation of the Specific Plan’s policy on encouraging the development of
a mix of retail, office and higher density residential uses. The City shall encourage the development
of uses within the area to closely follow the recommended land use assumptions contained in the
Specific Plan. If, based on its biannual review, the City finds that the proportion of residential uses to
non-residential uses are not being developed as assumed in the Specific Plan, the City shall
investigate additional incentives, concessions or assistance and revise programs as appropriate.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Review incentives within 1-year of Housing Element adoption; revise, as
         appropriate; Monitor effectiveness of incentives and regulatory concession biennially,
         staring in 2016; Ongoing monitoring of development within Downtown Specific Plan.
H-2.B. Pursue Funding for Affordable Housing
The City shall pursue funding from State, Federal, and regional sources and support applications for
funding to help increase the supply of affordable housing. Funding programs may include but are
not limited to:
      One Bay Area Grants awarded by the Association of Bay Area Governments;
      HCD Local Housing Trust Fund Program;
      HUD Section 811 funding for supportive housing for extremely low-income residents;
      The state Infill Infrastructure Grant program, sponsored by the Department of Housing and
         Community Development (HCD); and
      The State Multifamily Housing Program (MHP), sponsored by HCD.
     Potential Funding: Housing Trust Fund
     Who is Responsible: Community Development
     Timeframe: At least biennially, or as funding opportunities become available
Policy Document                                                                                  Page H-5
Adopted December 1, 2014

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
H-2.C. Community Development Block Grant Program
The City shall continue to administer the Community Development Block Grant Program for all
eligible activities, including acquisition, rehabilitation, home buyer assistance, economic
development, homeless assistance, public services, and public improvements. The City shall
continue to inform non-profit organizations of funding availability through the City’s website and
informational packets at City Hall.
         Potential Funding: CDBG
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Annually
H-2.D. Housing Trust Fund
The City shall continue to administer the City’s Housing Trust Fund for all eligible activities, including
new construction, acquisition, rehabilitation, home buyer assistance, homeless assistance, public
services related to housing, and preservation of affordable housing. The City shall continue to inform
non-profit organizations of funding availability through the City’s website and informational packets
at City Hall.
         Potential Funding: Housing Trust Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Annually
H-2.E. Funding Sources to Assist Homeownership
The City shall pursue potential sources of additional funding for homeownership assistance,
including the availability of State HCD, CalHFA funds, HOME, and County funds. The City shall
improve public outreach activities through the compilation of resources for down payment
assistance, silent second mortgages, and other means of acquiring a home.
         Potential Funding: Housing Trust Fund, State and County financing sources, and MCC
         Certificate Program
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Development of resources for public dissemination by December 2015; ongoing
         review of additional funding sources
H-2.F. Section 8 Referrals
The City shall continue to provide Section 8 referral services and information to City residents. The
City shall make information on the Section 8 voucher program available on the City website.
         Potential Funding: HUD
         Who is Responsible: Community Development/ Housing Authority of Santa Clara County
         Timeframe: Post on website by January 2016; provide referral on an ongoing basis
Page H-6                                                                                 Policy Document
                                                                               Adopted December 1, 2014

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
H-2.G. Development of Housing for Extremely Low-Income Households
The City shall review and incorporate appropriate regulatory incentives, financial incentives, and
other policies that encourage the development of housing units for extremely low-income
households. The City shall encourage and support the development of housing for extremely low-
income households within future affordable housing projects through various strategies and
programs that may include: assistance with entitlement processing; and modifying development
standards and granting concessions and incentives for projects that provide housing for lower
income families.
         Potential Funding: State and Federal Funding for multifamily housing
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Review and amend Zoning Code (estimated FY 2015/16), as appropriate,
         following adoption of the New General Plan
H-2.H. Water and Sewer Service Priority
The City shall review and update every five years, as necessary, the Water and Sewer Service Priority
Policy to ensure future affordable projects will receive service priority.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Review every 5 years, starting December 2015
HOUSING PRESERVATION AND REHABILITIATION
                   HOUSING PRESERVATION AND REHABILITATION
 GOAL H-3          Maintain and conserve the existing housing stock in a sound, safe, and sanitary
                   condition.
Policies
Policy H-3.1     The City shall promote the maintenance and rehabilitation of structures in poor
                 condition and take action to prevent poorly maintained properties from further
                 deterioration.
Policy H-3.2     The City shall strive to preserve the affordability of existing below market rate
                 housing units.
Policy H-3.3     The City shall encourage the retention and rehabilitation of older homes in and near
                 the historic city center and ensure that rehabilitation activities are sensitive to the
                 historic character of the building and/or site.
Policy Document                                                                                   Page H-7
Adopted December 1, 2014
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Implementation Programs
H-3.A. Housing Rehabilitation
To enhance the quality of existing neighborhoods, the City shall continue to implement the City’s
Housing Rehabilitation Program. The City will continue using Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) funds to assist in the improvement of substandard housing.
         Potential Funding: CDBG (HUD)/Gilroy Housing Trust Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
H-3.B. Code Enforcement Program
To ensure continued maintenance of housing quality, condition, and use, the City shall continue to
enforce building codes to address existing exterior and interior code violations. Within current
staffing limits, the City shall contact owners of units identified as substandard, offering inspection
services and providing information on the City’s Rehabilitation Loan Program and landlord/tenant
information and mediation services.
         Potential Funding: General Fund/CDBG (HUD)/Gilroy Housing Trust Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
H-3.C. Monitoring of Units At-Risk of Converting to Market Rate
The City shall provide for regular monitoring of deed-restricted units that have the potential of
converting to market rate. In order to proactively address units at-risk of conversion, the City shall
develop a program to partner with non-profit housing providers and develop a preservation
strategy. This strategy will at least include biennial contact with property owners of affordable units,
identification of funds to purchase and preserve affordable units, noticing of tenants and technical
assistance with applications for funds.
         Potential Funding: General Fund, Housing Trust Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Implement strategy by December 2015
H-3.D. Resale Control on Owner-Occupied Below Market Rate Units
The City shall continue to implement resale controls on owner-occupied Below Market Rate (BMR)
units to ensure that affordable units provided through public assistance or public action are retained
for 30 years or more as affordable housing stock.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
Page H-8                                                                                Policy Document
                                                                               Adopted December 1, 2014

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
H-3.E. Rent and Income Restrictions on Rental Below-Market Rate Units
The City shall continue to implement rent and income restrictions on rental Below Market Rate
(BMR) units to ensure that affordable units provided through public assistance or public action are
retained for 30 years or more as affordable housing stock.
         Potential Funding: CDBG/ Housing Trust Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
HOUSING OPPORTUNITY FOR RESIDENTIAL WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
                  HOUSING OPPORTUNITY FOR RESIDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
 GOAL H-4         The City shall increase access to decent and suitable housing for Gilroy residents
                  with special housing needs.
Policies
Policy H-4.1     The City shall encourage housing opportunities for special needs groups, including:
                 seniors; persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities; the
                 homeless; large households; single female-headed households; and farmworkers.
Policy H-4.2     The City shall encourage the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of
                 affordable and market-rate housing for seniors, particularly in neighborhoods that
                 are accessible to public transit, commercial services, and health and community
                 facilities.
Policy H-4.3     The City shall support efforts to provide emergency shelter, transitional housing,
                 and permanent supportive housing for homeless persons and those at risk of
                 homelessness.
Policy H-4.4     The City shall support the development of permanent and seasonal farmworker
                 housing in appropriate areas of the city.
Policy H-4.5     The City shall encourage affordable housing developments to include units that can
                 accommodate large households of five or more.
Policy H-4.6     The City shall encourage the development and maintenance of housing accessible to
                 people with disabilities, including developmental disabilities.
Policy H-4.7     The City shall continue to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable
                 accommodation through flexibility in the application of land use or zoning, when
                 necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.
Policy Document                                                                                Page H-9
Adopted December 1, 2014
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Implementation Programs
H-4.A. Housing for Large Families
The City shall review and revise the Zoning Code, as appropriate, to incorporate appropriate
regulatory incentives, and other policies that encourage the development of rental housing units
with three or more bedrooms to accommodate the needs of large families. The City shall encourage
and support the development of rental housing for large families within future affordable housing
projects through various strategies and programs that may include: assistance with site
identification and entitlement processing; and modifying development standards and granting
concessions and incentives.
          Potential Funding: General Fund
          Who is Responsible: Community Development
          Timeframe: Review and amend Zoning Code (estimated FY 2015/16), as appropriate,
          following adoption of the New General Plan
H-4.B. Development of Housing for Seniors
The City shall consider areas for new senior housing development, including residential care
facilities, that are convenient to public transit and within walking distance to shopping and
restaurants, and incorporate appropriate regulatory incentives, financial incentives, and other
policies that encourage the development of housing for seniors. The City shall continue to accept
Senior only and Affordable Senior Housing projects through the RDO Exemption program to
encourage the development of these projects.
          Potential Funding: General Fund
          Who is Responsible: Community Development
          Timeframe: Review and amend Zoning Code (estimated FY 2015/16), as appropriate,
          following adoption of the New General Plan
H-4.C. Reduced Parking Standards for Senior Housing
The City shall conduct a study to determine if reduced parking standards for senior housing is
appropriate in Gilroy. Based on the findings of the study, the City may revise the Zoning Code, as
necessary, to reduce parking standards for senior housing.
          Potential Funding: General Fund
          Who is Responsible: Community Development
          Timeframe: Conduct study and review Zoning Code (estimated FY 2015/16) (as appropriate)
          following adoption of the New General Plan
Page H-10                                                                           Policy Document
                                                                          Adopted December 1, 2014
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
H-4.D. Development and Conservation of Housing for Farmworkers
The City shall continue to partner with the Housing Authority of Santa Clara County and various non-
profit organizations to explore and implement ways of providing affordable farmworker housing.
The City shall assist with requests by developers for State and Federal funding for development of
multi-family housing within city limits.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Outreach to Santa Clara Housing Authority and non-profit organizations
         biennially starting in 2016, and identify and pursue development, as appropriate
H-4.E. Consistency with the Employee Housing Act
The City shall update the Zoning Code to be consistent with the Employee Housing Act (Health and
Safety Code 17021), which generally requires employee housing to be permitted by-right, without a
CUP, in single-family zones for less than six persons, and in all zones that allow agricultural uses with
no more than 12 units or 36 beds.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Review and amend Zoning Code (estimated FY 2015/16) following adoption of
         the New General Plan
H-4.F. Support Homeless Service Providers
The City shall continue to support the efforts of agencies providing emergency shelter for homeless
residents, including providing funding when feasible and appropriate.
         Potential Funding: General Fund, Housing Trust Fund, CDBG
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
H-4.G. Home Access Grants
The City shall continue to administer Home Access Program to provide very low-income disabled
residents with help in safely entering and exiting their homes and accessing essential areas within
their homes.
         Potential Funding: CDBG
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
H-4.H. Coordinate with the San Andreas Regional Center
The City shall work with the San Andreas Regional Center to implement an outreach program
informing residents of the housing and services available for persons with developmental
disabilities. The City shall make information available on the City website.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Initiate coordinate by 2016
Policy Document                                                                                 Page H-11
Adopted December 1, 2014
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
H-4.I.   Zoning Code Amendments for Transitional and Supportive Housing
The City shall update the Zoning Code to be fully compliant with State law and allow transitional and
supportive housing in all zones that allow residential uses, subject to the same restrictions that
apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Amend Zoning Code (estimated FY 2015/16) following adoption of the New
         General Plan
FAIR HOUSING
                   FAIR HOUSING
 GOAL H-5          To ensure equal housing opportunities for all Gilroy residents regardless race, color,
                   religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin, ancestry, familial
                   status, disability, or source of income.
Policies
Policy H-5.1     The City shall promote fair housing standards.
Policy H-5.2     The City shall refer discrimination complaints to Project Sentinel or other
                 organizations that address housing discrimination.
Implementation Programs
H-5.A. Fair Housing Counseling
The City shall continue to provide funds to and contract with a non-profit agency to provide fair
housing assistance including landlord/tenant counseling, homebuyer assistance, and improvement
or removal of identified impediments. The City shall disseminate information about fair housing
assistance through pamphlets in City-owned buildings and other public locations (e.g., City Hall,
Library, post office, other community facilities) and by posting information on the City website.
         Potential Funding: Gilroy Housing Trust Fund/CDBG
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
Page H-12                                                                                   Policy Document
                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
EXPANDING OUTREACH
                  EXPANDING OUTREACH
 GOAL H-6         Increase awareness of and participation in housing programs.
Policies
Policy H-6.1     The City shall consolidate and disseminate housing related resources to provide
                 better access to information on available housing programs and affordable housing
                 units.
Policy H-6.2     The City shall encourage the production of secondary units in single family districts
                 through outreach and educational materials.
Policy H-6.3     The City shall provide information on resources available to assist residents facing
                 foreclosure.
Implementation Programs
H-6.A. Interagency Collaboration for Lower Cost Housing
The City shall continue participation in Countywide housing assistance programs, and collaborate
with other public agencies and non-profit housing sponsors in the use of available programs to
provide lower-cost housing in Gilroy.
         Potential Funding: Gilroy Housing Trust Fund/CDBG
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
H-6.B. Collaboration with Development Community
The City shall continue to establish relationships with and provide technical assistance to both for-
profit and non-profit development companies working in the area of affordable housing, facilitating
innovative partnerships and collaborative approaches to affordable housing development. The City
will especially utilize the Housing Advisory Committee to address housing issues and provide
outreach to the development community.
         Potential Funding: General Fund
         Who is Responsible: Community Development
         Timeframe: Ongoing
Policy Document                                                                               Page H-13
Adopted December 1, 2014
 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
 H-6.C. Community Access to Housing Information
 To ensure the Gilroy community is provided the highest level of access to information, the City shall
 evaluate the effectiveness of existing outreach and community education efforts and develop a
 comprehensive outreach strategy for the delivery of housing information. The outreach strategy will
 consider various methods of delivery, including print media, mailers, web-based information, and
 other methods that consider economic and cultural considerations unique to the City of Gilroy.
          Potential Funding: General Fund
          Who is Responsible: Community Development
          Timeframe: Develop housing information strategy by June 2016
 H-6.D. Annual Review of Housing Element
 Pursuant to HCD Requirements, the City shall conduct an annual implementation review of the
 Housing Element. The review will include the following information: a log of new residential
 development permits and completion reports; inventory of units built in the Extremely Low-, Very
 Low- and Low-Income categories, an update or inventory of approved projects; an annual estimate
 of population from the State Department of Finance; and available vacant land and zoning survey.
          Potential Funding: General Fund
          Who is Responsible: Community Development
          Timeframe: Annually to HCD
 B.       Quantified Objectives
 The quantified objectives set a target goal for Gilroy to achieve based on needs, resources, and
 constraints. State law recognizes that the total housing needs identified by a community may
 exceed available resources and the community’s ability to satisfy this need. Under these
 circumstances, the quantified objectives need not be, and are not intended to be, identical to the
 total housing needs.
 The quantified objectives shown in Table H-1 represent targets. They are estimates based on past
 experience and anticipated housing market conditions. The quantified objectives are not designed
 to be minimum requirements. The quantified objectives are based largely upon implementation
 programs that have measurable outcomes. However, the Housing Element contains several policies
 and implementation programs that reduce barriers and create opportunities for affordable housing.
 These policies and programs are essential to meeting the City’s housing needs, but are more
 qualitative and difficult to quantify.
                                              TABLE H-1
                               QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVE SUMMARY
                                        2015-2023 Planning Period
                          Extremely                                                 Above
                              Low        Very Low        Low        Moderate      Moderate
   Program Types            Income        Income       Income        Income        Income         Total
New Construction                   75          100           150           200            475      1,000
Rehabilitation                      0           25             25            0               0        50
Preservation                        0          124           124             0               0       248
Total                              75          249           299           200            475      1,298
 Page H-14                                                                              Policy Document
                                                                               Adopted December 1, 2014

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
           BACKGROUND REPORT
              Adopted December 1, 2014
                              Prepared by:
                            Mintier Harnish
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table of Contents
Section 13.1        Introduction ........................................................................................................ 13-1
  Purpose and Content .......................................................................................................................................... 13-1
  Housing Element Update Process ....................................................................................................................... 13-2
  State Law and Local Planning .............................................................................................................................. 13-2
         Consistency with State Law ....................................................................................................................... 13-2
         General Plan Consistency .......................................................................................................................... 13-3
         Relationship to Other Plans and Programs ............................................................................................... 13-3
  Housing Element Organization ............................................................................................................................ 13-3
  Citizen Participation ............................................................................................................................................ 13-4
         Housing Advisory Committee Meeting (January 8, 2014) ......................................................................... 13-4
         Stakeholder Workshop (March 6, 2014) ................................................................................................... 13-4
         Gilroy 2040 Town Hall Forum (March 2014 to TBD) ................................................................................. 13-5
Section 13.2        Housing Needs Analysis ....................................................................................... 13-5
  Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................ 13-5
  Community Profile .............................................................................................................................................. 13-6
         Population Trends and Characteristics ...................................................................................................... 13-6
         Employment Trends .................................................................................................................................. 13-9
         Household Characteristics ....................................................................................................................... 13-11
         Housing Inventory and Market Conditions ............................................................................................. 13-15
         Overpayment........................................................................................................................................... 13-25
         Overcrowding .......................................................................................................................................... 13-26
  Special Needs Groups ........................................................................................................................................ 13-27
         Elderly Persons ........................................................................................................................................ 13-27
         Large Households .................................................................................................................................... 13-32
         Female-Headed Households ................................................................................................................... 13-34
         Persons with Disabilities .......................................................................................................................... 13-35
         Homeless Population............................................................................................................................... 13-36
         Farmworkers ........................................................................................................................................... 13-38
         Extremely Low-Income Households ........................................................................................................ 13-40
  Summary of Existing Housing Needs ................................................................................................................. 13-41
  Preservation of Assisted Units At-Risk of Conversion ....................................................................................... 13-42
         Qualified Entities ..................................................................................................................................... 13-42
         Inventory of At-Risk Units ....................................................................................................................... 13-43
         Cost of Preservation versus Replacement ............................................................................................... 13-45
  Future Growth Needs ........................................................................................................................................ 13-47
Section 13.3        Resources ......................................................................................................... 13-48
  Community Development Block Grant Program ............................................................................................... 13-48
  Housing Trust Fund ........................................................................................................................................... 13-49
  State Funds for New Development ................................................................................................................... 13-49
  Energy Conservation ......................................................................................................................................... 13-49
  Adequate Sites Analysis .................................................................................................................................... 13-53
         Regional Housing Needs Assessment ...................................................................................................... 13-53
         Inventory of Units Planned, Approved, and Under Construction ........................................................... 13-54
         Residential Sites Inventory ...................................................................................................................... 13-62
Section 13.4        Constraints........................................................................................................ 13-80
  Governmental Constraints ................................................................................................................................ 13-80
         Land Use Controls ................................................................................................................................... 13-80
Background Report                                                                                                                                               Page 13-i
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
        Density Bonus Ordinance ........................................................................................................................ 13-90
        Residential Care Facilities ........................................................................................................................ 13-90
        Emergency Shelters, Transitional Housing, and Single Room Occupancy Units ..................................... 13-91
        Accessory Dwelling Units......................................................................................................................... 13-92
        Housing for Persons with Disabilities ...................................................................................................... 13-93
        Building Codes and Enforcement ............................................................................................................ 13-94
        Development and Permit Fees ................................................................................................................ 13-95
        Local Processing and Permit Procedures ................................................................................................. 13-96
        On-and Off Site Improvements ............................................................................................................... 13-98
        Residential Development Ordinance....................................................................................................... 13-98
        Neighborhood District Policy ................................................................................................................. 13-106
        Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints...................................................................................... 13-107
  Non-Governmental Constraints ...................................................................................................................... 13-112
        Land Prices ............................................................................................................................................ 13-112
        Construction Costs ................................................................................................................................ 13-113
        Total Development Costs ...................................................................................................................... 13-114
        Financing ............................................................................................................................................... 13-115
Appendix A: Review of 2007-2014 Housing Element Policies and Actions..................................... A-117
Appendix B: Community Outreach...............................................................................................B-129
  Housing Advisory Committee Meeting Summary ............................................................................................. B-129
  Stakeholder Workshop Summary ..................................................................................................................... B-131
  Town Hall Forum Summary ............................................................................................................................... B-133
Appendix C: Local Amendments to the California Building Code ................................................... C-135
Appendix D: Development Requirements ................................................................................... D-137
Appendix E: Glossary of Terms .................................................................................................... E-139
Page 13-ii                                                                                                                                     Background Report
                                                                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
List of Tables
Table 13-1 Regional Population Trends ..................................................................................... 13-6
Table 13-2 Annual Average Growth ........................................................................................... 13-6
Table 13-3 Age Distribution ....................................................................................................... 13-7
Table 13-4 Racial and Ethnic Composition ................................................................................ 13-8
Table 13-5 Employment by Industry .......................................................................................... 13-9
Table 13-6 Major Employers .................................................................................................... 13-10
Table 13-7 Labor Force Trends ................................................................................................ 13-11
Table 13-8 Total Households ................................................................................................... 13-12
Table 13-9 Average Persons per Household ............................................................................ 13-12
Table 13-10 Household Size Distribution ................................................................................. 13-12
Table 13-11 Median Household Income by Tenure ................................................................ 13-13
Table 13-12 Income Range by Affordability Category based on State Area Median Income . 13-14
Table 13-13 Household Income by Tenure .............................................................................. 13-14
Table 13-14 Number of Housing Units .................................................................................... 13-15
Table 13-15 Unit Size by Tenure .............................................................................................. 13-15
Table 13-16 Housing Inventory by Unit Type .......................................................................... 13-16
Table 13-17 Unit Type by Tenure............................................................................................. 13-17
Table 13-18 Occupied Units by Tenure.................................................................................... 13-17
Table 13-19 Occupancy Status ................................................................................................. 13-18
Table 13-20 Tenure by Age of Housing Stock (Occupied Units) .............................................. 13-18
Table 13-21 Units Lacking Plumbing or Complete Kitchen Facilities ....................................... 13-19
Table 13-22 Housing Cost Limits by Area Median Income Level ............................................. 13-20
Table 13-23 Ability to Pay Based on HUD Income Limits ........................................................ 13-22
Table 13-24 Median Sales Price ............................................................................................... 13-24
Table 13-25 Average Monthly Rent by Unit Size ..................................................................... 13-24
Table 13-26 Gross Rent as a Percentage of Household Income .............................................. 13-25
Table 13-27 Housing Cost as a Percentage of Household Income .......................................... 13-26
Table 13-28 Overcrowded Households ................................................................................... 13-27
Table 13-29 Householders by Tenure and Age ........................................................................ 13-28
Table 13-30 Elderly Median Household Income ...................................................................... 13-28
Table 13-31 Elderly Household Income Distribution ............................................................... 13-29
Table 13-32 Elderly with Disabilities Limiting Independent Living .......................................... 13-30
Table 13-33 Elderly Households – Housing Problems ............................................................. 13-31
Table 13-34 Large Households by Tenure ............................................................................... 13-32
Table 13-35 Large Households – Housing Problems ............................................................... 13-33
Table 13-36 Tenure Of Female-Headed Households ............................................................... 13-34
Table 13-37 Poverty in Female-Headed Households............................................................... 13-34
Table 13-38 Persons Reporting Disabilities ............................................................................. 13-35
Table 13-39 Developmental Disability by Type Served by San Andreas Regional Center ....... 13-36
Table 13-40 Homeless Population ........................................................................................... 13-37
Background Report                                                                                                            Page 13-iii
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-41 Homeless Facilities in Gilroy ................................................................................ 13-37
Table 13-42 Estimated Number of FarmWorkers.................................................................... 13-39
Table 13-43 Number of Farmworkers and Farms .................................................................... 13-39
Table 13-44 Extremely Low-Income Households – Housing Problems ................................... 13-41
Table 13-45 Units “At-Risk” of Conversion by 2025 ................................................................ 13-44
Table 13-46 Potential Rent Subsidies ...................................................................................... 13-45
Table 13-47 Replacement Costs by Unit Type ......................................................................... 13-46
Table 13-48 ABAG Regional Housing Needs Allocation ........................................................... 13-48
Table 13-49 CDBG Activity Allocations .................................................................................... 13-48
Table 13-50 City Housing Trust Fund Allocations .................................................................... 13-49
Table 13-51 Developments Under Construction, Approved Projects, and Planned Projects . 13-59
Table 13-52 Capacity in Glen Loma Specific Plan Neighborhoods .......................................... 13-64
Table 13-53 Remaining Capacity in the Hecker Pass Specific Plan Area ................................. 13-67
Table 13-54 Summary of Remaining Capacity in Downtown Specific Plan ............................. 13-73
Table 13-55 Vacant And Underutilized Parcels 2014-2022 Planning Period ........................... 13-77
Table 13-56 Sites Summary 2014-2022 Planning Period ......................................................... 13-79
Table 13-57 Residential Land Use Designations ...................................................................... 13-81
Table 13-58 Housing Types Permitted by Zone ....................................................................... 13-85
Table 13-59 Summary of Residential Zoning Requirements ................................................... 13-86
Table 13-60 Summary of Commercial and Downtown Specific Plan Zoning Requirements ... 13-87
Table 13-61 Residential Parking Requirements ....................................................................... 13-88
Table 13-62 Total Land and Development Standards in CM Zoning District and Downtown Gilroy
Cannery District........................................................................................................................ 13-91
Table 13-63 Estimated Development Fees .............................................................................. 13-96
Table 13-64 Approximate Development Timelines ................................................................. 13-97
Table 13-65 RDO Growth Numbers ....................................................................................... 13-102
Table 13-66 Estimated Single Family Housing Development Costs....................................... 13-114
Table 13-67 Estimated Multifamily Housing Development Costs ......................................... 13-114
Table 13-68 Mortgage Lending Rates .................................................................................... 13-115
Table A-1 Review of Housing Element Policies and Programs ................................................ A-117
List of Figures
Figure 13-1 Historical Home Prices in Gilroy ........................................................................... 13-23
Figure 13-2 Developments Under Construction, Approved, and Planned Projects ................ 13-57
Figure 13-3 Glen Loma ............................................................................................................. 13-65
Figure 13-4 Hecker Pass ........................................................................................................... 13-69
Figure 13-5 Downtown Specific Plan Districts ......................................................................... 13-71
Figure 13-6 Vacant and Underutilized Sites............................................................................. 13-75
Figure 13-7 Mortgage Rates .................................................................................................. 13-116
Page 13-iv                                                                                                              Background Report
                                                                                                             Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                        HOUSING ELEMENT
Section 13.1                       Introduction
The Housing Element identifies and analyzes existing and projected housing needs and conveys the
City’s policies for the preservation, conservation, improvement, and production of housing within the
city of Gilroy. The Housing Element is made up of two parts: 1) the Background Report, which is
contained in Chapter 13 of the General Plan Background Report, and 2) the Policy Document, which is
published separate from the Background Report as an Element of the General Plan.
Purpose and Content
The City of Gilroy Housing Element addresses housing opportunities for present and future residents
through 2023 and provides the primary policy guidance for local decision making as it relates to housing.
The Housing Element has a shorter planning period than the other General Plan elements and is the only
General Plan element that requires review and certification by the State of California.
The Housing Element provides a detailed analysis of the city’s demographic, economic, and housing
characteristics as required by State Law. The Element also provides a comprehensive evaluation of the
City’s progress in implementing the past policies and programs related to housing production,
preservation, and conservation. Based on the community’s housing needs, available resources,
constraints, and opportunities for housing production and preservation, and its past performance, the
Housing Element identifies goals, policies, and programs that address the housing needs of present and
future residents. The goals, policies, and programs are included in the Housing Element Policy
Document, which is published separately from the Background Report.
Background Report                                                                               Page 13-1
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Housing Element Update Process
The housing goal for the State of California is for every Californian to have access to a decent home and
suitable living environment. Recognizing the important role that local governments play in pursuit of this
goal, the Legislature has mandated that all cities and counties prepare a Housing Element as part of their
comprehensive General Plan (California Government Code Section 65302 (c)).
This Housing Element update covers the planning period from 2015-2023. State planning law mandates
that jurisdictions within the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) region update and adopt their
Housing Element by January 31, 2015. It is intended that this Housing Element be reviewed annually and
updated and modified not less than every eight years in order to remain relevant and useful and reflect
the community’s changing housing needs.
State Law and Local Planning
Consistency with State Law
The Housing Element is one of the required General Plan elements, as articulated in Sections 65580 to
65589.8 of the California Government Code. State Law requires that each jurisdiction’s housing element
consists of “an identification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs and a statement of
goals, policies, quantified objectives, and programs for the preservation, improvement, and
development of housing.” The Housing Element plans for the provision of housing for all economic
segments of the population.
As required by State Law (Government Code Section 65583 (a)) the assessment and inventory for this
Element includes the following:
       Analysis of population and employment trends and projections, and a quantification of the City’s
        existing and projected housing needs for all income levels. This analysis of existing and projected
        needs includes the City of Gilroy’s share of the regional housing need.
       Analysis and documentation of household characteristics, including level of payment compared
        to ability to pay; housing characteristics, including overcrowding; and housing stock condition.
       An inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having
        potential for redevelopment; and an analysis of the relationship of zoning, public facilities, and
        services to these sites.
       Analysis of potential and actual governmental constraints upon the maintenance, improvement,
        or development of housing for all income levels and for persons with disabilities, including land
        use controls, building codes and their enforcement, site improvements, fees and other exactions
        required of developers, and local processing and permit procedures.
       Analysis of local efforts to remove governmental constraints.
       Analysis of potential and actual non-governmental constraints upon the maintenance,
        improvement, or development of housing for all income levels, including the availability of
        financing, the price of land, and the cost of construction.
Page 13-2                                                                                  Background Report
                                                                                   Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       Analysis of any special housing needs for the elderly; persons with disabilities, including
        developmental disabilities; large families; farmworkers; families with female heads of
        households; and families and persons in need of emergency shelter.
       Analysis of opportunities for residential energy conservation.
       Analysis of “at-risk” assisted housing developments that are eligible to change from low-income
        housing uses during the next 10 years.
General Plan Consistency
The California Government Code requires internal consistency among the various elements of the
General Plan. Section 65300.5 of the Government Code states that the General Plan’s various elements
shall provide an integrated and internally consistent and compatible statement of policy. Upon
adoption, this Housing Element will become part of the City’s General Plan. The City is currently (2014)
in the process of preparing a new General Plan. City staff has reviewed the other elements of the 2002
General Plan and has determined that this Housing Element provides consistency with the other
elements of the 2002 General Plan. Adoption of the new General Plan may necessitate revisions to the
Housing Element to maintain internal consistency. The City will maintain this consistency as future
General Plan amendments are processed by evaluating proposed amendments for consistency with all
elements of the General Plan.
Relationship to Other Plans and Programs
The Housing Element identifies goals, objectives, policies, and programs for the next eight years that
directly address the housing needs of the City of Gilroy. There are numerous City plans and programs
that work to implement the goals and policies of the Housing Element. These include the City’s
Municipal Code and Specific Plans. Every five years, the City prepares a Consolidated Plan that identifies
the City’s overall housing and community development needs and market conditions, establishes
priorities, and outlines a strategy to address these priorities. The City prepares Annual Action Plans each
year to supplement the Consolidated Plan and prepares the Consolidated Annual Performance and
Evaluation Report (CAPER) to report on the prior year’s programs and projects. The Consolidated Plan
and Annual Action Plans address many of the goals, policies, and programs of the General Plan Housing
Element.
Housing Element Organization
The City of Gilroy Housing Element is organized into the following sections:
       Introduction. Explains the purpose, process, and content of the Housing Element.
       Housing Needs Analysis. Describes the demographic, economic, and housing characteristics of
        Gilroy as well as the current and projected housing needs.
       Resources Analysis. Analyzes the various land, financial, and administrative resources available
        to the City for meeting its housing needs.
       Constraints Analysis. Analyzes the actual and potential governmental and non-governmental
        constraints to the maintenance, preservation, conservation, and development of housing.
Background Report                                                                                   Page 13-3
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       Housing Policy Plan. Details specific policies and programs the City of Gilroy will carry out over
        the planning period to address the City’s housing goals (published separate from the Background
        Report).
Given the detail and lengthy analysis in developing the Housing Element, supporting background
material is included in the following appendices:
       Appendix A. Review of 2007-2014 Housing Element Policies and Actions
       Appendix B. Community Outreach
       Appendix C. Local Amendments to the California Building Code
       Appendix D. Glossary of Terms
Citizen Participation
As part of the Housing Element update process, the City implemented the State’s public participation
requirements in Housing Element Law, set forth in Government Code Section 65583(c)(7), that
jurisdictions “…shall make a diligent effort to achieve participation of all economic segments of the
community in the development of the housing element.” The City of Gilroy values public input in the
development of its community development goals and objectives, including the provision of decent and
adequate housing. The following section summarizes public outreach conducted by the City of Gilroy.
The input provided at the workshops and on the online Town Hall Forum helped shape the policies and
programs included in the Housing Element.
Housing Advisory Committee Meeting (January, April, and May 2014)
The City formed Housing Advisory Committee (HAC) representing nonprofit and for profit housing
developers, renters, rental property owners, homeowners, and affordable housing advocates in 2006 to
provide recommendations to staff and the City Council on the Housing Element update and on
affordable housing programs and policies. This committee holds monthly meetings to discuss and make
recommendations to the City Council on housing-related issues.
On January 8, 2014, the City of Gilroy held a Housing Advisory Committee (HAC) meeting at City Hall. At
the meeting, City staff and the Housing Element Consultant presented a brief overview of the Housing
Element Update and facilitated an interactive discussion to solicit ideas from HAC members about the
most critical housing issues facing Gilroy residents and new ways the City and community might address
these issues. Appendix B contains a summary of the comments gathered at the HAC meeting. The input
provided at the meeting was used to shape the Housing Element policies and programs. The Housing
Advisory Committee reviewed the Draft Housing Element at two subsequent meetings on April 9, 2014
and May 14, 2014 and provided feedback.
Stakeholder Workshop (March 6, 2014)
On March 6, 2014, the City held a Stakeholder Workshop at the Public Library. To advertise the
workshop, the City sent an email notice and made phone calls to over 60 local agencies, community
organizations, and stakeholders in the city and broader region. The City also posted flyers around the
city and advertised the workshop on the General Plan website. While the focus of the workshop was
Page 13-4                                                                                   Background Report
                                                                                    Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
getting input from housing stakeholders, the meeting was open to the public and members of the public
were encouraged to attend. Approximately 20 people attended the Stakeholder Workshop.
At the workshop, City staff and the Housing Element consulting firm, Mintier Harnish, presented a brief
overview of the Housing Element Update and facilitated an interactive discussion to solicit ideas from
participants about the most critical housing issues facing Gilroy residents and new ways the City and
community might address these issues. Appendix B contains a summary of the issues and ideas
discussed at the workshop. The input provided at the workshop was used to shape the Housing Element
policies and programs.
Gilroy 2040 Town Hall Forum (March to June 2014)
The City of Gilroy posted a question about housing needs on the online Gilroy 2040 Town Hall Forum to
solicit input from the community on the unmet housing needs in the city and what the City can do to
help provide for those needs. Appendix B contains a summary of the comments gathered on the Town
Hall Forum.
General Plan Advisory Committee Meetings (May and June 2014)
The General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC), a 25-person advisory committee made up of community
representatives that was formed to oversee development of the General Plan, reviewed the Draft
Housing Element at two meetings on May 28, 2014, and June 11, 2014. The public at-large was invited to
attend and comment on the Draft Housing Element. The GPAC made a recommendation to the Planning
Commission and City Council to approve the Housing Element.
Planning Commission and City Council Study Sessions (June and August 2014)
The Planning Commission and City Council reviewed the Draft Housing Element in separate study
sessions on June 26, 2014, and August 18, 2014. Both meetings included a public hearing, providing
members of the public to comment on the Draft Housing Element. The Commission and Council
authorized City staff to submit the Housing Element to HCD for the State-mandated review.
Section 13.2                      Housing Needs Analysis
Introduction
When preparing the Housing Element, each jurisdiction must evaluate both existing and future housing
needs for all economic segments of the population. This section analyzes demographic, economic, and
housing characteristics that influence the demand for and availability of housing. The analyses form a
foundation for policies and programs that seek to address identified housing needs. Housing needs are
identified according to income, tenure, and special needs groups.
Primary data sources used in these analyses include the 2000 and 2010 U.S. Census, the 2012 American
Community Survey, the California Department of Finance (DOF), and the Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG). These data sources are the most reliable for assessing existing conditions, provide
consistent comparison with historical data, and serve as the basis for forecasts.
Background Report                                                                                Page 13-5
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Community Profile
Population Trends and Characteristics
Housing needs are generally influenced by population and employment trends. This section provides a
summary of the changes to the population size and age and racial/ethnic composition of the city.
Historical, Existing, and Forecast Growth
The City of Gilroy is one of 15 cities within Santa Clara County. The California Department of Finance
(DOF) estimates Santa Clara County’s population was 1,842,254 in 2013. Table 13-1 lists adjacent
counties and their respective populations.
                                                     TABLE 13-1
                                    REGIONAL POPULATION TRENDS
                                Santa Clara County and Surrounding Counties
                                                        2000-2013
                  County                           2000                        2010                      2013
     Santa Clara County                                1,682,585                  1,781,642                 1,842,254
     Alameda County                                    1,443,741                  1,510,271                 1,548,681
     San Mateo County                                    707,161                    718,451                    735,678
     Stanislaus County                                   446,997                    514,453                    524,124
     Santa Cruz County                                   255,602                    262,382                    266,662
     Merced County                                       210,554                    255,793                    262,478
     San Benito County                                     53,234                    55,269                     56,669
    Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF1, P1, US Census 2010 SF 1, and the California Department of Finance, E5, 2013.
According to the U.S. Census and the DOF, Gilroy experienced an average annual growth rate of 1.7
percent between 2000 and 2010, which was 183 percent greater than the county’s average annual
growth rate of 0.6 percent. Between 2010 and 2013, the city’s average annual growth rate was 1.8
percent, which continued to be greater than the county’s average annual growth rate (1.1 percent) by
63.6 percent.
Table 13-2 compares the average annual growth rates of the city and county from 2000 through 2013.
                                                     TABLE 13-2
                                        ANNUAL AVERAGE GROWTH
                                       City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                        2000-2013
                                                                         2000-2010                2010-2013
        Jurisdiction         2000          2010          2013
                                                                     Number AAGR             Number        AAGR
        Gilroy                41,464        48,821        51,544         7,357      1.7%         2,723         1.8%
        Santa Clara
                           1,682,585 1,781,642 1,842,254                99,057      0.6%       60,612          1.1%
        County
       Note: AAGR stands for Average Annual Growth Rate.
       Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF1, P001, U.S. Census 2010 SF1, P1, California Department of Finance E5, 2013, and Mintier
       Harnish, 2014.
Page 13-6                                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                                Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Age Composition
Between 2000 and 2010, Gilroy experienced growth in the percentages of the “retirement” (55-64
years) and “senior citizen” (65 years and older) populations, while the percentages of “preschool” (0-4
years), “school age” (5-17 years), “young adult” (18-24 years), and “prime working” (25-54 years)
populations declined; however, the “prime working” (25-54 years) population remains the largest age
group in the city, at 42.4 percent of the population.
Table 13-3 summarizes the population’s age distribution in 2000 and 2010.
                                                      TABLE 13-3
                                                AGE DISTRIBUTION
                                                      City of Gilroy
                                                      2000 and 2010
                                                2000                            2010
         Age Group                                    Percent of                          Percent of
                                   Number                         1     Number                       1
                                                     Population                          Population
   Preschool                              3,813                 9.2%             4,144             8.4%
   (0-4 years)
   School                                 9,750                23.4%           10,839            22.2%
   (5-17 years)
   Young Adult (18-24                     3,919                 9.4%             4,514             9.2%
   years)
   Prime Working                         18,737                45.0%           20,717            42.4%
   (25-54 years)
   Retirement                             2,559                 6.2%             4,509             9.2%
   (55-64 years)
   Senior Citizen (65+                    2,809                 6.8%             4,098             8.4%
   years)
                                               2
   Total                                41,587                 100%            48,821             100%
  Notes:
  1
   Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding.
  2
   Discrepancy in 2000 SF3 total population data due to sampling error.
  Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF3, P8, and U.S. Census 2010 SF1, QT-P2.
Background Report                                                                               Page 13-7
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Race and Ethnicity
Table 13-4 summarizes the racial and ethnic composition of the population in 2000 and 2010.As of 2010
57.7 percent of Gilroy residents were of Hispanic origin and 42.3 percent were Non-Hispanic. Of the
Non-Hispanic population, 31.4 percent were white and 6.9 percent were Asian or Pacific Islander.
Between 2000 and 2010, the White Non-Hispanic population percentage declined by 6.5 percent, while
the Asian or Pacific Islander population percentage increased by 2.7 percent, and the Hispanic
population percentage increased by 4.2.
                                                    TABLE 13-4
                                RACIAL AND ETHNIC COMPOSITION
                                                    City of Gilroy
                                                    2000 and 2010
                                                                2000                    2010
                      Racial/Ethnic Group
                                                       Number Percent            Number Percent
                Not Hispanic or Latino
                White                                     15,767       37.9%       15,335    31.4%
                Black                                         615        1.5%         709      1.5%
                American Indian & Alaska Native               193        0.5%         180      0.4%
                Asian or Pacific Islander                   1,732        4.2%       3,351      6.9%
                Some other race alone                          58        0.1%          58      0.1%
                                     1
                Two or more races                             801        1.9%         974      2.0%
                Sub-Total                                 19,166       46.1%       20,607    42.3%
                Hispanic or Latino
                White                                       8,659      20.8%       13,339    27.3%
                Black                                         130        0.3%         233      0.5%
                American Indian & Alaska Native               468        1.1%         651      1.3%
                Asian or Pacific Islander                     183        0.4%         208      0.4%
                Some other race alone                     11,441       27.5%       12,264    25.1%
                Two or more races                           1,417        3.4%       1,519    3.11%
                Sub-Total                                 22,298       53.5%       28,214    57.7%
                       1
                Total                                     41,464        100%       48,821     100%
                         1
                  Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding.
                  Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF1, P8 and U.S. Census 2010 SF1, DP-1.
Page 13-8                                                                                         Background Report
                                                                                           Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Employment Trends
Housing needs are influenced by employment trends. Significant employment opportunities within the
city can lead to growth in demand for housing in proximity to jobs. The quality and/or pay of available
employment can determine the need for various housing types and prices.
As shown in Table 13-5, in 2012, 11.6 percent of residents living in the city of Gilroy were employed in
manufacturing; 12.3 percent were employed in professional, scientific, management, administrative,
and waste management services; 14.9 percent were employed in retail trade; and 16.0 percent were
employed in educational, health, and social services.
                                                   TABLE 13-5
                                       EMPLOYMENT BY INDUSTRY
                                      City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                       2012
                                                       Gilroy                 Santa Clara County
                    Industry
                                               Employees       Percent     Employees          Percent
      Agriculture, forestry, fishing and    1,004             4.6%       4,428              0.5%
      hunting, and mining
      Construction                          1,841             8.5%       43,822             5.1%
      Manufacturing                         2,535             11.6%      164,935            19.2%
      Wholesale trade                       764               3.5%       19,159             2.2%
      Retail trade                          3,257             14.9%      86,247             10.0%
      Transportation and warehousing, 790                     3.6%       23,509             2.7%
      and utilities
      Information                           250               1.1%       30,624             3.6%
      Finance, insurance, real estate,      887               4.1%       41,301             4.8%
      and rental and leasing
      Professional, scientific,             2,678             12.3%      160,972            18.7%
      management, administrative, and
      waste management services
      Educational, health and social        3,477             16.0%      160,719            18.7%
      services
      Arts, entertainment, recreation,      2,407             11.0%      64,556             7.5%
      accommodation and food
      services
      Other services (except public         991               4.5%       38,193             4.4%
      administration)
      Public Administration                 905               4.2%       20,875             2.4%
      Total                                 21,786            100%       859,340            100%
     Source: 2012 ACS 2P03.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-9
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
As shown in Table 13-6, the Gilroy Unified School District is the largest single employer in Gilroy with
over 1,000 employees. Other large employers in Gilroy include Christopher Ranch with 650 employees
and Saint Louise Hospital with 550 employees.
                                                    TABLE 13-6
                                             MAJOR EMPLOYERS
                                                     City of Gilroy
                                                          2012
                                     Company                                Number of Employees
     Gilroy Unified School District                                                               1,000
     Christopher Ranch                                                                              650
     Saint Louise Hospital                                                                          550
     Olam International                                                                             500
     Walmart                                                                                        395
     City of Gilroy                                                                                 274
     Monterey Gourmet Foods                                                                         270
     Costco                                                                                         220
     Gavilan College                                                                                219
     International Paper                                                                            180
     Headstart Nursery                                                                              180
     Syngenta Seeds                                                                                 175
     Kaiser Permanente                                                                              175
     Rebekah Children Services                                                                      175
     Target Corp.                                                                                   130
     Safeway Foods                                                                                  130
     Angelica Linen                                                                                 120
     Gilroy Health Care and Rehab                                                                   115
     Cintas Corporation                                                                             106
     Mi Pueblo Grocery Store                                                                        106
     Heinzen Manufacturing                                                                          105
     Nob Hill Foods                                                                                 100
     South County Housing                                                                            93
     Recology                                                                                        90
     Eagle Ridge                                                                                     85
     North Coast Medical                                                                             80
     The G.B. Group                                                                                  75
     Container Consulting Service                                                                    50
     Hilton Garden Inn                                                                               45
     Germain’s Seed Technology                                                                       41
     Silva Sausage                                                                                   35
    Source: City of Gilroy Economic Development Corporation, 2012.
Page 13-10                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                   Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
As shown in Table 13-7, Gilroy’s labor force increased from 19,300 in 2005 to 21,900 in 2012. According
to the California Employment Development Department, the unemployment rate in Gilroy was 12.6
percent in 2012, which was lower than the peak unemployment rate of 16.3 percent in 2010, but still
higher than pre-recession unemployment rates. The unemployment rate for Gilroy was higher than the
County’s unemployment rate of 8.4 percent in 2012.
                                                    TABLE 13-7
                                            LABOR FORCE TRENDS
                                                     City of Gilroy
                                                          2012
                                                                                      Unemployment
           Year             Labor Force          Employment           Unemployment
                                                                                           Rate
                 2005                19,300               17,700                1,600              8.2%
                 2006                19,300               18,000                1,300              6.9%
                 2007                19,900               18,400                1,400              7.2%
                 2008                20,600               18,700                1,900              9.1%
                 2009                21,300               17,900                3,400             16.1%
                 2010                21,500               18,000                3,500             16.3%
                 2011                21,600               18,400                3,200             14.6%
                 2012                21,900               19,100                2,800             12.6%
     Source: State of California Employment Development Department (EDD), 2012.
Household Characteristics
This section describes Gilroy’s household characteristics. The U.S. Census Bureau defines a household as
all persons living in a single housing unit, whether or not they are related. One person living alone is
considered a household, as is a group of unrelated people living in a single housing unit. The U.S. Census
Bureau defines a family as related persons living within a single housing unit.
Household Formation and Composition
As shown in Table 13-8, the number of households in Gilroy continues to grow at a faster pace than the
county and the state. In 2010, the U.S. Census Bureau reported 14,175 households in Gilroy, a 19.2
percent increase from 2000. In comparison, total households in Santa Clara County increased by 6.8
percent between 2000 and 2010 and total households in California increased by 9.3 percent.
DOF reports 14,657 households in 2013, a 3.4 percent increase since 2010.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-11
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                      TABLE 13-8
                                              TOTAL HOUSEHOLDS
                                City of Gilroy, Santa Clara County, and California
                                                        2000-2013
                                                                                        Percent           Percent
                                                                             1
             Area                  2000              2010              2013            Increase          Increase
                                                                                      2000-2010         2010-2013
     Gilroy                           11,894            14,175             14,657           19.2%                3.4%
     Santa Clara County             565,863            604,204           611,426              6.8%               1.2%
     California                  11,502,870        12,577,498         12,675,876              9.3%               0.8%
           1
    Note: Occupied Housing Units reported by California Department of Finance
    Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF1, DP-1, U.S. Census 2010 SF1, DP-1, and Department of Finance Table E-5, 2013.
The average number of persons per household in Gilroy was 3.4 in 2010, a 0.1 percent decrease since
2000. As shown in Table 13-9, the average number of persons per household in Gilroy continues to be
higher than the state and county average.
                                                      TABLE 13-9
                                AVERAGE PERSONS PER HOUSEHOLD
                                       City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                      2000 and 2010
                                 Jurisdiction                             2000                 2010
                 Gilroy                                                           3.5                   3.4
                 Santa Clara County                                               2.9                   2.9
                 California                                                       2.9                   2.9
                 Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF1, DP-1 and U.S. Census 2010.
As shown in Table 13-10, households of three to four persons made up the largest segments of both
owner- and renter-occupied households in 2010. One-person households were the smallest segment of
both owner- and renter-occupied households.
                                                     TABLE 13-10
                                     HOUSEHOLD SIZE DISTRIBUTION
                                                      City of Gilroy
                                                           2010
                                   Total Households            Renter Households          Owner Households
        Household Size
                                 Number         Percent        Number         Percent      Number         Percent
        1 Person                      2,136          15.1%          1,002         7.1%          1,134          8.0%
        2 Persons                     3,520          24.8%            956         6.7%          2,564        18.1%
        3-4 Persons                   5,152          36.3%          1,871        13.2%          3,281        23.1%
        5+ Persons                    3,367          23.8%          1,722        12.1%          1,645        11.6%
        Total                        14,175          100%           5,551        39.2%          8,624        60.8%
      Source: U.S. Census 2010 SF1, QT-H2.
Page 13-12                                                                                              Background Report
                                                                                               Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Household Income
As indicated in Table 13-11, the median household income for the city of Gilroy in 2012 was $76,060,
approximately $13,000 less than the median income for the county. Within the city, the median income
for owner-occupied households ($100,911) was significantly higher than the median income for renter-
occupied households ($40,659).
                                                TABLE 13-11
                            MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME BY TENURE
                                    City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                     2012
                             Jurisdiction                      2012 Median Income
              City of Gilroy                                                         $76,060
                 Owner-Occupied Households                                          $100,911
                 Renter-Occupied Households                                          $40,659
              Santa Clara County                                                     $89,445
              Source: 2012 ACS B25119.
The Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) calculates an annual median family
income (MFI) for each area of the country for the purpose of determining program eligibility. The area
median family income for Gilroy is based on the income for Santa Clara County. Because eligibility is
based on the area median income, cities such as Gilroy that have a lower median income than the area
median income will have more residents that qualify for housing programs. The State of California uses
five income categories to determine eligibility for housing programs based on the MFI.
       Extremely Low-Income: 30 percent or less of the median family income;
       Very Low-Income: 31 percent to 50 percent of the median family income;
       Low-Income: 51 percent to 80 percent of the median family income;
       Moderate-Income: 81 percent to 120 percent of the median family income; and
       Above Moderate-Income: Greater than 120 percent of the median family income.
Table 13-12 shows the State-defined income ranges for each income category based on the area median
income (AMI) of $105,500 for a household of four in Santa Clara County.
Background Report                                                                              Page 13-13
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                   TABLE 13-12
          INCOME RANGE BY AFFORDABILITY CATEGORY BASED ON STATE
                                           AREA MEDIAN INCOME
                                                 Santa Clara County
                                                         2013
                                                                         1                            2
         Affordability Category            Percent of County Median               Income Range ($)
      Extremely Low Income                                           30%                           $31,850
      Very Low Income                                            31%-50%                     $31,851-$53,050
      Low Income                                                 51%-80%                     $53,051-$84,900
      Moderate Income                                           81%-120%                    $84,901-$126,600
      Above Moderate Income                                         >120%                          >$126,600
    Notes:
    1
      Based on HUD income categories.
    2
      Based on 2013 State AMI of $105,500 for Santa Clara County (household of four persons).
    Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2013,
    http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/rep/state/inc2k13.pdf.
Based on the HUD 2006-2010 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy shown in Table 13-13, 26.6
percent of owner-occupied households and 76.6 percent of renter-occupied households in Gilroy were
within the extremely low-, very low-, and low-income categories. Approximately 18.9 percent of both
types of households were within the extremely low-income category; 12.6 percent of the county’s
households were within the extremely low-income category. In Gilroy, the percentage of households
within both the extremely low- and very-low income categories was 32.8 percent, while only 23.0
percent of the county’s households were within the combined categories.
                                                    TABLE 13-13
                                   HOUSEHOLD INCOME BY TENURE
                                                     City of Gilroy
                                                          2012
                                                                                                 Total Occupied
              Income Level                       Renter-Occupied         Owner-Occupied
                                                                                                  Housing Units
City of Gilroy                                  Number      Percent     Number     Percent     Number     Percent
Extremely Low Income (<30% AMI)                     1,935      36.9%          735       8.3%       2,670     18.9%
Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)                        1,205      23.0%          760       8.5%       1,965     13.9%
Low Income (51-80% AMI)                               875      16.7%          870       9.8%       1,745     12.3%
Moderate Income and Above (>80% AMI)                1,230      23.5%        6,540     73.4%        7,770     54.9%
Total                                               5,245       100%        8,905      100%       14,150      100%
Santa Clara County                              Number      Percent     Number     Percent     Number     Percent
Extremely Low Income (<30% AMI)                    22,375        6.3%      53,020     21.8%       75,395     12.6%
Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)                       26,995        7.6%      34,835     14.3%       61,830     10.4%
Low Income (51-80% AMI)                            27,000        7.6%      29,325     12.1%       56,325       9.4%
Moderate Income and Above (>80% AMI)              277,025      78.4%      126,170     51.8%     403,195      67.6%
Total                                             353,400     100.0%      243,350    100.0%     596,745     100.0%
Source: 2006-2010 HUD CHAS data.
Page 13-14                                                                                       Background Report
                                                                                         Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Housing Inventory and Market Conditions
This section describes the housing stock and market conditions in the city of Gilroy. By analyzing past
and current housing trends, future housing needs can be projected.
Housing Stock Profile
Table 13-14 summarizes the number of housing units in the city and county from 2000 to 2013. In 2000,
Gilroy had 12,152 housing units. By 2010, the number of housing units increased to 14,854, a 22 percent
increase. In 2013, the DOF reported 15,358 housing units within the city. According to the DOF,
currently 2.4 percent of housing units in the county are within Gilroy’s boundaries.
                                                     TABLE 13-14
                                       NUMBER OF HOUSING UNITS
                                      City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                        2000-2013
                                                                                          Gilroy as Percent of
                                                                 Santa Clara
                 Year                      Gilroy                                          Total Santa Clara
                                                                    County
                                                                                              County Units
      2000                                         12,167                  579,329                            2.1%
      2010                                         14,854                  631,920                            2.4%
      2013                                         15,358                  639,446                            2.4%
    Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF3, H1, U.S. Census 2010 SF1, H1, and Department of Finance Table E-5, 2013.
Unit Size
Table 13-15 summarizes the distribution of unit size by tenure in 2012. The most common unit size for
renter-occupied units was two-bedroom units (38.2 percent). The second largest group of renter-
occupied units was three-bedroom units (27.3 percent). Owner-occupied units were larger, on average;
36 percent of owner-occupied units had three bedrooms and 42.3 percent had four bedrooms.
                                                     TABLE 13-15
                                             UNIT SIZE BY TENURE
                                                      City of Gilroy
                                                            2012
                                                                                                Total Occupied
             Unit Size                Owner-Occupied               Renter-Occupied
                                                                                                 Housing Units
                                                             1                          1                          1
                                      Units        Percent         Units      Percent          Units       Percent
     Studio/1 bedroom                       206          2.4%         1,326        22.2%          1,532       10.4%
     2 bedrooms                             813          9.3%         2,276        38.2%          3,089       21.0%
     3 bedrooms                          3,154         36.1%          1,627        27.3%          4,781       32.5%
     4 bedrooms                          3,690         42.3%            587          9.8%         4,277       29.1%
     5 or more bedrooms                     867          9.9%           148          2.5%         1,015         6.9%
     Total                               8,730          100%          5,964         100%         14,694        100%
          1
   Note: Percentages may not equal 100 percent due to rounding
   Source: 2012 ASC B25042.
Background Report                                                                                             Page 13-15
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Unit Type
Table 13-16 summarizes Gilroy’s housing inventory by unit type from 2000 to 2013. The 2010 U.S.
Census shows single family detached units were the largest housing types in Gilroy with 9,997 units, or
67.3 percent. Multifamily units made up 24.6 percent of the housing stock in 2010 with 3,653 units.
From 2010 to 2012, the number of units for all housing types increased, except for single family
attached units, which remained the same at 887 units. In 2013 single family detached housing continued
to be the most prevalent housing type (10,451 units) in Gilroy comprising 68.1 percent of the housing
inventory; 24.1 percent of the housing stock was composed of multifamily units (3,703). In Santa Clara
County, single family detached housing made up 54.1 percent of the housing stock in 2013 with 346,145
units, and multifamily units made up 34 percent of the housing stock with 212,047 units.
                                                     TABLE 13-16
                                 HOUSING INVENTORY BY UNIT TYPE
                                      City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                        2000-2013
                                                 2000                       2010                       2013
            Housing Type
                                        Number Percent Number Percent                         Number       Percent
    City of Gilroy
    Single family, detached                 7,768        63.8%         9,997        67.3%        10,451       68.1%
    Single family, attached                    742         6.1%          887          6.0%           887       5.8%
    Multifamily                             3,225        26.5%         3,653        24.6%         3,703       24.1%
    Mobile homes                               432         3.6%          317          2.1%           317       2.1%
    Other (Boats, RV, etc.)                       0          0%             0           0%             0         0%
                                                  1
    Total Housing Units                   12,167          100%        14,854        100%         15,358       100%
    Santa Clara County
    Single family, detached               323,923        55.9%      344,586           55%       346,145       54.1%
    Single family, attached                52,736          9.1%       61,517          10%        62,201        10%
    Multifamily                           182,999        31.6%      206,779         32.7%       212,047       33.2%
    Mobile homes                           19,102          3.3%       19,038            3%       19,053          3%
    Other (Boats, RV, etc.)                    569         0.1%             0           0%             0         0%
                                                  1
    Total Housing Units                  579,329          100%      631,920         100%        639,446       100%
          1
    Note: Discrepancy in 2000 SF3 total housing units data due to sampling error.
    Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF3, H30 and California Department of Finance Table E-5, 2010 and 2013.
Page 13-16                                                                                             Background Report
                                                                                               Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-17 shows occupied housing units by tenure in 2012. This excludes vacant housing units. As
shown in Table 13-17, the majority of owner-occupied housing units were single family detached,
comprising 90.1 percent of all owner-occupied units. Renter-occupied units were predominately
multifamily with five or more units in the complex, with 34.9 percent of total renter-occupied units.
                                                  TABLE 13-17
                                            UNIT TYPE BY TENURE
                                                   City of Gilroy
                                                         2012
                                                                                      Total Occupied
                                        Owner-Occupied          Renter- Occupied
                                                                                       Housing Units
                                                          1                       1                     1
                                        Units    Percent        Units    Percent     Units     Percent
    Single family, detached               7,865      90.1%        1,503      25.2%     9,368       63.8%
    Single family, attached                 424        4.9%         590       9.9%     1,014         6.9%
    Multi-family (2-4 units)                136        1.6%       1,723      28.9%     1,859       12.7%
    Multi-family (5+ units)                  67        0.8%       2,079      34.9%     2,146       14.6%
    Mobile homes                            238        2.7%          69       1.2%       307         2.1%
    Other (e.g., boats, RV, etc.)             0          0%           0         0%         0           0%
    Total                                 8,730       100%        5,964      100%     14,694        100%
           1
     Note: Percentages may not equal 100 percent due to rounding.
     Source: 2012 ACS B25032.
Tenure
Approximately 61 percent of Gilroy’s housing units were owner-occupied and 39 percent of the units
were renter-occupied in 2010. As shown in Table 13-18 the percentage of owner-occupied units in
Gilroy was comparatively higher than Santa Clara County and California.
                                                  TABLE 13-18
                                       OCCUPIED UNITS BY TENURE
                                City of Gilroy, Santa Clara County, and California
                                                         2010
                                  Owner-Occupied             Renter- Occupied              Total
                                                      1                         1                         1
                                Number        Percent       Number      Percent     Number       Percent
    Gilroy                            8,624      60.8%           5,551     39.1%        14,175      100%
    Santa Clara County             348,298       57.6%         255,906     42.4%       604,204      100%
    California                   7,035,371       56.0%       5,542,127     44.1%    12,577,498      100%
           1
     Note: Percent of Total in each geography
     Source: U.S. Census 2010 SF1, QT-H2.
Vacancy Rates
Vacancy rates are indicators of housing supply and demand. Low vacancy rates influence greater upward
price pressures. Higher vacancy rates indicate downward price pressure. A four to five percent vacancy
rate is considered “healthy.” In 2000, the vacancy rate in Gilroy was 2.2 percent. The vacancy rate
reported by DOF in 2013 increased to 4.6 percent.
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-17
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-19 summarizes the number of occupied and vacant units in Gilroy from 2000 to 2013.
                                                     TABLE 13-19
                                             OCCUPANCY STATUS
                                                      City of Gilroy
                                                     2000 and 2013
            Occupancy Status                     2000             Percent               2013            Percent
      Occupied Housing Units                         11,894              97.8%              14,657           95.4%
      Vacant Housing Units                              273               2.2%                 701            4.6%
                                                           1
      Total Housing Units                           12,167               100%               15,358           100%
           1
    Note: Discrepancy in 2000 SF3 total housing units data due to sampling error.
    Source: U.S. Census 2000 SF3, H6 and California Department of Finance Table E-5, 2013.
Age of Housing Stock
The age of a housing unit is often an indicator of housing conditions. In general, housing that is 30 years
or older may exhibit need for repairs based on the useful life of materials. Housing over 50 years old is
considered aged and is more likely to exhibit a need for major repairs.
Table 13-20 provides a summary of age of housing stock by tenure in 2012. Approximately 40 percent of
owner-occupied units in the city were built before 1980 (i.e., more than 30 years old) and 10.2 percent
were built before 1960 (i.e., more than 50 years old). Of the renter-occupied units, 44.3 percent were
built before 1980 and 13.2 percent were built before 1960.
                                                     TABLE 13-20
                 TENURE BY AGE OF HOUSING STOCK (OCCUPIED UNITS)
                                                      City of Gilroy
                                                           2012
                                                                                                Total Occupied
                                      Owner-Occupied              Renter- Occupied
                                                                                                 Housing Units
                                                             1                            1                        1
             Year Built               Units        Percent         Units       Percent          Units     Percent
                   2
     2010 or later                            0           0%              0             0%            0          0%
     2000-2009                          1,797          20.6%          1,331         22.3%         3,128       21.3%
     1990-1999                          1,959          22.4%            707         11.9%         2,666       18.1%
     1980-1989                          1,372          15.7%          1,280         21.5%         2,652       18.1%
     1970-1979                          1,712          19.6%          1,308         21.9%         3,020       20.1%
     1960-1969                            990          11.3%            547           9.2%        1,537       10.5%
     1950-1959                            492           5.6%            396           6.6%          888        6.0%
     1940-1949                            204           2.3%            131           2.2%          335        2.3%
     1939 or earlier                      204           2.3%            264             4.4         468          3.2
     Total                              8,730          100%           5,964          100%        14,694       100%
    Notes:
    1
      Percentages may not equal 100 percent due to rounding
    2
      According to the Department of Finance, 504 new housing units were built between 2010 and 2013. These
    units are not accounted for in the ACS data likely due to a sampling error.
    Source: 2012 ACS B25036.
Page 13-18                                                                                            Background Report
                                                                                               Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Housing Conditions
Housing is considered substandard when conditions are found to be below the minimum standard of
living defined in the California Health and Safety Code. Households living in substandard conditions are
considered to be in need of housing assistance, even if they are not seeking alternative housing
arrangements, due to threat to health and safety.
In addition to structural deficiencies and standards, the lack of infrastructure and utilities often serves as
an indicator for substandard conditions. Table 13-21 summarizes the number of units lacking plumbing
or complete kitchen facilities. According to the 2012 ACS three-year estimates, 28 occupied-units in
Gilroy lacked complete plumbing facilities. All 28 of the units were owner-occupied. Sixty-one occupied
units also lacked complete kitchen facilities. Of those lacking complete kitchen facilities, 13 were owner-
occupied and 43 were renter-occupied. It should be noted that there might be some overlap in the
number of substandard housing units, as some units may lack both complete plumbing and kitchen
facilities.
                                               TABLE 13-21
             UNITS LACKING PLUMBING OR COMPLETE KITCHEN FACILITIES
                                                City of Gilroy
                                                     2012
             Units              Owner Occupied           Renter Occupied                    Total
     Lacking complete
                                                 28                          0                          28
     plumbing facilities
     Lacking complete
                                                 13                         48                          61
     kitchen facilities
   Source: 2012 ACS B25049 and B25053.
Code Enforcement activities in the city of Gilroy are conducted by two Code Enforcement officers. The
officers respond to complaints about substandard housing conditions reported by residents. A large
number of these complaints come from the city’s Neighborhood Revitalization Strategy Area (NRSA)
which is the area bordered by Highway 101 on the east, the intersection of Monterey Road and Highway
101 on the south, Las Animas Avenue on the north, and on the west side partially by several streets
including Monterey Road, 1st Street, Rosanna Street and 7th Street, Eigleberry Street, and 10th Street. The
NRSA has neighborhood associations that work with city staff, including the Police Department, to
monitor the housing code and blight enforcement.
Neighborhood complaints received by Code Enforcement regarding sub-standard housing in October
through December 2013 include:
        Someone is living in a detached garage and in a detached unit next to the pool;
        Occupants living without water and dwelling being uninhabitable;
        A two-garage style granny units at the rear of the property with people living in them, and have
         many cars parked and stored in the street;
        A young couple is living in a detached garage at the rear of the property;
Background Report                                                                                   Page 13-19
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
        Persons living in a substandard unit; breaker is constantly tripping, plumbing leaking, bedrooms
        lack egress, and the electric stove shocks tenants intermittently;
       People living at the rear of a building without a certificate of occupancy.
In 2013, the City allocated $13,500 of CDBG funds for Code Enforcement Officers to respond to
complaints regarding housing code violations. Gilroy’s Housing Trust Fund budget for Program Year 2013
is estimated to be $72,172 for rehabilitation of low-income rental and owner-occupied properties,
special needs and homeless capital projects, as well as for public services related to homelessness and
special needs housing. The City allocated $85,000 for competitive awards for services related to
homelessness, affordable housing, and special needs housing; another $95,000 will be available for
services addressing fair housing, tenant-landlord information and referral, foreclosure counseling, and
the Gilroy Streets Team. The City has dedicated up to $96,000 of CDBG funds for services provided
within the Neighborhood Revitalization Strategy Area, which will be restricted to employment and youth
and must be provided by a HUD recognized Community Based Development Organization (CBDO). CDBG
funds of $17,000 will be made available for competitive awards for public service activities.
Many of the low-income multi-family developments in the city are owned by South County Housing, a
non-profit developer located in Gilroy. This organization has a policy of providing high quality
developments and takes pride in the maintenance and upkeep of their affordable properties. They have
purchased older apartment complexes within the city in the past and applied to the City, State, and
Federal government for funds to rehabilitate the complexes to current codes and rent them to low- and
very low-income households. The City of Gilroy can make loans from the Housing Trust Fund for
rehabilitation purposes to multi-family developments or individuals who own properties with two or
more units that need funds for maintenance, repair, and upgrading. Clients must sign a rent restriction
agreement assuring they will provide affordable rents for a specific number of years to their tenants.
Housing Costs and Rents
This section evaluates housing cost trends in Gilroy.
Affordability Gap Analysis
Table 22 shows the affordable housing cost guidelines established in Section 50052.5 and 50053 of the
California Health and Safety Code. The guidelines are based on the median income calculated by the
HCD income limits. The generally accepted definition of housing affordability is for a household to pay
no more than 30 percent of its gross annual income on housing. It should be noted that moderate-
income households and above typically spend greater than 30 percent on household expenses;
therefore, the threshold for overpayment is higher at approximately 35 percent of their income.
                                                 TABLE 13-22
                HOUSING COST LIMITS BY AREA MEDIAN INCOME LEVEL
                Income Level Income Limit                    For Sale                Rental
                Extremely Low       0-30% AMI           30% of 30% of AMI       30% of 30% of AMI
                Very Low            31-50% AMI          30% of 50% of AMI       30% of 50% of AMI
                Low                 51-80% AMI          30% of 70% of AMI       30% of 60% of AMI
                Moderate            81-120% AMI         35% of 110% of AMI 35% of 110% of AMI
              Note: Affordability levels should be adjusted for household size.
              Source: HCD Income Limits.
Page 13-20                                                                                      Background Report
                                                                                         Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-23 summarizes 2013 HCD-defined household income limits for very low-, low-, and moderate-
income households in Santa Clara County (including Gilroy) by the number of persons in the household,
and shows maximum affordable monthly rents and maximum affordable purchase prices for homes.
Households earning the 2013 area median income for a family of four in Gilroy ($105,500) could afford
to spend up to $31,656 a year, or $2,638 per month, on housing without being considered “overpaying.”
For renters, this is a straightforward calculation, but home ownership costs are less transparent.
A household can typically qualify to purchase a home that is 2.5 to 3.0 times the annual income of that
household, depending on the down payment, the level of other long-term obligations (such as a car
loan), and interest rates. In practice, the interaction of these factors allows some households to qualify
for homes priced at more than three times their annual income, while other households may be limited
to purchasing homes no more than two times their annual incomes. These factors—interest rates,
insurance, and taxes—are held constant in the table below in order to determine maximum affordable
rent and purchase price for households of each income category. It is important to note that this table is
used for illustrative purposes only; the City uses a different methodology to calculate affordability costs
than HUD. The information provided in Table 13-23 realistically reflects the difficulty in affording rent
and purchase prices in the city of Gilroy.
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-21
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                   TABLE 13-23
                          ABILITY TO PAY BASED ON HUD INCOME LIMITS
                                                 Santa Clara County
                                                          2013
  Extremely Low-Income Households at 30% of 2013 Median Family Income (MFI)
  Number of Persons                                    1             2           3           4           5          6
  Income Level                                  $22,150      $25,300      $28,500   $31,650        $34,200    $36,700
  Max. Monthly Gross Rent (1)                     $554          $633         $713       $791          $855      $918
  Max. Purchase Price (2)                       $89,470     $102,193     $115,119  $127,842       $138,143   $148,241
  Very Low-Income Households at 50% of 2013 MFI
  Number of Persons                                    1             2           3           4           5          6
  Income Level                                  $36,950      $42,200      $47,500   $52,750        $56,950    $61,200
  Max. Monthly Gross Rent (1)                     $924        $1,055        $1,188   $1,319         $1,424     $1,530
  Max. Purchase Price (2)                      $149,251     $170,457     $191,865  $213,071       $230,036   $247,203
  Low-Income Households at 70% of MFI for For Sale and 60% of 2013 MFI for Rental
  Number of Persons                                    1             2           3           4           5          6
  Income Level for For Sale (70% MFI)           $51,700      $59,100      $66,450   $73,850        $79,750    $85,650
  Income Level for For Rental (60% MFI)         $44,300      $50,650      $56,950   $63,300        $68,350    $73,450
  Max. Monthly Gross Rent (1)                    $1,108       $1,266        $1,424   $1,583         $1,709     $1,836
  Max. Purchase Price (2)                      $208,830 $238,720         $268,409  $298,299       $322,131   $345,962
  Median-Income Households at 100% of 2013 MFI
  Number of Persons                                    1             2           3           4           5          6
  Income Level                                  $73,850      $84,400      $94,950  $105,500       $113,950   $122,400
  Max. Monthly Gross Rent (1)                    $1,846       $2,110        $2,374   $2,638         $2,849     $3,060
  Max. Purchase Price (2)                      $298,299 $340,913         $383,527  $426,142       $460,273   $494,405
  Moderate-Income Households at 110% of 2013 MFI
  Number of Persons                                    1             2           3           4           5          6
  Income Level                                  $81,250      $92,850     $104,450  $116,050       $125,350   $134,600
  Max. Monthly Gross Rent/Payments (1)           $2,370       $2,708        $3,046   $3,385         $3,656     $3,926
  Max. Purchase Price (2)                      $382,888 $437,553 $492,217 $546,882 $590,708 $634,298
Notes:
1
 Assumes that 30 percent of income is available for either: monthly rent, including utilities; or mortgage payment,
taxes, mortgage insurance, and homeowners insurance.
2
 Assumes 96.5 percent loan at 4.5 percent annual interest rate and 30-year term; assumes taxes, mortgage
insurance, and homeowners’ insurance account for 21 percent of total monthly payments.
3
 2013 State Area Median Income for Santa Clara County $105,500
Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2013,
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/rep/state/inc2k13.pdf; Mintier Harnish, 2013.
Page 13-22                                                                                         Background Report
                                                                                           Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Median Home Sales Price
Figure 13-1 shows the historical home prices in Gilroy between January 2004 and December 2013. After
2007, the housing market slowdown affected home sale prices in Gilroy. Between mid-2007 and early
2012, the home sales prices decreased by approximately 50 percent, making housing more affordable.
Since then, the median sales prices for new and resale homes in Gilroy have increased.
                          FIGURE 13-1 HISTORICAL HOME PRICES IN GILROY
                                                2004-2013
   $800,000
   $700,000
   $600,000
   $500,000
   $400,000
   $300,000
   $200,000
   $100,000
            $0
Source: zillow.com, accessed December 12, 2013.
Background Report                                                                         Page 13-23
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
As shown in Table 13-24, the median sales price significantly increased by 25 percent between October
2012 and October 2013 from $420,000 to $499,000. In October 2013, the median sales price in Santa
Clara County was $659,000, which represents a 20.4 percent increase since October 2012. In October
2013, the median sales price in Santa Clara County was 31.8 percent higher than the median sales price
in Gilroy.
                                                      TABLE 13-24
                                              MEDIAN SALES PRICE
    City of Gilroy, City of Campbell, City of Santa Clara, City of San Jose, City of Morgan Hill, and
                                                   Santa Clara County
                                                       2012 and 2013
       Jurisdiction                     October 2012                    October 2013                  % Change
Gilroy                                                $461,000                       $500,000                     8.5%
Campbell                                              $600,000                       $750,000                    25.0%
Santa Clara                                           $565,000                       $678,000                    20.0%
San Jose                                              $465,000                       $599,500                    28.9%
Morgan Hill                                           $514,500                       $674,000                    31.0%
Santa Clara County                                    $547,250                       $659,000                    20.4%
Source: DataQuick, http://www.dqnews.com/Charts/Monthly-Charts/CA-City-Charts/ZIPCAR.aspx, accessed December 12, 2013.
The maximum affordable purchase price for a median income four person household is $426,142,
whereas the median sales price in Gilroy was $500,000 in October 2013, an affordability gap of $67,130.
The median sales price in Gilroy was out of reach for lower-income families, but within reach for many
moderate-income families in Santa Clara County. It is likely that housing prices will continue this upward
trend during the Housing Element planning period.
Rental Prices
Table 13-25 summarizes the average monthly rent by unit size in 2013. According to the RealFacts
Annual Report for 2013, the average rental rate for a one-bedroom, one bath unit was $1,433; a two-
bedroom, one bath unit was $1,584; a two-bedroom, two bath unit was $1,776; and a three-bedroom,
two-bath unit was $1,877.
                                                      TABLE 13-25
                               AVERAGE MONTHLY RENT BY UNIT SIZE
                                                       City of Gilroy
                                                            2013
                                    Unit Size                      Average Monthly Rent
                                                                                                 1
                         Studio                                                              N/A
                         1 bedroom, 1 bath                                                 $1,433
                         2 bedrooms, 1 bath                                                $1,584
                         2 bedrooms, 2 baths                                               $1,776
                         3 bedrooms, 2 baths                                               $1,877
                               1
                         Note: Rental rate for studio units not available in report.
                         Source: RealFacts, Annual Trend, obtained December 13, 2013.
Table 13-26 shows the number of households by percentage of household income spent on rent in
2012. According to the 2012 American Community Survey, 54 percent of renter households in Gilroy
Page 13-24                                                                                           Background Report
                                                                                              Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
spent 30 percent or more of their household income on rent in 2012. And 31.3 percent spent 50 percent
or more on rent. Rental housing is generally affordable to moderate-income households within the city.
Extremely low- and very low- income groups would not be able to afford a market-rate apartment in
Gilroy. The average rents for one-bedroom to three-bedroom units would be affordable to the low-,
moderate-, and above moderate-income groups.
                                            TABLE 13-26
              GROSS RENT AS A PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME
                                              City of Gilroy
                                                   2012
                                                        Number of              Percent of
               Percent of Household Income
                                                       Households             Households
             Less than 10 percent                                    131                 2.2%
             10 to 14.9 percent                                      358                 6.0%
             15 to 19.9 percent                                      483                 8.1%
             20 to 24.9 percent                                      806               13.5%
             25 to 29.9 percent                                      872               14.6%
             30 to 34.9 percent                                      533                 8.9%
             35 to 39.9 percent                                      367                 6.2%
             40 to 49.9 percent                                      452                 7.6%
             50 percent or more                                    1,864               31.3%
             Not computed                                             98                 1.6%
             Total                                                 5,964              100.0%
             Source: 2012 ACS B25070
Overpayment
Overpayment is defined as households paying more than 30 percent of their gross income on housing
related expenses, including rent or mortgage payments and utilities. Severe overpayment occurs when
households pay 50 percent or more of their gross income for housing. Higher costs for housing may
contribute to households having a limited ability to cover other everyday living expenses.
The impact of housing costs is more apparent for extremely low-, very low-, and low-income
households, especially renter households.
In 2010, 4,350 (48.8 percent) owner-occupied households and 2,960 (56.4 percent) of renter-occupied
households experienced overpayment. Altogether, 7,310 households experienced overpayment, which
represents 53.1 percent of households in Gilroy. In the county, 240,480 households experienced
overpayment, which represents 40.3 percent of total households.
Table 13-27 summarizes housing cost as a percentage of household income for owner-occupied and
renter-occupied households.
Background Report                                                                             Page 13-25
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                 TABLE 13-27
                  HOUSING COST AS A PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME
                                    City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                      2010
                                          Households             Percentage of Income Spent on Housing
                                                                                       Severe Overpayment
                                                              Overpayment (>30%
    Housing Income Range                                                                 (>50% income on
                                      Number Percent          income on housing)
                                                                                              housing)
                                                              Number       Percent     Number       Percent
City of Gilroy
Owner Households
Extremely Low Income (<30% AMI)             735      8.3%           470        63.9%         365        49.7%
Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)                760      8.5%           370        48.7%         295        38.8%
Low Income (51-80% AMI)                     870      9.8%           655        75.3%         510        58.6%
Moderate Income and above
                                          6,540     73.4%         2,855        43.7%         730        11.2%
 (>80% AMI)
Total                                     8,905    100.0%         4,350        48.8%       5,200        58.4%
Renter Households
Extremely Low Income (<30% AMI)           1,935     36.9%         1,675        86.6%       1,160        59.9%
Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)              1,205     23.0%           795        66.0%         400        33.2%
Low Income (51-80% AMI)                     875     16.7%           375        42.9%         115        13.1%
Moderate Income and above
                                          1,230     23.5%           115         9.3%           0          0.0%
 (>80% AMI)
Total                                     5,245    100.0%         2,960        56.4%       1,675        31.9%
Santa Clara County
Owner Households
Extremely Low Income (<30% AMI)          22,375      6.3%        15,855        70.9%      13,495        60.3%
Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)             26,995      7.6%        16,030        59.4%      12,015        44.5%
Low Income (51-80% AMI)                  27,000      7.6%        15,865        58.8%       9,730        36.0%
Moderate Income and above
                                        277,025     78.4%        90,450        32.7%      22,750          8.2%
(>80% AMI)
Total                                   353,400    100.0%       138,200        39.1%      57,990        16.4%
Renter Households
Extremely Low Income (<30% AMI)          53,020     21.8%        41,865        79.0%      35,400        66.8%
Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)             34,835     14.3%        29,020        83.3%      12,485        35.8%
Low Income (51-80% AMI)                  29,325     12.1%        16,595        56.6%       3,035        10.3%
Moderate Income and above
                                        126,170     51.8%        14,800        11.7%       1,035          0.8%
(>80% AMI)
Total                                   243,350    100.0%       102,280        42.0%      51,955        21.3%
Source: 2006-2010 HUD CHAS data.
Overcrowding
An overcrowded housing unit is defined by the U.S. Census Bureau as a housing unit occupied by more
than one person per room (excluding bathrooms, kitchen, hallway, and closet space). Overcrowding can
affect public facilities and services, reduce the quality of the physical environment, and create
conditions that contribute to deterioration of the housing stock.
Page 13-26                                                                                  Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-28 summarizes overcrowding in Gilroy in 2012. Approximately 10 percent of Gilroy’s
households were overcrowded. Instances of overcrowding vary by tenure. Approximately four percent
of owner households and 19 percent of renter households were overcrowded.
                                                TABLE 13-28
                                  OVERCROWDED HOUSEHOLDS
                                                 City of Gilroy
                                                      2012
                          Owners                             Renters                             Total
Persons per Overcrowded             Percent      Overcrowded Percent of             Overcrowded Percent of
    Room           Households       of Total      Households            Total        Households          Total
1.00                     8,399         96.2%               4,835           81.1%            13,234         88.4%
1.01 to 1.50                142           1.6%                883           14.8%              1,025         7.0%
>1.50                       189           2.2%                246            4.1%                435         3.0%
Total                       331           3.8%              1,129           18.9%              1,460        10.0%
Overcrowded
Note: Total owner-occupied: 8,730; total renter-occupied: 5,964; total all households: 14,694.
Source: 2012 ACS B25014.
Special Needs Groups
Certain segments of the population may have more difficulty finding decent, affordable housing due to
special needs. This section identifies the housing needs for elderly persons, large households, female-
headed households, persons with disabilities (including developmental disabilities), homeless persons,
and farmworkers.
In addition to the data from the 2012 American Community Survey, this section also uses data from the
2006-2010 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) published by HUD. The CHAS provides
information related to households with housing problems, including overpayment, overcrowding,
and/or without complete kitchen facilities and plumbing systems. The CHAS data is based on the 2006-
2010 ACS data files, but differs from the standard files by including a variety of housing need variables
split by HUD-defined income limits and HUD-specified household types.
Elderly Persons
Elderly persons are considered a special needs group because they are more likely to have fixed
incomes. Elderly persons are generally defined as people age 65 years and older. Elderly persons often
have special needs related to housing location and construction. Because of limited mobility, elderly
persons typically need access to services and amenities (e.g., medical and shopping) and public transit.
In terms of housing construction, elderly persons may need ramps, handrails, elevators, lower cabinets
and counters, and special security devices to allow for greater self-protection.
Background Report                                                                                      Page 13-27
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
According to the 2012 ACS three-year estimates, 9.6 percent of Gilroy’s residents were elderly, while
11.4 percent of the county’s residents were elderly. As shown in Table 13-29, 19.3 percent of Gilroy’s
households had an elderly householder in 2012, which is similar to the percent of elderly householders
in the county (18.5 percent).
                                              TABLE 13-29
                              HOUSEHOLDERS BY TENURE AND AGE
                                  City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                    2012
                                             Gilroy                        Santa Clara County
    Householder Age             Households            Percent        Households            Percent
  15-24 years                               461              3.1%             14,725                2.4%
  25-34 years                             2,466             16.8%            101,924              16.8%
  35-64 years                             8,937             60.8%            378,297              62.3%
  65-74 years                             1,936             13.2%             59,436                9.8%
  75 plus years                             894              6.1%             52,835                8.7%
  Total                                  14,694             100%             607,217               100%
Source: 2012 ACS B25007.
As indicated in Table 13-30, the 2012 median household income for households with a householder age
65 and older was $50,455 in Gilroy and $51,255 in Santa Clara County. This is compared to the citywide
median income of $76,060 and countywide median income of $89,445. The population of householders
age 65 and older generally falls in the very-low income category based on the county median income.
                                              TABLE 13-30
                              ELDERLY MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME
                                  City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                    2012
                                          City of Gilroy                 Santa Clara County
         Householder Age
                                         Median Income                     Median Income
      65 years and older                                  $50,455                           $51,255
      All Households                                      $76,060                           $89,445
     Source: 2012 ACS B19049.
Page 13-28                                                                              Background Report
                                                                                Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Based on HUD’s 2006-2010 data CHAS data shown in Table 13-31, 54.3 percent of elderly households
were within the extremely low- and very low-income categories. Santa Clara County had a smaller
percentage of elderly households within the extremely low- and very low-income categories (38.5
percent). 37.5 percent of Gilroy’s elderly population and 50 percent of Santa Clara County’s elderly
population fell within the moderate income and above category.
                                               TABLE 13-31
                        ELDERLY HOUSEHOLD INCOME DISTRIBUTION
                                   City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                      2012
                                           Gilroy                        Santa Clara County
             Income             Number            Percent            Number              Percent
      Extremely Low                   1,090               41.4%            25,195                22.1%
      Income (<30% AMI)
      Very Low Income                   340               12.9%            18,640                16.4%
      (31-50% AMI)
      Low Income (51-                   215                8.2%            13,420                11.8%
      80% AMI)
      Moderate Income                   985               37.5%            56,695                50.0%
      and Above (>80%
      AMI)
      Total                           2,630             100.0%            113,950               100.0%
     Source: 2006-2010 HUD CHAS data.
The U.S. Census Bureau provides information on the number of persons with disabilities of varying types
and degrees. The types of disabilities included in the Census are:
      Sensory: Blindness, deafness, or a severe vision or hearing impairment.
      Physical: A condition that substantially limits one or more basic physical activities, such as
       walking, climbing stairs, reaching, lifting, or carrying.
      Mental: A condition lasting six months or more that made it difficult to perform certain activities
       including learning, remembering, or concentrating.
      Self-care: A condition lasting six months or more that made it difficult to perform certain
       activities including dressing, bathing, or getting around inside the home.
      Go-outside-home: Only asked for population 16 and older of a condition lasting six months or
       more that made it difficult to perform certain activities including going outside the home alone to
       shop or visit a doctor's office.
      Employment: Only asked for the population 16 and older of a condition lasting six months or
       more that made it difficult to perform certain activities including working at a job or business.
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-29
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
As shown in Table 13-32, 15 percent of Gilroy’s elderly population had one type of disability in 2012, and
24 percent had two or more types of disability. The disability status in Gilroy and Santa Clara County are
similar; 13.9 percent of the county’s elderly population had one type of disability, while 19.7 percent
had two or more types of disability.
                                                TABLE 13-32
              ELDERLY WITH DISABILITIES LIMITING INDEPENDENT LIVING
                                  City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                      2012
                                          Gilroy                             Santa Clara County
                                                  Percent of                           Percent of People
     Disability Status         Total                             1       Total                        1
                                              People Age 65+                                 Age 65+
     With one type of
                                       685                   14.8%           27,955                   13.9%
     disability
     With two or more
                                     1,104                   23.8%           39,611                   19.7%
     types of disability
     Total with a
                                     1,789                   38.5%           67,566                   33.5%
     Disability
   Note: Total number of people 65+in Gilroy: 4,641; total number of people 65+ in Santa Clara County: 201,454
   Source: 2012 ACS C18108.
Page 13-30                                                                                     Background Report
                                                                                      Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-33 provides a summary of housing problems experienced by elderly households in Gilroy.
According to the 2006-2010 CHAS data, 28.6 percent of elderly renter-occupied households and 18.6
percent of elderly owner-occupied households experience overpayment. The increasing number of
elderly persons in the population is creating a demand for more affordable housing. The City will
address the needs of the elderly population through policies and programs that address affordability
and special design guidelines for the elderly.
                                              TABLE 13-33
                       ELDERLY HOUSEHOLDS – HOUSING PROBLEMS
                                                City of Gilroy
                                                 2006-2010
                                                             Renters                       Owners
     Elderly Households – Household Income
                                                                          525                           465
      30% MFI
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   25.3%                         55.9%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                         2
                                                                        31.4%                         19.4%
                         2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                          40.0%                         36.6%
     Elderly Households – Household Income
                                                                          110                           230
     > 30% to  50% MFI
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   50.0%                         15.2%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                         2
                                                                        36.4%                         23.9%
                         2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                          54.6%                         17.4%
     Elderly Households – Household Income
                                                                           40                           175
     > 50% to  80% MFI
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   62.5%                         20.0%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                         2
                                                                        25.0%                         25.7%
                         2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                          25.0%                         25.7%
     Elderly Households – Households Income
                                                                          130                           855
     > 80% MFI
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   11.5%                         18.1%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                         2
                                                                        11.5%                         15.2%
                         2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                           0.0%                          2.2%
     Total Elderly Households                                             805                         1,725
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   28.3%                         28.1%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                         2
                                                                        28.6%                         18.6%
                         2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                          34.8%                         15.9%
   Notes:
   1
    ”Housing Problem” defined as any occupied housing units lacking a complete kitchen, lacking complete
   plumbing, having more than 1.01 persons per room (overcrowded), or costing more than 30 percent of the
   occupant household’s income.
   2
    Percentage of household income spent on housing cost.
   Source: 2006-2010 HUD CHAS data.
Background Report                                                                                    Page 13-31
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Large Households
State housing law defines large households as households with five or more members. Large households
are considered a special needs group because they often require additional bedrooms. As shown in
Table 13-34, in 2012, there were 3,266 households in Gilroy with at least five persons, representing 22.2
percent of the total households in the city. Of the large households, 61.7 percent were renter-occupied
and 38.3 percent were owner-occupied. Santa Clara County exhibited a much smaller percentage of
large households, with only 13.2 percent of total households with five or more persons. Unlike Gilroy,
the majority of large households were owner-occupied, 54 percent, while only 46 percent of large
households were renter-occupied.
                                              TABLE 13-34
                              LARGE HOUSEHOLDS BY TENURE
                                 City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                    2012
                                                Gilroy                         Santa Clara County
 Number of Persons in Unit        Owner          Renter                  Owner        Renter
                                                              Total                                Total
                                Occupied       Occupied                Occupied Occupied
Five                                    641          1,340      1,981       25,560       20,802     46,362
Six                                     457            413        870        9,761        8,136     17,897
Seven or more                           153            262        415        7,856        8,043     15,899
Total Large Household                 1,251          2,015      3,266       43,177       36,981     80,158
Total Households                      8,730          5,964     14,694      345,332      261,885    607,217
                            1
Percent of Total Households           14.3%          33.8%      22.2%        12.5%        14.1%      13.2%
Source: 2012 ACS B25009.
Page 13-32                                                                               Background Report
                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-35 provides a summary of housing problems experienced by large households in the city of
Gilroy. According to the 2006-2010 CHAS data, 47.2 percent of large renter-occupied households and 33
percent of large owner-occupied households experience overpayment. Currently, less than 10 percent
of the City’s rental housing stock has four or more bedrooms (refer to Table 13-15) resulting in a high
percentage of large family households that are forced to live in overcrowded situations. To address this
need, the Housing Element will include policies that will establish incentives and programs to encourage
the development of housing for large families.
                                              TABLE 13-35
                        LARGE HOUSEHOLDS – HOUSING PROBLEMS
                                                City of Gilroy
                                                 2006-2010
                                                             Renters                       Owners
     Large Households – Household Income
                                                                           355                            4
      30% MFI
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                     2.8%                         0.0%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                        2
                                                                        16.9%                          0.0%
                        2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                         80.28%                       100.0%
     Large Households – Household Income
                                                                           220                          100
     > 30% to  50% MFI
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   52.3%                         70.0%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                        2
                                                                        20.5%                          4.0%
                        2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                          27.3%                         65.0%
     Large Households – Household Income
                                                                           220                          285
     > 50% to  80% MFI
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   56.8%                         75.4%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                        2
                                                                          6.8%                        12.3%
                        2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                            0.0%                         1.7%
     Large Households – Households Income
                                                                           210                         1120
     > 80% MFI
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   47.6%                         59.4%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                        2
                                                                          4.8%                        11.6%
                        2
     Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                            0.0%                         8.5%
     Total Large Households                                              1,005                        1,509
                                      1
     Percent with any Housing Problem                                   34.8%                         53.0%
     Percent Cost Burden 30% –  50%
                        2
                                                                        12.9%                         11.2%
                        2
     Percent Cost Burden >50%                                           34.3%                         21.8%
   Notes:
   1
    ”Housing Problem” defined as any occupied housing units lacking a complete kitchen, lacking complete
   plumbing, having more than 1.01 persons per room (overcrowded), or costing more than 30 percent of the
   occupant household’s income.
   2
    Percentage of household income spent on housing cost.
   Source: 2006-2010 HUD CHAS data.
Background Report                                                                                    Page 13-33
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Female-Headed Households
Female-headed households are a special needs group due to comparatively low rates of
homeownership, lower incomes, and high poverty rates experienced by this group. Table 13-36 shows
the number of female-headed households by tenure in 2012. According to the 2012 American
Community Survey data, 13.8 percent of Gilroy’s total households were female-headed compared to
10.7 percent in Santa Clara County. There were 1,144 female-headed households with children and 884
female-headed households without children in Gilroy. Of the total female-headed households in Gilroy,
58 percent were renter-occupied and 42 percent were owner-occupied.
                                                        TABLE 13-36
                             TENURE OF FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS
                                                         City of Gilroy
                                                              2012
                                Number           Percent of        Number         Percent of            Percent of
      Household Type              Owner           Owner             Renter         Renter      Total       Total
                                                                                                                    1
                               Occupied          Occupied         Occupied        Occupied             Households
    Female householder,                  205            24.1%               939        79.8%    1,144            7.8%
    no husband present,
    with own children
    under 18
    Female householder,                  647            75.9%               237        20.2%      884            6.0%
    no husband present,
    without own children
    Total                                852            100%              1,176         100%    2,028          13.8%
  Note: Total number of households in Gilroy in 2012: 14,694
  Source: 2012 ACS B25115.
In 2012, the overall poverty rate in Gilroy was 11.1 percent. As shown in Table 13-37, in 2012, 592 or
29.2 percent of the female-headed households in Gilroy were below poverty level. Of those below
poverty level, 39.6 percent had children under age 18.
                                                     TABLE 13-37
                          POVERTY IN FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS
                                                       City of Gilroy
                                                            2012
                            Number Below           Percent Below Number Above                Percent Above          1
   Household Type                                                                                             Total
                             Poverty Level          Poverty Level          Poverty Level     Poverty Level
Female householder, no                      510                39.6%                   777            60.4%     1,287
husband present, with
own children under 18
Female householder, no                        82               11.1%                   659            88.9%       741
husband present,
without own children
Total                                       592                29.2%                 1,436            70.8%     2,028
      1
Note: Totals do not match totals in Table 13-36 due to sampling error in the ACS.
Source: 2012 ACS B17010.
Page 13-34                                                                                          Background Report
                                                                                             Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Persons with Disabilities
Affordability of appropriate housing and access, both within the home and to/from the home site, are
the primary challenges for persons with disabilities. Access often requires specially designed dwelling
units. Additionally, housing locations near public facilities and public transit are important for this
special needs group.
The U.S. Census Bureau provides information on the number of persons with disabilities of varying types
and degrees. Table 13-38 shows the number of Gilroy residents over the age of five in 2012 with
disabilities. According to the American Community Survey, 4.9 percent of Gilroy residents reported
having one type of disability and 4.3 percent had two or more types of disability in 2012. Similarly, 4.2 of
county residents reported having one type of disability and 4.1 had two or more types of disability.
                                                   TABLE 13-38
                                  PERSONS REPORTING DISABILITIES
                                                    City of Gilroy
                                                          2012
                        With one       Percent of With two or          Percent of                         Percent of
                                                                                         Total with
     Age Group            type of         Age          more types          Age                               Age
                                                1                                1      Disabilities               1
                        disability       Group        of disability      Group                              Group
   5-17 years                    332          3.0%                95            0.9%              427            3.9%
   18-34 years                   169          1.5%               117            1.1%              286            2.6%
   35-64 years                 1,066          5.7%               664            3.5%            1,730            9.2%
   65-74 years                   371         12.1%               528          17.2%               899           29.3%
   75 and older                  314          19.9               576            36.6              890            56.5
   Total 5+ yrs.               2,252         42.8%             1,980          59.3%             4,232           100%
        1
  Note: Total 5-17 year olds: 11,024; 18-34 year olds: 11,133; 35-64 year olds: 18,770; 65-74 year olds: 3,066; 75+
  year olds: 1,575
  Source: 2012 ACS B18108.
Persons with Developmental Disabilities
SB 812, which took effect January 2011, amended State housing element law to require an evaluation of
the special housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities. A "developmental disability" is
defined as a disability that originates before an individual becomes 18 years old, continues or can be
expected to continue indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. This
includes Mental Retardation, Cerebral Palsy, Epilepsy, and Autism.
According to the California Department of Developmental Services, as of November 2013 the San
Andreas Regional Center served 3,793 residents with developmental disabilities in the region and 368
residents in Gilroy. Of the total, 32.8 percent of disabled persons are under the age of 14, 18.2 percent
are ages 15-22, 42.1 percent are ages 23-54, 5.2 percent are ages 55-64, and 1.6 percent are 65 or older.
Most developmentally-disabled residents in Gilroy have an intellectual disability (50.3 percent) and
many are autistic (16.1 percent) (Table 13-39).
Few developmentally-disabled Gilroy residents receiving services from the San Andreas Regional Center
lived in a group home facility (25 percent of adults). Most developmentally-disabled individuals lived at
home (68.2 percent). Many developmentally-disabled persons are able to live and work independently.
Background Report                                                                                         Page 13-35
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
However, more severely disabled individuals require a group living environment with supervision, or an
institutional environment with medical attention and physical therapy. Because developmental
disabilities exist before adulthood, the first housing issue for the developmentally disabled is the
transition from living with a parent/guardian as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an
adult.
                                                    TABLE 13-39
      DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY BY TYPE SERVED BY SAN ANDREAS REGIONAL
                                                       CENTER
                                                                    1
                                                    City of Gilroy
                                                           2013
                                                                 2
              Disability Type                           Number                        Percent
     Autism                                                                 82                     16.1%
     Epilepsy                                                               62                     12.2%
     Cerebral Palsy                                                         63                     12.4%
     Intellectual Disability                                               256                     50.3%
     Other Diagnosis                                                        46                      9.0%
     Total                                                                 509                     100%
   Notes:
   1
    Includes the following zip codes: 95020 and 95021.
   2
    Numbers do not add up to the total because some clients have more than one disability.
   Source: California Department of Developmental Service, December 12, 2013.
Homeless Population
In 2013, the County of Santa Clara, in conjunction with Applied Survey Research (ASR), conducted the
2013 Santa Clara County Homeless Count. Two strategies were used to collect the data for the study: a
point-in-time count and a comprehensive qualitative survey administered to individuals experiencing
homelessness after the completion of the 2013 Point-in-Time Count. The homeless survey showed that
the typical homeless person was living in Santa Clara County at the time they became homeless, and 56
percent had been homeless for one year or more. Of this number, 74 percent were unsheltered, 26
percent were in shelters, and 14 percent of people on the street were in families.
The point-in-time street and shelter census identified 7,631 homeless people in Santa Clara County.
Forty percent of survey respondents reported that the primary cause of their homelessness was due to a
loss of job, and 17 percent of all homeless respondents cited that the primary cause of their
homelessness was due to alcohol and drug abuse.
Table 13-40 summarizes sheltered and unsheltered homeless person in the city of Gilroy according to
the 2013 Santa Clara County Homeless Census and Survey. According to the 2013 study, there were 379
homeless persons in Gilroy, a significant decrease from 2011 (520 homeless persons). Of the total, 254
were sheltered and 125 were unsheltered. Counting existing emergency shelter beds within the city of
Gilroy (refer to Table 13-41), there are nearly enough individual shelter beds based on the count (368
best).
However, service providers to the homeless population in Gilroy expressed that they are experiencing
an increase in homelessness rather than a decrease. They felt the 2013 Census produced an undercount,
which may be attributed to a methodology more appropriate for dense, urban areas. The Census also
Page 13-36                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                    Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
does not account for people sleeping in garages and backyard sheds, in motels, or in vehicles parked out
of sight on private property.
                                                     TABLE 13-40
                                             HOMELESS POPULATION
                                                       City of Gilroy
                                                            2013
                Homeless
                                          Sheltered              Unsheltered               Total
               Population
             Homeless
                                                        254                     125                379
             Individuals
           Source: 2013 Santa Clara County Homeless Census and Survey.
Table 13-41 provides a summary of emergency shelters and transitional housing in Gilroy.
The countywide services and shelter provider, Emergency Housing Consortium LifeBuilders (EHC),
provides cold weather shelter at the Gilroy National Guard Armory from November through March each
year. Community Solutions provides services and shelter targeted to victims of domestic violence and to
youth who are homeless or at risk of homelessness.
                                                     TABLE 13-41
                                      HOMELESS FACILITIES IN GILROY
                                         City of Gilroy and Santa Clara County
                                                            2013
                                                                                               Number of
              Facility Name                     Type of Facility       Target Population
                                                                                             Shelter Beds
                                                                                                           1
      National Guard Winter                Cold Weather Shelter       Individuals and                   100
      Homeless Shelter                                                families
      La Isla Pacifica                     Emergency Shelter/         Women and children                  14
                                           Domestic violence          (under 12 years old)
      Sobrato Apartments                   Transitional/Emergency     Families                           225
                                           Shelter
      Sobrato Apartments                    Permanent Supportive      Chronically Homeless                26
                                           Housing
      Community Solutions                  Transitional Shelter       Single Individuals                  20
      St. Joseph’s Family Center           Transitional Shelter       Youth (some with                     9
                                                                      children)
      Total                                                                                              393
     Note: Limit can be exceeded in freezing conditions.
     Source: City of Gilroy, County of Santa Clara.
In addition to the National Guard Winter Homeless Shelter and La Isla Pacifica, the City of Gilroy
provides annual funds to the EHC San Martin Family Living Center in the neighboring unincorporated
town of San Martin. EHC currently receives $10,000 (each year for two fiscal years) for 36 homeless
residents with 5,000 nights of affordable housing and emergency shelter per fiscal year. The facility
provides 26 family units and eight emergency units for homeless families from December to March, and
to migrant families from May to November. St. Joseph’s Family Center has a homeless prevention
Background Report                                                                                      Page 13-37
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
service and currently receives $15,000 (each year for two fiscal years) for their housing program. The
program serves 300 low-income families to avoid homelessness. Funding also provides emergency
rental assistance to maintain tenure.
The Sobrato Gilroy Homeless Center was a construction project that South County Housing Corporation
(SCHC) planned to develop and construct on Monterey Road to provide 35 single occupancy studio units
for homeless individuals with incomes below 30 percent of the area median income. SCHC also planned
to set aside 17 of the units for individuals that are homeless or at risk of becoming homeless due to
mental illness. The City of Gilroy approved this site as a 140-bed emergency homeless shelter in 2003.
Since that time, acquiring funds to operate shelters has been nearly impossible to obtain and the shelter
was not built. In 2013 SCHC built the 26-studio Gilroy Sobrato Apartments on this site. The apartments
provide permanent housing for chronically homeless individuals. This development closely aligns with
the Federal Housing First concept.
For eight months out of the year, there is no emergency shelter available in South County. The Gilroy
National Guard Armory is only open from late November through March, and typically does not fill to its
capacity. According to conversations with service providers, if the weather is manageable, homeless
individuals express a strong reluctance to use the service, as service times are strict and do not allow for
a flexible schedule. Furthermore, the Armory is not wheelchair-accessible and does not provide
separation for men, women, and families. It also does not provide any support services. The Armory is
primarily used by chronically homeless individuals.
The service providers stress the need for a permanent emergency shelter as well as shelter or housing
for single adults who do not exhibit mental illness or substance abuse disorders. According to the
providers, Gilroy needs more permanent housing for people with extremely low incomes, including
seniors, and physically and mentally disabled adults.
Farmworkers
Farmworkers are defined as persons whose primary incomes are earned through seasonal agricultural
work. The demographics on farm laborers in all California markets are collected and reported on a
regional or countywide basis. The data collected includes income, household status, and length of time
the laborers work in each area. There are generally three classifications: 1) migrant workers move from
place to place, planting and harvesting; 2) annual workers generally work in the same agricultural area
year after year for nine or ten months and spend the rest of the year in their home country; and 3)
permanent workers are employed most of the year in one location and then collect unemployment for a
month or two.
Traditionally, Gilroy has been home to many agricultural businesses and industries. However, the
increase in the retail and service trade and the expansion of the city as a “bedroom community” for
northern Silicon Valley jobs, has reduced the prominent role of agriculture in recent years. ABAG
projects a drop in agricultural jobs in the county through 2020, with the number of agricultural jobs in
Gilroy projected to drop by approximately 25 percent during that period. In 2012, 4.6 percent of Gilroy’s
workforce was employed in the agriculture industry.
Page 13-38                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                   Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
To provide a better estimate of the number of farmworkers in the city, staff contacted local farms. Table
13-42 lists these local farms and the number of year-round and seasonal employees.
                                                   TABLE 13-42
                               ESTIMATED NUMBER OF FARMWORKERS
                                                    City of Gilroy
                                                         2009
                                                       Number of Year-
      Farm Name                      Address                               Number of Seasonal Employees
                                                      Round Employees
 Fiorio Farm                 6330 Thomas Road                   4          200 for a 2-week period
 G & K Farm                  720 Las Animas Ave.                2          8-12 for a 6-month period
 Bonfante Gardens            3675 Hecker Pass Hwy.              7          9 subcontracted
 Goldsmith Seeds             2280 Hecker Pass Rd.              45          Average 3 per day
 Mibau Wong Nursery          2825 Leavesley Rd.                 1          0
 T & C Supplies              4860 Monterey Hwy.                 0          20 in winter; 120 during seed season
 Total                                                         59
Source: City of Gilroy Phone Survey, 2009.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture conducts a Census of Agriculture every five years. Table 13-43
summarizes the 2007 Census results for farm labor in Santa Clara County. The 2007 data is the most
recent data available, as the release of the 2012 Census data has been delayed. There were a total of
5,589 farmworkers in the county in 2007.
Census of Agriculture data from 1992, 1997, 2002, and 2007 shows a decline in the number of hired
farmworkers countywide. Industry Employment Projections from the California Employment
Development Department project that there will be 5,900 farmworkers in the San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa
Clara Metropolitan Statistical Area (Santa Clara and San Benito Counties) by 2018, representing an
estimated 3.3 percent decline in farmworker employment estimates from 2008.
                                                   TABLE 13-43
                               NUMBER OF FARMWORKERS AND FARMS
                                                 Santa Clara County
                                                         2007
                                                         Farmworkers                      Farms
      Farms with less than 10 employees                                809                               287
      Farms with more than 10 employees                             4,780                                 87
         Workers working 150 days or more                           2,848                                  --
         Workers working less than 150 days                         2,747                                  --
      Total Farms                                                   5,589                                374
    Source: 2007 Census of Agriculture, Table 7.
Due to the seasonal nature of agricultural work and relatively low wages, farmworker households often
have a difficult time securing safe, habitable, and affordable housing. To provide for the existing
farmworkers, the Santa Clara County Housing Authority operates the Ochoa Migrant Center in the Gilroy
area. The center contains 100 family units and functions as a migrant camp for an eight-month period
each year. Housing at the Ochoa Migrant Center is available on a seasonal basis for a maximum of 100
Background Report                                                                                      Page 13-39
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
families whose primary income is derived from agricultural-related work. South County Property
Management also operates four housing developments for farmworkers: The Trees, which has 14 units
available for farmworkers and families; Aspen Grove, which has 24 apartments; Maple Gardens, which
has 18 units; and Monterra, which has 28 out of 34 units for farmworkers. The Rodriguez Migrant Labor
Camp, which houses 37 seasonal farmworkers, is privately owned and is located outside of the city
limits. It has a potential to house more workers but is limited due to a potable water supply problem
that has to be resolved before this can occur.
Recognizing the need for farm labor in the community, the City of Gilroy has made farmworker housing
a priority as part of the City’s Balanced Planned Growth and Agricultural Viability Policy. The Santa Clara
Housing Authority, the City of Gilroy, and various non-profit organizations, such as the Gilroy Unified
School District Migrant Education Program, are working together to continue to explore and implement
ways of providing affordable farmworker housing, while conserving the city’s current agricultural
resources.
The Gilroy Zoning Code makes available zoning to accommodate various housing types to address the
needs of farmworkers. Manufactured and modular homes are permitted by-right in all residential zoning
districts; boarding and rooming houses are allowed in all residential zoning districts with a CUP; and
multi-family units are allowed in the R-3 and R-4 residential zoning districts as a matter of right.
Currently, the City’s Zoning Code is not consistent with the Employee Housing Act; therefore, as part of
this Housing Element update, the City will include a program to revise the Zoning Code.
Extremely Low-Income Households
Extremely low-income households are defined as households with income less than 30 percent of the
MFI. The provisions of Government Code Section 65583 (a)(1) require quantification and analysis of
existing and projected housing needs of extremely low-Income households. In 2012, 18.9 percent of
Gilroy households were within the extremely low-income category (refer to Table 13-13).
Page 13-40                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                    Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-44 provides a summary of housing problems experienced by extremely low-Income households
in the city of Gilroy. Extremely low-income renter-occupied households experience both overpayment
and overcrowding. According to data from the 2006-2010 CHAS provided by HUD, 80.1 percent of
extremely low-income households experience at least one type of housing problem.
                                                TABLE 13-44
           EXTREMELY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS – HOUSING PROBLEMS
                                                  City of Gilroy
                                                       2012
                                                                                                   Total
                                                          Renters            Owners
                                                                                               Households
      Household Income  30% MFI                                 1,935                735              2,670
                                       1
      Percent with any Housing Problem                           62.7%              17.4%              80.1%
                          2
      Percent Cost Burden > 30%                                  62.8%              17.6%              80.5%
                          2
      Percent Cost Burden > 50%                                  43.5%              13.7%              57.2%
    Notes:
    1
     ”Housing Problem” defined as any occupied housing units lacking a complete kitchen, lacking complete
    plumbing, having more than 1.01 persons per room (overcrowded), or costing more than 30 percent of the
    occupant household’s income.
    2
     Percentage of household income spent on housing cost
    Source: 2006-2010 HUD CHAS data.
The needs of extremely low-income households include housing units designed for transient/homeless
populations, multi-family rental housing, factory-built housing, mobile homes, housing for agricultural
employees, supportive housing, single-room occupancy units, and workforce housing.
Summary of Existing Housing Needs
        In 2012 45.1 percent of Gilroy households fell within the lower-income categories (i.e., extremely
         low-, very low-, and low-income). In that same year the median income in Gilroy was $76,060,
         while the county median income was $89,445, indicating a higher percentage of low-income
         residents in Gilroy as compared to the county.
        The unemployment rate has decreased significantly since 2009, from 3,400 (16.1 percent)
         unemployed individuals to 2,800 individuals (12.6 percent) in 2012; however, Gilroy’s
         unemployment rate was higher than the unemployment rate in California (10.4 percent).
        According to the 2010 CHAS, 4,350 (48.8 percent) of owner-occupied households and 2,960 (56.4
         percent) of renter-occupied households experienced overpayment. Altogether, 7,310
         households, or 53.1 percent, experienced overpayment. Only 40.3 percent of total households
         experienced overpayment in the county. There is an undeniable need for affordable housing in
         Gilroy, as more than half of the city’s residents are paying more than 30 percent of their income
         on housing.
        In 2012 5,964, or 40.6 percent, of households (14,694) were renter-occupied. Of the renter-
         occupied households, 2,015, or 33.8 percent, are large households, while only 14.1 percent of
         renter-occupied households in Santa Clara County are large households. In Gilroy, there are 587
Background Report                                                                                     Page 13-41
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
        rental units with 4 bedrooms and only 148 with five or more bedrooms, indicating a need for
        larger units.
       The lack of larger units can lead to overcrowding; in Gilroy, 14.8 percent of renter households are
        overcrowded and 4.1 percent are severely overcrowded.
       According to the 2013 Santa Clara County Homeless Census and Survey, there were 379
        homeless persons in Gilroy; 254 homeless, or 67.0 percent, were sheltered while 125 (33.0
        percent) were unsheltered. The number of shelter beds within the city of Gilroy is just short of
        379, at 368 beds. There is no permanent emergency shelter in Gilroy.
Preservation of Assisted Units At-Risk of Conversion
Jurisdictions are required by State Housing Element Law to analyze government-assisted housing that is
eligible to convert from low-income to market rate housing over the next 10 years. State law identifies
housing assistance as a rental subsidy, mortgage subsidy, or mortgage insurance to an assisted housing
development. Government assisted housing might convert to market rate housing for a number of
reasons including expiring subsidies, mortgage repayments, or expiration of affordability restrictions.
This section includes:
       An inventory of assisted housing units that are at-risk of converting to market rate housing,
       An analysis of the costs of preserving and/or replacing these units,
       Resources that could be used to preserve at-risk units,
       Program efforts for preservation of at-risk housing units, and
       Quantified objectives for the number of at-risk units to be preserved during the Housing Element
        planning period.
Qualified Entities
Under Government Code Section 65863.11, owners of Federally-assisted projects must provide a Notice
of Opportunity to Submit an Offer to Purchase to Qualified entities, non-profit or for-profit organizations
that agree to preserve the long-term affordability if they should acquire at-risk projects, at least one
year before the sale or expiration of use restrictions. Qualified entities have first right of refusal for
acquiring at-risk units. Qualified entities are non-profit or for-profit organizations with the legal and
managerial capacity to acquire and manage at-risk properties that agree to maintain the long-term
affordability of projects. The following is a list of qualified entities for Santa Clara County that could
potentially acquire and manage properties if any were to be at risk of converting to market rate in the
future, from HCD.
      Affordable Housing Foundation                                      Eden Housing, Inc.
      Cambrian Center, Inc.                                              Mid-Peninsula Housing Coalition
      Charities Housing Development Corp.                                Palo Alto Housing Corp
      Christian Church Homes of Northern California, Inc.                Palo Alto Senior Housing Project, Inc.
      Community Home Builders and Associates                             ROEM Development Corporation
Page 13-42                                                                                     Background Report
                                                                                        Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
     Community Housing Developers, Inc.                               Satellite Housing Inc.
     Community Housing Improvement Systems &                          South County Housing, Inc
      Planning Assoc. Inc.
Inventory of At-Risk Units
There are approximately 940 assisted housing units in Gilroy. As shown in Table 13-45, of the total
assisted housing units, 248 are “at-risk” of losing their affordability within the next 10 years from the
Housing Element due date (i.e., 2025).
Of the 940 assisted housing units, 219 are HUD properties; and 721 properties (were subsidized by the
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC). LIHTC properties were funded with tax credits in the 1990s and
were required by Federal law to remain affordable for 30 years. Many states are now requiring longer
affordability terms of up to 55 years. There are two LIHTC properties in Gilroy that are at-risk of being
converted to market-rate. However, the risk of conversion is minimal because the property is owned by
a non-profit organization.
Background Report                                                                                   Page 13-43
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                 TABLE 13-45
                                                       UNITS “AT-RISK” OF CONVERSION BY 2025
                                                                                   City of Gilroy
                                                                                          2013
                                                       Type of                                  Length of               Earliest            Total    Assisted      Assessment
         Project                   Address                                Program
                                                        Units                                 Affordability       Conversion Date           Units       Units          of Risk
                                                                        LIHTC, Rental                                                                     24
                                                                                                                                                                      Low-Risk
                                                         Large             Housing                                                                     (2 BR-6
      The Redwoods             9005 Kern Avenue                                                  30 years              05/31/2022             24                     (Owned by
                                                        Family           Construction                                                                  3 BR-12
                                                                                                                                                                     Non-Profit)
                                                                           Program                                                                     4 BR-6)
                                                                                                                                                         109          Low-Risk
                                        th
     Wheeler Manor              651 W. 6 Street         Senior               LIHTC               30 years              04/01/2023            109     (1 BR-109)      (Owned by
                                                                                                                                                                     Non-Profit)
                                                                                                                                                          45          High Risk
                                                                        HAP Section 8                                                                  (1 BR-8       (Owned by
  Parkview Apartments          181 Pierce Street        Family                                      N/A                03/31/2018             54
                                                                     Preservation                                                                      2 BR-17          Profit-
                                                                                                                                                      3 BR-20)       Motivated)
                                                                                                                                                          70        Very Low Risk
                               1055 Montebello                                HAP
     Plum Tree West                                     Senior                                      N/A                07/31/2014             70      (1 BR-69       (Owned by
                                     Drive                               Section 8 NC                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                       2 BR-1)       Non-Profit)
Total                                                                                                                                                    248
P
  reservation Partners, a development group specializing in the acquisition, rehabilitation, and preservation of assisted affordable housing developments, took ownership of Plum
Tree West in 2000 and has been managing it since 2006. Since the mission of Preservation Partners is to preserve assisted affordable housing developments, it is unlikely that
Plum Tree West will convert to market rate.
Source: California Housing Partnership, obtained January 21,2013.
Page 13-44                                                                                                                                                     Background Report
                                                                                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Cost of Preservation versus Replacement
Preservation Strategies
There are many options to preserving units including providing financial incentives to project owners to
extend low-income use restrictions, purchasing affordable housing units by a non-profit or public
agency, or providing local subsidies to offset the difference between the affordable and market rate.
Scenarios for preservation will depend on the type of project at risk.
Local Rental Subsidy
Tenant-based subsidies could be used to preserve the affordability of housing. The Housing Authority of
Santa Clara and local non-profit agencies provide Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers to lower income
households. The City could provide funding to the agencies for obtaining and securing vouchers for
residents if additional sources of revenue to the Housing Trust Fund were available. The level of subsidy
required to preserve at-risk affordable housing through rent subsidies is estimated to equal the Fair
Market Rent for a unit minus the housing cost affordable by a lower-income household. Table 13-46
estimates the rent subsidies required to preserve the housing affordability for a theoretical project with
equal numbers of three different prototypical units. Based on the estimates and assumptions shown in
the table, approximately $817,224 annually would be required to preserve the current at-risk inventory
of 248 units. The subsidy for 10 years would be about $8.2 million, while a subsidy for 30 years would be
about $24.5 million.
                                               TABLE 13-46
                                    POTENTIAL RENT SUBSIDIES
                                                City of Gilroy
                                                     2014
                                            1 BR           2 BR           3 BR         4 BR
                                                                                                     Total
                                         (1 person) (3 person)         (4 person)   (6 person)
 Per Unit Affordable Rent
 A     Low Income (80% AMI)                    $1,485        $1,910         $2,123       $2,631
 B     Very Low Income (50% AMI)                 $929        $1,194         $1,326       $1,539
 C     Average (A & B)                         $1,207        $1,552         $1,725       $2,085
       Per Unit Voucher Payment
 D
       (110% Fair Market Rent)                 $1,388        $1,771         $2,497       $2,831
 E     Monthly Per Unit Subsidy (D–C)            $181          $219           $772         $746
 F     Annual Subsidy/Unit (E * 12)            $2,172        $2,628         $9,264       $8,952
       Total “At Risk” Units                      186            24             32             6         248
       Total Annual Subsidy                 $403,992        $63,072       $296,448      $53,712     $817,224
 Source: Mintier Harnish, 2014.
Replacement Cost
Gilroy can also consider the cost of replacing the units with new construction. Construction cost
estimates include all hard and soft costs associated with construction in addition to per unit land costs.
The analysis assumes the replacement units are garden style apartments with parking provided on-site.
Square footage estimates are based on the average unit size in the region. Land costs have been
determined on a per unit basis.
Background Report                                                                                Page 13-45
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-47 summarizes the estimated replacement costs per unit. It is estimated that it will cost about
$47 million dollars to replace all 248 units.
                                                     TABLE 13-47
                                  REPLACEMENT COSTS BY UNIT TYPE
                                                       City of Gilroy
                                                                                                       Total
                 Construction Cost        Average Square          Replacement      Number of
 Unit Size                                                 2                    3                  Replacement
                  per Square Foot             Foot/ Unit          Cost per Unit   At-Risk Units             1
                                                                                                       Cost
1 bedroom                         $200                      732         $171,400            186       $31,880,400
2 bedroom                         $200                      952         $215,400              24       $5,169,600
3 bedroom                         $200                    1,170         $259,000              32       $8,288,000
            4
4 bedroom                         $200                    1,228         $270,600               6       $1,623,600
Total                                 --                       --              --           248       $46,961,600
Notes:
1
  Based on prevailing market conditions. Units assumed as garden apartments with on-site parking.
2
  Based on average square footage reported by RealFacts, Second Quarter 2007.
3
  Includes fees, financing, and land acquisition costs of $25,000 per unit.
4
 Data from Rent.com
Source: RBF Consulting, 2008, Rent.com; Mintier Harnish, 2014.
Resources for Preservation
A variety of programs exist to assist cities to acquire, replace, or subsidize at-risk affordable housing
units. The following summarizes financial resources available to the City of Gilroy.
Federal Programs
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) – CDBG funds are awarded to cities on a formula basis
for housing activities. The primary objective of the CDBG program is the development of viable
communities through the provision of decent housing, a suitable living environment and economic
opportunity for principally low- and moderate-income persons. Funds can be used for housing
acquisition, rehabilitation, economic development, and public services.
HOME Investment Partnership – HOME is a flexible grant program and funds are awarded on a formula
basis for housing activities. HOME takes into account local market conditions, inadequate housing,
poverty and housing production costs. HOME funding is provided to jurisdictions to assist rental housing
or home ownership through acquisition, construction, reconstruction and/or rehabilitation of affordable
housing.
Section 8 Rental Assistance Program – The Section 8 Rental Assistance Program provides rental
assistance payments to owners of private, market rate units on behalf of very low-income tenants.
Section 811/202 Program – Non-profit and consumer cooperatives can receive no interest capital
advances from HUD under the Section 202 program for the construction of very low-income rental
housing for seniors and persons with disabilities. These funds can be used in conjunction with Section
811, which can be used to develop group homes, independent living facilities and immediate care
facilities. Eligible activities include acquisition, rehabilitation, new construction, and rental assistance.
Page 13-46                                                                                     Background Report
                                                                                        Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
State Programs
California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA) Multifamily Programs – CalHFA’s Multifamily Programs
provide permanent financing for the acquisition, rehabilitation, and preservation or new construction of
rental housing that includes affordable rents for low and Moderate-Income families and individuals. One
of the programs is the Preservation Acquisition Finance Program that is designed to facilitate the
acquisition of at-risk affordable housing developments and provide low-cost funding to preserve
affordability.
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) – This program provides tax credits to individuals and
corporations that invest in Low-Income rental housing. The LIHTC program creates affordable housing
opportunities when the developer of a project “sells” the tax credits to an investor or investors who
contribute equity to the development in exchange for an ownership position in the project.
California Community Reinvestment Corporation (CCRC) – The California Community Reinvestment
Corporation is a multifamily affordable housing lender whose mission is to increase the availability of
affordable housing for Low-Income families, seniors and residents with special needs by facilitating
private capital flow from its investors for debt and equity to developers of affordable housing. Eligible
activities include new construction, rehabilitation and acquisition of properties.
Program Efforts to Preserve At-Risk Units
Through the Community Development Department, the City continually monitors the eligibility of
affordable housing to convert to market rate housing. Constant monitoring allows the City to anticipate
the timeframe by which affordability covenants would expire, allowing the City to implement various
resources to ensure the continued affordability of the housing units. Through the Consolidated Annual
Performance and Evaluation Report the City annually checks with the regional Housing and Urban
Development division on the status of rental multi-family housing units that are funded with federal
subsidies. To monitor for sale affordable units, the City annually sends a “Below Market-Rate” pamphlet
in English and Spanish to all property owners under a resale restriction program. The pamphlet reminds
the owners that their home is currently in the program and directs them to contact City staff when they
plan to sell, refinance or transfer ownership of their property.
Quantified Objectives
Housing Element law requires that cities establish the maximum number of units that can be preserved
over the planning period. Four assisted projects with a total of 248 units are at-risk of converting to
market-rate housing within the planning period. The City of Gilroy will explore appropriate funding
opportunities to assist in preserving all 248 affordable units.
Future Growth Needs
ABAG is responsible for allocating housing needs to each jurisdiction in its region, including Gilroy. A
local jurisdiction’s “fair share” of regional housing need is the number of additional housing units
needed to accommodate the forecasted household growth, replace the loss of existing housing units,
and to achieve vacancy rates that contribute to a stable and healthy housing market. Housing unit
allocations are divided into the four income categories: very low, low, moderate, and above moderate.
Based on the requirements of Assembly Bill 2634 (Statutes of 2006), each jurisdiction must also address
the projected need of extremely low-income (ELI) households, which is defined as households earning
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-47
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
less than 30 percent of the median income. The projected extremely low-income need can be assumed
as 50 percent of the total need for the very low-income households. Table 13-48 shows the Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the City of Gilroy.
                                                      TABLE 13-48
                       ABAG REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
                                                       City of Gilroy
                                                         2014-2022
                                   Extremely            Very                               Above
                                                                      Low-   Moderate                  Total
                                       Low-             Low-                             Moderate-
                                               1                    Income   -Income                   Need
                                     Income           Income                              Income
   Number of Housing Units                    118            118         160       217           475     1,088
   Percent of Total                        10.8%          10.8%        14.7%     19.9%        43.7%      100%
  Notes:
  1
    Regional share of extremely low-income units is assumed to be 50 percent of the very low- income units.
  2
   Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding.
  Source: Regional Housing Needs Allocation, ABAG 2014-2022.
Section 13.3                           Resources
Community Development Block Grant Program
The City of Gilroy receives an annual allocation of U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds. The CDBG program allows the City to use
Federal funds to address specific local housing and community development needs. To be eligible for
CDBG funds, organizations must be nonprofit or governmental, serve lower-income Gilroy residents, and
submit projects for funding that assist lower-income Gilroy residents in one or more CDBG priority
areas. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds are one of the largest sources of Federal
funding for housing and housing-related activities in the city of Gilroy. Table 13-49 lists the CDBG funded
activities for the 2013 Program Year.
                                                      TABLE 13-49
                                      CDBG ACTIVITY ALLOCATIONS
                                                       City of Gilroy
                                                         2013-2014
                                              Activity                       Allocation
                          Public Service Grants                                     $53,000
                          Neighborhood Revitalization Strategy                     $109,500
                          Rehabilitation Loans                                     $105,000
                          Affordable Housing Capital Project                       $122,788
                          Administrative                                            $70,832
                          Total                                                    $461,120
                          Source: City of Gilroy, 2013 Action Plan.
Page 13-48                                                                                      Background Report
                                                                                         Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Housing Trust Fund
The City’s Housing Trust Fund is a local source of affordable housing funds that is funded by equity
shares from resale of below market rate units, repayments of rehabilitations and homebuyer loans, and
interest on the fund balance. The fund can be used for rehabilitation of low-income rental and owner-
occupied properties, special needs and homeless capital projects, as well as for public services related to
homelessness and special needs housing. Table 13-50 summarizes the City’s Housing Trust Fund
allocations.
                                                 TABLE 13-50
                             CITY HOUSING TRUST FUND ALLOCATIONS
                                                  City of Gilroy
                                                        2014
                                     Activity                                     Allocation
      Grants to Nonprofits for housing related services                                         $89,500
      Fair Housing & Tenant/Landlord Services                                                   $51,000
      First time Homebuyer Down Payment Assistance                                                    $0
      Rehabilitation Loans                                                                      $10,000
      Preservation of At-risk Units                                                                   $0
      Special Needs Capital Projects                                                                  $0
      Staffing                                                                                   1.1 FTE
    Source: City of Gilroy, 2014.
State Funds for New Development
The City has not applied for State funds to assist new housing projects and is therefore not expecting to
receive any state loans or grants this year.
Energy Conservation
State Law requires housing elements to address the issue of energy conservation within all residential
development. Energy efficiency is directly related to affordability of housing especially for those of low-
income, as money spent on utilities can substantially reduce the amount that can be spent on food,
shelter, and other basic needs. It is important for the City to provide energy conservation opportunities
to help absorb the shock of cost increases for low-income households.
Energy conservation remains a major priority in the City of Gilroy. The City continues to require
compliance with Title 24, Part 6, of the California Code or Regulations (Building Energy Efficiency
Standards for Residential and Nonresidential Buildings) on the use of energy efficient appliances and
insulation.
There is a new section within the California Building Code that now includes green building regulations,
referred to as CALGreen. This is the nation’s first mandatory state-wide green building code, intended to
encourage more sustainable and environmentally friendly building practices, require low pollution
emitting substances that can cause harm to the environment, conserve natural resources, and promote
the use of energy efficient materials and equipment.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-49
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
CALGreen Requirements for new buildings include:
       Reduce water consumption by 20 percent;
       Divert 50 percent of construction waste from landfills;
       Install low pollutant-emitting materials;
       Separate water meters for nonresidential buildings’ indoor and outdoor water use;
       Moisture-sensing irrigation systems for larger landscape projects; and
       Mandatory inspections of energy systems (e.g., heat furnace, air conditioner and mechanical
        equipment) for nonresidential buildings over 10,000 square feet to ensure that all are working at
        their maximum capacity and according to their design efficiencies.
These regulations respond to California's energy crisis and need to reduce energy bills, increase energy
delivery system reliability, and contribute to an improved economic condition for the state. They were
established in 1978 and most recently updated in 2013 (effective date of January 1, 2014). Through the
building permit process, local governments enforce energy efficiency requirements. All new
construction must comply with the standards in effect on the date a building-permit application is made.
The City of Gilroy has adopted the 2013 California Building Code, which went into effect on January 1,
2014.
Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E), which provides electricity service in the city of Gilroy, offers
public information and technical assistance to homeowners regarding energy conservation. PG&E also
provides numerous incentives for energy-efficient new construction and home remodeling. Remodeling
rebates include cool roofs, insulation, and water heaters. Residents are granted between $100-$200 per
1,000 square feet for installed cool roofs and up to $500 for attic and wall insulation. Installing new
energy-efficient water heaters qualifies residents for a $30 rebate.
PG&E also offers energy-efficiency tax credits under the Energy Policy Act of 2005 for both homeowners
and builders. Existing homeowners are eligible for tax credits up to a maximum of $500 for energy -
efficient improvements. An additional tax credit is available for solar energy systems. Builders of energy-
efficient new homes are eligible for tax credits up to a maximum of $2,000.
PG&E provides a variety of energy conservation services for residents as well as offers a wealth of
financial and energy-related assistance programs for low income customers:
       The Balanced Payment Plan (BPP). Designed to eliminate big swings in a customer’s monthly
        payments by averaging energy costs over the year. On enrollment, PG&E averages the amount of
        energy used by the household in the past year to derive the monthly BPP amount. PG&E checks
        the household’s account every four months to make sure that its estimated average is on target.
        If the household’s energy use has increased or decreased dramatically, PG&E will change the
        amount of monthly payment so that the household does not overpay or underpay too much over
        the course of a year.
       CARE (California Alternate Rates for Energy). PG&E offers this rate reduction program for low- to
        middle-income households. PG&E determines qualified households by a sliding income scale
Page 13-50                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                   Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       based on the number of household members. The CARE program provides a 20 percent discount
       on monthly energy bills.
      Energy Efficiency for Multifamily Properties. The Energy Efficiency for Multifamily Properties
       program is available to owners and managers of existing multifamily residential dwellings
       containing two or more units. The program encourages energy efficiency by providing rebates for
       the installation of certain energy-saving products such as high-efficiency appliances, compact
       fluorescent light bulbs, attic and wall insulation, and efficient heating and cooling systems.
      Energy Savings Assistance Program. PG&E’s Energy Savings Assistance program offers free
       weatherization measures and energy-efficient appliances to qualified low- to moderate-income
       households. PG&E determines qualified households through the same sliding income scale used
       for CARE. The program includes measures such as attic insulation, weather stripping, caulking,
       and minor home repairs. Some customers qualify for replacement of appliances including
       refrigerators, air conditioners, and evaporative coolers.
      Energy Works Program/Energy Partners Program - The Energy Works Program provides qualified
       low-income tenants free weatherization measures and energy-efficient appliances to reduce gas
       and electricity usage. In order to qualify for the program, a household’s total annual gross income
       cannot exceed the income as set in the income guidelines (http://www.hacsc.org/energy_works_
       program.htm); households must receive gas and/or electricity from PG&E; and the residence
       cannot have participated in the Energy Partners Program in the past 10 years.
      The Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA) Program - PG&E’s rate reduction program for large
       households of three or more people with low- to middle-income. It enables low income large
       households to receive a Tier 3 (131 percent to 200 percent of baseline) electric rate reduction on
       their PG&E bill every month.
      The Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) Block Grant Funded by the Federal
       Department of Health and Human Services, it provides two basic types of services. Eligible low-
       income persons, via local governmental and nonprofit organizations, can receive financial
       assistance to offset the costs of heating and/or cooling dwellings and/or to have their dwellings
       weatherized to make them more energy efficient. This is accomplished through these three
       program components:
                The Weatherization Program provides free weatherization services to improve the
                 energy efficiency of homes, including attic insulation, weather-stripping, minor home
                 repairs, and related energy conservation measures.
                The Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP) provides financial assistance to eligible
                 households to offset the costs of heating and/or cooling dwellings.
                The Energy Crisis Intervention Program (ECIP) provides payments for weather-related or
                 energy-related emergencies.
      Medical Baseline Allowance Program. The Medical Baseline Allowance program is available to
       households where a California-licensed physician has certified that a full-time resident is either
       dependent on life-support equipment while at home; a paraplegic, hemiplegic, quadriplegic, or
       multiple sclerosis patient with special heating and/or cooling needs; a scleroderma patient with
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-51
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
        special heating needs; or suffering from a life-threatening illness or compromised immune
        system with special heating and/or cooling requirements to sustain the patient’s life or prevent
        deterioration of the patient’s medical condition. The program allows customers to get additional
        quantities of energy at the lowest or baseline price for residential customers.
       PG&E's SmartAC™ program - This program offers a simple and convenient way to help prevent
        power interruptions. When customers sign up, PG&E installs a free SmartAC device that slightly
        reduces the energy the air conditioner uses automatically in case of a state or local energy supply
        emergency. PG&E customers receive $50 for signing up for the SmartAC™ program.
       REACH (Relief for Energy Assistance through Community Help). The REACH program is
        sponsored by PG&E and administered through the Salvation Army. PG&E customers can enroll to
        give monthly donations to the REACH program. Through the REACH program, qualified low-
        income customers who have experienced uncontrollable or unforeseen hardships that prohibit
        them from paying their utility bills may receive an energy credit up to $200. REACH assistance is
        available once per 18-month period, with exceptions for seniors and mentally- and physically-
        disabled persons. The Salvation Army determines eligibility by a sliding income scale based on the
        number of household members. To qualify for the program, the applicant’s income cannot
        exceed 200 percent of the Federal poverty guidelines.
The City of Gilroy uses the U.S. Green Building Council’s guidelines for LEED Certification in building
energy-efficient homes. LEED-certified buildings achieve energy and water savings, reduced
maintenance costs, and improved occupant satisfaction. The LEED for New Construction program has
been applied to numerous multi-family residential projects nationwide. The LEED for Homes pilot
program was launched in 2005 and includes standards for new single-family and multi-family home
construction. The LEED certification standards are one piece of a coordinated green building program.
One of the primary goals behind establishing a green building program is to create a holistic, integrated
design approach to green building. The purpose for this is because while most local building standards
already consider energy and stormwater issues, and many jurisdictions have programs related to
energy, recycling, water conservation, stormwater management, land use, and public health, these
programs are often overlapping and uncoordinated.
A green building program considers a broad range of issues including community design, energy
efficiency, water conservation, resource-efficient material selection, indoor environmental quality,
construction management, and building maintenance. This comprehensive approach to building energy-
efficient homes will result in buildings that use fewer resources, are healthier for peoples, and reduce
harm to the environment.
On February 2, 2009, the City of Gilroy passed a green building ordinance consistent with other cities in
Santa Clara County. Pursuant to the ordinance, the City of Gilroy will:
       Require all construction and renovation projects of municipal buildings larger than 5,000 square
        feet to meet LEED Silver standards, if doing so is deemed financially feasible by the City Council. A
        completed feasibility study must also confirm that the Silver LEED standard can be achieved.
       Use the U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED Rating system and Build It Green’s GreenPoint Rating
        system as the official green building standards for commercial and residential development
        within the City, respectively. A common set of standards relieves cities of the task of developing
        their own standards, and provides consistency to builders who work in many jurisdictions.
Page 13-52                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                   Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
        Require the completion of a Green Checklist as part of the planning application for commercial
         and residential buildings. The applicant is not required to adopt green building practices but the
         checklist educates applicants about green building and enables the city to benchmark green
         building practices.
The City also outlines energy conservation strategies in its Interim Climate Action Plan as it continues to
move towards a sustainable energy future. The primary goal of the plan is to reduce Gilroy’s greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions to 15 percent below 2005 levels by the year 2020. The plan outlines measures to
reduce municipal GHG emissions, as well as measures the community can take to reduce their
emissions. Planned actions include:
         Weatherize homes, particularly for low-income residents.
        Update the Residential/Commercial Energy Conservation Ordinance (RECO/CECO) on a regular
         basis to ensure buildings become more energy efficient over time.
        Partner with PG&E and hold promotional energy efficiency lighting (e.g., compact fluorescent
         light bulbs, LED holiday lights) giveaway days to encourage community members to save energy.
        Offer a property-based energy-financing program (such as Property Assessed Clean Energy) and
         associated outreach for energy efficiency and renewable energy improvements to residential and
         commercial property owners.
        Increase tree cover throughout the community with special emphasis on shading east, south, and
         west walls of structures through revised development standards, an urban forestry program, or a
         carbon sequestration program.
        Conduct a citywide renewable energy assessment to estimate the total renewable energy
         potential as well as costs and benefits of developing the potential within City bounds.
        Develop and adopt a Green Building Ordinance that mandates or provides incentives for
         CALGreen Tier 1 voluntary residential and non-residential measures. Incentives can include
         expedited building permit plan check, provision of a plaque for building mounting, and listing of
         the building on the City’s website.
        Reduce regulatory barriers to solar system installation (>25 percent of $/kW is permit related).
The City is also a part of a climate action plan through which it will be adopting additional policies and
program aimed at reducing community greenhouse gas emissions.
Adequate Sites Analysis
Regional Housing Needs Assessment
State law requires each jurisdiction in California to demonstrate the availability of adequate sites
through appropriate zoning and development standards and the availability of public services and
facilities. These available sites must provide the necessary policy and regulatory guidance to
accommodate a variety of housing types at a variety of income levels. The City must demonstrate that
the estimated capacity of adequate sites will be able to accommodate the projected housing need for
the 2014-2022 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA).
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-53
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
The State Department of Finance (DOF) is responsible for projecting the total statewide housing
demand, with the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) apportioning this
demand to each of the state’s regional governing bodies. This demand represents the number of
additional units needed to accommodate the anticipated growth in the number of households, to
replace expected demolitions and conversions of housing units to non-housing uses, and to achieve a
future vacancy rate that allows for healthy functioning of the housing market.
The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) is responsible for allocating the region’s projected
new housing demand to municipalities within the ABAG region. Through the RHNA, regional level
housing growth needs are allocated to individual cities and counties. The allocation takes into account
factors such as market demand for housing, employment opportunities, the availability of suitable sites
and public facilities, commuting patterns, type, and tenure of housing need, and other factors. In
determining a jurisdiction’s share of new housing needs by income category, the allocation is adjusted
to avoid an over concentration of lower-income households in any one jurisdiction. The allocation of
projected housing demand is divided into four income categories:
       Very Low Income – up to 50 percent of the median income;
       Low Income – 51 to 80 percent of the median income;
       Moderate Income – 81 to 120 percent of the median income; and
       Above Moderate Income – more than 120 percent of the median income.
Based on the requirements of AB 2634 (Statutes of 2006), each jurisdiction must also address the
projected need of extremely low-income (ELI) households, defined as households earning less than 30
percent of the median income. The projected extremely low-income need can be assumed as 50 percent
of the total need for the very low-income households.
To enable the City of Gilroy to meet RHNA goals, the City must evaluate its capacity to provide available
sites to meet projected future housing needs. The ABAG Regional Housing Needs Plan assigns 236 very
low-income, 160 low-income, 217 moderate-income, and 475 above moderate-income housing units to
the City of Gilroy for the 2014-2022 planning period (see Table 13-48 in Section 13.2). The City must
demonstrate it has or will make available adequate sites with appropriate zoning and development
standards and with services and facilities to accommodate the RHNA. The following section shows how
the City will meet this requirement through developments under construction, planned, and approved
projects, specific plan areas, and vacant and underutilized sites.
Inventory of Units Planned, Approved, and Under Construction
Since the Housing Element planning period begins January 1, 2014, Gilroy’s RHNA can be reduced by the
number of new units under construction, approved, or planned as of January 1, 2014. City staff compiled
an inventory of all residential projects with a housing component that are (as of January 1, 2014) under
construction, approved, or planned and anticipated to be built by the end of the current Housing
Element planning period. For under construction, approved, and planned projects, deed-restricted
affordable units are inventoried as lower-income. Market-rate, high-density residential projects zoned
R-4, R-3, Cannary District, Expansion, District, Historic District, or Gateway District are inventoried as
moderate income based on expected rents/sale prices.
Page 13-54                                                                                    Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Developments Under Construction
The City of Gilroy has a number of projects for which building permits have been issued and
construction is underway. These projects, totaling 387 units, include Oak Creek, Harvest Park I, and
Monterey Manor. Oak Creek includes 19 deed-restricted lower-income units, and 16 deed-restricted
moderate-income units. All 60 units of the Monterey Manor project are moderate-income based on
expected rents/sale prices in the Gateway District (which allows up to 30 units per acre). The remaining
units in Oak Creek and all the units in Harvest Park I are expected to be above moderate-income. These
projects are summarized in Table 13-51 and shown in Figure 13-2. The Map ID column in Table 13-51
corresponds with the map labels in Figure 13-2.
Approved Projects
Approved projects are either fully entitled or have been approved by the City and will soon be entitled.
Entitled units are units considered approved due to a Development Agreement, Housing
Agreement/Density Bonus Agreement, or other zoning action (e.g., subdivision, conditional use permit,
variance). There are 19 approved projects in the city of Gilroy totaling 504 units. These projects include
seven townhomes, one accessory dwelling unit, and two duplex units inventoried as moderate-income
units; and 494 single-family units inventoried as above moderate-income units. Approved projects are
summarized in Table 13-51 and shown in Figure 13-2. The Map ID column in Table 13-51 corresponds
with the map labels in Figure 13-2.
Planned (Pending) Projects
Planned projects are projects that have submitted applications, but have yet to receive final project
approval. There are four planned projects, totaling 391 units, in the city of Gilroy that will be counted
towards the 2014-2022 RHNA. These projects include 265 lower-income units at San Ysidro—a proposed
affordable housing project downtown; 273 higher-density, small-lot townhomes and single-family
homes inventoried as moderate-income units; and 95 low-density single-family homes inventoried as
above moderate-income units. The planned projects are summarized in Table 13-51 and shown in Figure
13-2. The Map ID column in Table 13-51 corresponds with the map labels in Figure 13-2.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-55
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page 13-56                                    Background Report
                                       Adopted December 1, 2014
                                 Figure 13-2
                                 Developments Under Construction,
                                 Approved, and Pending Projects
                                                                            t
                                                                        Firs     ¡
                                                                                 ¤   101
                                                                          St
                                      ¬
                                      «
                                      19
                                                                        ¬
                                                                        «2
                                                                                 Vick
                                                                                      ery L
                                                                                            n
                        ¬
                        «
                        9
                                                ¬
                                                «   15                          ¬
                                                                                «
                                                                                18
                                                                                                                                             ey
                                                                                                                                                R     d
                                                                                                                                          esl
       ¬
       «  17                                                                                                                        Le av
       « ¬
         «                                                     !
                                                               (
                    6                                              26
       ¬ 4
                                 ¬
                                 «
                                 7
              !
              (24
                            « ¬
                            ¬
                            16«       14
                                                     !
                                                     (   27
                                 ¬
                                 «                                                         ¬
                                                                                           «5
                                 22
                                                                                                         ¬
                                                                                                         «
                                                                                                         10
                                               ¬
                                               «21
                                                                                                                                                                     Pa
                                                                                                                                                                        ch   eco
                                               ¬
                                               «
                                               11                                                                !
                                                                                                                 (25                                                               P
                                       ¬
                                       «                                                   ( ¬
                                                                                             «       3
                                           8
                                                                                           !
                                                                                           23
                                                              ¬
                                                              «
                                                              12
                                                                                     ¬
                                                                                     «20             ¬
                                                                                                     «   1
                                                                                                ¬
                                                                                                «
                                                                                                13
                                                                                                   nta
                                                                                                Sa
                                                                                                        e
City Limits                                                                                          Ter
                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                         sa  l
Planning Area/Sphere of Influence
Rail                                                                                                                            ¡
                                                                                                                                ¤   101
Developments Under Construction
Approved Projects                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                        oo
                                                                                                                                                                      Bl
Pending Projects
                                                                                                         Miles
                                                                                                              0        0.25   0.5                 1
                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                          Source: City of Gilroy (2014)
                                                                                                                                                                             fie
                                                                                                                                                                                ld
                                                                                                                                                                                Av
                                                                                                                                                  Map Date: 2/4/2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page 13-58                                    Background Report
                                       Adopted December 1, 2014
      CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                TABLE 13-51
                  DEVELOPMENTS UNDER CONSTRUCTION, APPROVED PROJECTS, AND PLANNED PROJECTS
                                                                  City of Gilroy
                                                                  January 2014
                                                      Lower                    Above
                                                                Moderate
Map        Project Name/                   Total  Income Units               Moderate
                                    Zoning                       Income                              Status                            Notes
 ID            Address                     Units   (Very Low +                Income
                                                                   Units
                                                  Low-Income)                  Units
Developments Under Construction
       Oak Creek                                                                                                        This project represents full
                                                                                        Construction began in January
  1    (Monterey and             ND                                                                                     buildout of the Oak Creek Master
                                                                                        2014
       Luchessa)                             236            19           16        201                                  Plan, approved as of July 2013.
       Harvest Park I (Vickery                                                          Construction began in August
  2                              ND                                                                                     Single Family Homes
       and Wren)                              91              0           0          91 2013
       Monterey Manor            Gateway                                                Construction began in January   High Density Residential
  3                           th
       (Monterey St and 11 )     District     60              0          60           0 2014                            Apartment Complex
Developments Under Construction Subtotal     387            19           76        292
Approved Projects
  4    2355 Stonecress           RH             1             0           0           1 Approved                        Single Family Home
                                 Expansion
  5    66 Third Street                                                                  Approved                        Townhouse Units
                                 District       7             0           7           0
                                                                                        Building Permit Issued in June
  6    9115 Tea Tree Way         RH                                                                                     Single Family Home
                                                                                        2013
                                                1             0           0           1
       Carriage Hills III (North
                                                                                                                        39 single family home project, 14
  7    of Mantelli, west of      RH                                                     Approved
                                                                                                                        of which are built and occupied.
       Rancho Hills)                          25              0           0          25
                                                                                        Received final time extension
  8    2021 Portmarnock Ct       RH                                                                                     Single Family Home
                                                1             0           0           1 in August 2013
       Denova (West of                                                                  9 building permits issued as of
  9                              RH                                                                                     Single Family Homes
       Rancho Hills Drive)                    68              0           0          68 November 2013
                                 Downtown
 10    170 Lewis Street                                                                 Approved                        Residential Duplex
                                 Cannery        2             0           2           0
      Background Report                                                                                                                   Page 13-59
      Adopted December 1, 2014
    CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                            TABLE 13-51
                DEVELOPMENTS UNDER CONSTRUCTION, APPROVED PROJECTS, AND PLANNED PROJECTS
                                                              City of Gilroy
                                                              January 2014
                                                  Lower                    Above
                                                            Moderate
Map       Project Name/                Total  Income Units               Moderate
                                Zoning                       Income                              Status                        Notes
 ID           Address                  Units   (Very Low +                Income
                                                               Units
                                              Low-Income)                  Units
                             District
     Eagle Ridge: BMC Eagle
 11                          RH                                                     All permits are issued      Single Family Homes
     Ridge
                                          23              0          0           23
 12  Eagle Ridge: Bellavista RH                                                     Approved                    Single Family Homes
                                          18              0          0           18
     Mesa Road, South of                                                                                        9 home project, 1 of which is built
 13                          R-1                                                    Approved
     Thomas Road                                                                                                and occupied
                                            8             0          0            8
 14  8361 Wintergreen Ct     RH             1             0          0            1 Approved                    Single Family Home
     Sunrise and Santa
 15                          R1-PUD                                                 Approved                    Single Family Homes
     Teresa                               10              0          0           10
 16  2135 Hollyhock          RH             1             0          0            1 Approved                    Single Family Home
 17  2400 Olea Ct            RH             1             0          1            0 Approved                    Accessory Dwelling Unit
     Harvest Park II
 18  (Cohansey and           ND                                                     Tentative Map December 2013 Single Family Homes
     Monterey Rd)                         57              0          0           57
     Silveira Subdivision
 19  (Day Rd and Cougar      R-1                                                    Entitled January 2014       Single Family Homes
     Way)                                 56              0          0           56
     Masoni III Subdivision
 20  (930 Babbs Creek)       A-1                                                    Entitled January 2014       Single Family Homes
                                          23              0          0           23
    Page 13-60                                                                                                           Background Report
                                                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014
      CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                      TABLE 13-51
                    DEVELOPMENTS UNDER CONSTRUCTION, APPROVED PROJECTS, AND PLANNED PROJECTS
                                                                        City of Gilroy
                                                                        January 2014
                                                            Lower                    Above
                                                                      Moderate
Map         Project Name/                        Total  Income Units               Moderate
                                      Zoning                           Income                              Status                   Notes
 ID              Address                         Units   (Very Low +                Income
                                                                         Units
                                                        Low-Income)                  Units
       Hecker Pass/SVCC
                                   Hecker Pass                                                                      Within the residential cluster east
 21    (Hecker Pass and Third                                                                 Entitled May 2011
                                   Specific Plan                                                                    of the Hecker Pass Specific Plan
       Street)                                       15             0           0          15
       Hecker Pass East
                                   Hecker Pass                                                                      Within the residential cluster east
 22    Cluster (2060 Hecker                                                                   Entitled October 2013
                                   Specific Plan                                                                    of the Hecker Pass Specific Plan
       Pass)                                        186             0           0        186
Planned and Approved Projects Subtotal              504             0          10        494
Planned Projects
       Royal Way                                                                              In Review             Single Family Homes
 23                                R-3
       (South of Royal Way)                          25             0          25           0
       Country Estates Phase                                                                  In Review             Hillside Single Family Home
 24    IV (South of Sunflower      RH                                                                               Community
       Circle)                                       95             0           0          95
                                                                                              In Review             The proposed development is
                                                                                                                    described as multifamily
       San Ysidro Project (200
 25             th                 DED                                                                              affordable housing project
       East 10 Street)
                                                                                                                    configured in a five story building
                                                                                                                                     th
                                                    265           265           0           0                       fronting East 10 and Alexander St
                                                                                              In Review             Residential PUD
 26    9070 Kern Ave               R-3
                                                     31             0          31           0
         st                                                                                   In Review             Townhomes
 27    1 and Santa Teresa          R-4
                                                    217             0        217            0
Pending Projects Subtotal                           633           265        273           95
Total                                             1,524           265        359         881
      Source: City of Gilroy, 2014
      Background Report                                                                                                                Page 13-61
      Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Residential Sites Inventory
In accordance with the requirements of Government Code Section 65583.2, the City conducted an
assessment of the vacant and underutilized sites suitable for residential development within the city of
Gilroy. The data was compiled by City staff and the Consultants and mapped using a Geographic
Information System (GIS). All parcels (or portions of parcels) in the residential sites inventory were
reviewed by City staff and the Consultants to confirm vacancy status, ownership, adequacy of public
utilities and services, possible environmental constraints such as flood zones and steep slopes, and other
possible constraints to development feasibility.
The following assumptions were made in the inventory:
             Type of sites. All of the sites in the inventory are vacant or underutilized sites zoned for
              residential use and meet the classification in State law (Government Code Section
              65583.2(a)) as “land suitable for residential development.”
             Relation of density to income categories. The following assumptions were used to
              determine the income categories according to the allowed densities for each site:
                   o   Sites that are zoned R-4 have a density range of 20-30 dwelling units per net acre,
                       and were inventoried as available for low- and very low-income residential
                       development in accordance with the “default density standard” set forth in
                       Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)1.
                   o   Sites that are zoned R-3 have a density range of 8-16 dwelling units per net acre,
                       and were inventoried as available for moderate-income residential development.
                       The City’s zoning ordinance states that the R-3 zone is intended to provide areas
                       within the city for living environments that include primarily multifamily units, such
                       as garden apartments and condominiums.
                   o   Sites that are zoned Neighborhood District (ND) have a variety of density standards
                       that are intended to produce a more integrative, comprehensive, and creative
                       neighborhood. The zoning district requires that at least 15 percent of all units be
                       “affordable,” as defined in the RDO Affordable Housing Exemption Procedure. This
                       inventory used either the development agreement or the adopted specific
                       plan/master plan buildout statistics to inventory expected units by income category
                       on sites that are zoned ND.
                   o   All other sites, which were zoned R-2 or R-1, were inventoried as above moderate-
                       income units.
Specific Plan and Master Plan Areas
Gilroy has three major Specific Plan areas. Capacity within these areas is largely based on assumptions in
the Specific Plans.
1
  Default density standard is the density “deemed appropriate” in State law to accommodate housing for lower-
income households given the type of the jurisdiction. Gilroy is considered a “suburban jurisdiction” with a default
density standard of 20 units per acre. HCD is required to accept sites that allow for zoning at this density as
appropriate for accommodating Gilroy’s share of the regional housing need for lower-income households.
Page 13-62                                                                                          Background Report
                                                                                           Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan
The Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan area is located in the southwestern part of the city of Gilroy. It is
bounded by Uvas Creek to the north, Santa Teresa Boulevard to the west and south, and existing
development to the east. The specific plan area allows for a wide range of densities and residential
product types. The specific plan area is divided into 19 neighborhoods, each with its own zoning district.
The diversity of sizes and unit ranges represent a deliberate attempt to break away from homogenous
development patterns and move towards smaller, individual neighborhoods with a mix of densities. This
mixture of sizes and unit densities is consistent with the intent of the Neighborhood District.
The Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan was awarded 1,443 market rate RDO allocations and 250 “Special
Exemption Units,” for a total project allocation of 1,693 units in the original Development Agreement
dated November 21, 2005. Due to market conditions, there has been no development as of January
2014. However, with the market recovery and the zoning in place, the City anticipates the Specific Plan
to begin to develop early in the 2015-2023 planning period.
The Specific Plan forecasts unit counts for each of the neighborhoods based on each zoning district’s
allowable densities. Based on allowable densities, the R-1 and R-2 zoned neighborhoods are counted in
the Housing Element sites inventory as above moderate-income, R-3 zoned neighborhoods are counted
as moderate-income, and R-4 zoned neighborhoods are counted as lower-income units.
Under the City’s Neighborhood District Policy, the Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan area is required to
allocate at least 15 percent of its total units for affordable housing. The Development Agreement for the
Glen Loma Specific Plan area includes 256 affordable units. Rather than counting these required
affordable units toward the RHNA, the Housing Element inventories the capacity on R-4 zoned land,
which meets the default density standard of 20 units per acre. The Specific Plan includes two
neighborhoods with R-4 zoning, totaling 17.1 acres. Using the low end of the density ranges allowed in
the R-4 zone (i.e. 20 units per acre), the Specific Plan assumes 322 units in these areas. Table 13-52
summarizes the neighborhoods within the Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan area. The neighborhood
names correspond with the neighborhoods shown in Figure 13-3.
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-63
Adopted December 1, 2014

  CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                               TABLE 13-52
            CAPACITY IN GLEN LOMA SPECIFIC PLAN NEIGHBORHOODS
                                                City of Gilroy
                                                        Density                        Income Category
    Neighborhood                                        Range           Expected      (Based on Allowed
                 1                                                              2
          Name                 Acres       Zoning    (units/acre)         Units             Density)
   Town Center Multi-                                         20-30            172      Very Low/Low-Income
        Family R4                     9.3  R-4 PUD
   Town Center Senior                                         20-30            150      Very Low/Low-Income
          Housing                     7.8  R-4 PUD
       Olive Grove                  13.7   R-3 PUD             8-16            192          Moderate-Income
        Montonico                       5  R-3 PUD             8-16              80         Moderate-Income
         Luchessa                       4  R-3 PUD             8-16              54         Moderate-Income
      Wild Chestnut                    11  R-1 PUD           3-7.25              72  Above Moderate-Income
         Nebbiolo                   19.4   R-1 PUD           3-7.25              97  Above Moderate-Income
         Malvasia                   19.6   R-1 PUD           3-7.25            169   Above Moderate-Income
      Canyon Creek                    7.7  R-1 PUD           3-7.25              47  Above Moderate-Income
         Cabernet                      10  R-1 PUD           3-7.25              53  Above Moderate-Income
          Mataro                      8.6  R-1 PUD           3-7.25              81  Above Moderate-Income
        The Grove                   12.8   R-1 PUD           3-7.25              78  Above Moderate-Income
        Vista Bella                 26.5   R-1 PUD           3-7.25            162   Above Moderate-Income
    McCutchin Creek                   4.4  R-2 PUD               3-9             38  Above Moderate-Income
         Palomino                     6.6  R-2 PUD               3-9             57  Above Moderate-Income
      Home Ranch                      7.6  R-2 PUD               3-9             62  Above Moderate-Income
         The Glen                     3.1  R-2 PUD               3-9             27  Above Moderate-Income
       Rocky Knoll                    4.1  R-2 PUD               3-9             33  Above Moderate-Income
       Petite Sirah                    13  R-2 PUD               3-9             69  Above Moderate-Income
           Total                   194.2                                     1,693
Notes:
1
  Neighborhood Names correspond with the neighborhood names shown in the site plan (Figure 13-4).
Neighborhoods may include multiple parcels as determined through the subdivision process.
2
 Units in R-1, R-2, and R-3 based on forecasted mid-point calculations in Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan. The
322 Very Low/Low income units in the Town Center Multi-Family and Town Center Senior Housing
neighborhoods assume the low end of density ranges for the R-4 zone.
Source: Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan and Development Agreement, November 21, 2005.
  Page 13-64                                                                                       Background Report
                                                                                          Adopted December 1, 2014
Figure 13-3
Glen Loma
Specific Plan
              Source: City of Gilroy (2013), Glen Loma Specific Plan (2005)
                                                      Map Date: 12/4/2013
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page 13-66                                    Background Report
                                       Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Hecker Pass Specific Plan
The Hecker Pass Specific Plan area is a 423-acre site at the western gateway to the city Gilroy. The
Specific Plan area is expected to develop 521 dwelling units affordable to above moderate-income
households within the 2014-2022 planning period. The Specific Plan designates three “clusters” for
residential development: North Cluster (57 units), West Cluster (205 units), and East Cluster (244 units).
The Specific Plan aims to provide for a variety of housing types in each cluster, but provides some
flexibility for how that variety is achieved. Each cluster targets a different proportional breakdown of
three lot size ranges (i.e., 2,500-3,500 square foot lots, 3,500-6,000 square foot lots, and larger than
6,000 square foot lots). Ultimately if each cluster adheres to its target percentage of each lot size, North
Cluster will have a density of 2.7 dwelling units per acre, West Cluster will have a density of 6.6 dwelling
units per acre, and East Cluster will have a density of 6.2 dwelling units per acre. Even though the
Specific Plan allows for multifamily and mixed-use development, due to the flexible density
requirements in the three residential clusters, all units are counted as above moderate-income units.
The Hecker Pass Specific Plan area is starting to buildout; 201 of the East Cluster units are already
approved and are counted as approved projects in Table 13-51. Table 13-53 below summarizes the
remaining capacity in the Hecker Pass Specific Plan area after these approved units have been
subtracted. The Specific Plan designations correspond with the neighborhoods shown in Figure 13-4.
                                                        TABLE 13-53
          REMAINING CAPACITY IN THE HECKER PASS SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
                                                          City of Gilroy
                                                                                     Projected
                                         Zoning/Specific Plan            Total                             Income
              APN                                             1                     Number of
                                               Designation               Acres                2           Category
                                                                                       Units
                                   Hecker Pass Special                                                 Above Moderate-
  78304023                                                               20.33            57
                                   District/Residential Cluster North                                       Income
  81020015, 81020007,                                                                                  Above Moderate-
                                   Hecker Pass Special                                      3
  81020008, 81020009,                                                    127.75          58                 Income
                                   District/Residential Cluster East
  81020020 (partial)
  81020020 (partial),                                                                                  Above Moderate-
                                   Hecker Pass Special
  81021001, 81021009                                                     41.01           205                Income
                                   District/Residential Cluster West
  81021003, 81021008
  Total                                                                  189.9           320
  Notes:
  1
   Specific Plan Designations correspond with the Residential Cluster Locations found in Figure 13-4 entitled
  Hecker Pass Specific Plan
  2
   Projected number of units derived from Hecker Pass Specific Plan build-out calculations. See Figure 13-4 for
  estimated buildout by typical lot size configurations.
  3
   Hecker Pass Specific Plan calls for 259 units in this residential cluster. This table reflects the remaining units
  after approved projects have been subtracted.
  Source: City of Gilroy, Hecker Pass Specific Plan, 2005.
Background Report                                                                                               Page 13-67
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan
The Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan covers over 160 acres in the central portion of the city of Gilroy. In
contrast to the single-use zoning based on land use type, the Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan is based on
geographic areas called planning districts. The Gilroy Zoning Ordinance is consistent with the
requirements of the planning districts in the Downtown Specific Plan. Allowed densities within the
Cannery, Expansion, and Historic Districts were amended as a part of the City’s rezone program in 2013
to meet the default density standard for lower-income units. Therefore, all units that have not yet been
built in these districts are inventoried for lower-income units (see Table 13-54).
The Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan, approved in 2005, projects that there will be 1,576 new residential
units constructed between 2005-2025 within the Specific Plan area. This assumes that 60 percent of
undeveloped property will buildout and 10 percent of developed property will be redeveloped. This
build-out number is a flexible allocation and does not dictate a yearly allocation of units within the 20-
year build out period. Based on the rate of approvals, the City anticipates that the Downtown Specific
Plan area will not reach buildout prior to 2023. However, the flexible nature of the Specific Plan’s
residential buildout does not prevent residential development from occurring during the Housing
Element planning period.
Each planning district is projected to develop a particular number of units. Residential buildout for each
planning district within the Downtown Specific Plan area also took into account the potential for non-
residential uses. The area’s projected residential buildout did not assume residential-only development
of all sites. The Specific Plan anticipates that an additional 900,000 square feet of non-residential uses
will accompany the projected 1,576 residential units in the Downtown Specific Plan. Downtown Gilroy
Specific Plan units are exempt from the City’s RDO Allocation application, thus the City Council can
permit special exception to the assigned build-out schedule or to the numerical limits for a calendar year
provided that the exception does not adversely affect the City’s ability to provide services. The City
Council can provide this special exception if it finds and determines that the Specific Plan necessitates
additional dwelling unit allocations in a specified year to accomplish the goals and vision of the General
Plan. Figure 13-5 shows the Specific Plan districts and are counted in Table 13-54.
The 2007-2014 Housing Element identified 787 units that were already constructed or still in the review
process within the Downtown Specific Plan area. These units have all been built and are subtracted
from the original 2005 buildout calculations found in the Specific Plan. In addition, there are four new
projects within the Downtown Specific Plan area since the last Housing Element, totaling 334 units.
These projects are counted towards the 2014-2022 RHNA as under construction, approved, or planned
projects:
        Monterey Manor, in the Gateway District, 60 units are under construction;
        San Ysidro Courts, in the Expansion district, 265 units are planned;
        66 Third Street Project, in the Expansion District, 7 units are approved; and
        170 Lewis Street Project, in the Cannary District, 2 units are approved.
These projects are also subtracted from the original 2005 buildout calculations found in the Specific
Plan. Table 13-54 summarizes the districts and remaining capacity in the Downtown Specific Plan Area.
After all units have been subtracted, the Specific Plan area has a remaining capacity of 456 lower-
income units.
Page 13-68                                                                                  Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

Figure 13-4
Hecker Pass
Specific Plan
              Source: City of Gilroy (2013), Hecker Pass Specific Plan
                                          (2005) Map Date: 12/4/2013
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page 13-70                                    Background Report
                                       Adopted December 1, 2014
                                                               Figure 13-5
                                                               Downtown Specific Plan Area
                                                                                          ¤¡
                                                                                           101
                                                               Districts and Current Projects
Wren Av
St
                                                               66 Third Street
                                                                 (Approved)
                                                                             rch
                                                                         Chu
                                                      d   St                                    170 Lewis Street
                                                 Thir                                             (Approved)
                                                                             St
                             Miller Av
                                                                                                                            St
                                                                                                                     n th
                                                                                                                 E Te
                             Rail
                             City Limits
                                                                                                              San Yisidro Courts
          Uv                 UnderConstruction                                                                    (Planned)
            as
                 Pa
                   rk        Approved Projects
                        Dr
                             Planned Projects
           Districts
                             Cannary District
                                                                                     Monterey Manor
                             Civic/Cultural Arts Disctrict
                                                                                   (Under Construction)
                             Expansion District
                                                                                                                                    ¡
                                                                                                                                    ¤
                                                                                                                                    101
                             Gateway District
                             Historic District
                             Transitional District
                                                                                                     Miles
                                                                                                          0     0.125        0.25             0.5
                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                     Source: City of Gilroy (2013)
                                                                                                                                             Map Date: 2/6/2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page 13-72                                    Background Report
                                       Adopted December 1, 2014
  CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                        TABLE 13-54
                                 SUMMARY OF REMAINING CAPACITY IN DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                         City of Gilroy
                                                                                                                Number of
                                                                                            Number of
                                                                                                               Units Under
                                                                                               Units
                                                                                                              Construction,
                    Allowable                       Existing     Net       Projected      Developed or                          Remaining
                                   Gross                              1                                        Approved, or                       Income
   District           Density                   Development   Acres       Number of       Planned from                               Unit
                                   Acres                                           2                            Planned in                       Category
                     (du/acre)                      (Acres)                  Units          2007-2014                             Capacity
                                                                                                                 2014-2023
                                                                                             Housing
                                                                                                      3           Housing
                                                                                             Element
                                                                                                                  Element
                               4
Cannery              Min of 20        31.40            6.46     24.94              760                  234                 2             524  Lower-Income
Civic/              Max FAR of                                                                                              0
                            5         16.80            0.98     15.82                                                                          Lower-Income
Cultural                 1.5                                                         14                   0                                14
                               4
Expansion            Min of 20        40.20           12.10     28.10              448                  382               272            -206  Lower-Income
                               4
Historic             Min of 20        25.60           10.55     15.05              116                   68                 0              48  Lower-Income
Gateway              Max of 30        54.40            4.57     49.83              159                   94                60                5 Lower-Income
Transitional         Max of 20        20.70            5.96     14.74                79                   9                 0              70  Lower-Income
Total                                                                            1,576                  787               334             455
Notes:
1
 Net acres calculated by subtracting existing development from gross acres.
2
 Projected number of units derived from Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan buildout calculations. Unit capacity projections assume lot assemblage based upon
ownership, project proposals and incentives (such as reduced fees, expedited application processing, and mixed-use allowances).
3
 From 2007-2014 Housing Element. Includes all projects constructed between 2005 and 2012 and all projects planned or in review in 2012.
4
 For residential portion of mixed-use projects. Stand alone residential projects must develop at a density ranging from 20-40 units per acre
5
 For mixed use projects from Monterey to Church Street. Mixed-use projects from Church Street to Dowdy Street have a maximum FAR of 1.0.
Source: City of Gilroy, Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan, 2005.
  Background Report                                                                                                                                 Page 13-73
  Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Other Vacant and Underutilized Land
Table 13-55 summarizes the vacant and underutilized land in the City currently (2014) zoned for
residential development. Based on allowed densities, this land has an estimated capacity of 110 above
moderate-income units and 423 lower-income units. The capacity for 423 lower-income units is on 12 (9
of which are still vacant) parcels that the City rezoned to R-4 in October 2012 in order to attain
certification for its 2007-2014 Housing Element. None of the sites have been developed since they were
rezoned and the lower-income units assume the lower end of allowable densities in the R-4 zone (i.e. 20
units per acre). These sites are shown in Figure 13-6.
Page 13-74                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                   Adopted December 1, 2014
                                       Figure 13-6
                                       Vacant and
                                       Underutilized Parcels
                                                                                                          ¡
                                                                                                          ¤
                                                                                                          101
                                    Day
                                        R   d
                                                                   R   d
                                                               Day
                                                                                         Mo
                                                          C                                  nte
                                                                                                  S
                                                                                              rey                                                                                      Rd
                                                                                                   t           Site LI-1                                                     sl   ey
                                                                                                                                                                   Le   av e
                                                                                                                    Site LI-2
                                                                               Wren Av
                                                Mantelli Dr
                        B
                                                              Site LI-4                                              Site LI-3
                                                                                   First St
                                                                                                                             rc
                                                                                                           Thir
                                                                                                                d   St   Chu
                                                                                                                            hS
                                                                                              Miller Av
                                                                                                                              t
                                                 Site LI-5
                                                                                                                                                     St
                                                                                                                                               nth                                                Pa
                                                                              Uv                                                          E Te                                                         c he
                                                                                 a                                                                                                                            co
                                                                                         s                                                                                                                         P
                                                                                             Pa
                                                                                                  rk
                                                                                                          Dr
                                                                       Miller Av
                                                                                                          D
                                                                                         A                                E
                                                                                                                                  Sa
                                                                                                                F                 nta
         Rail                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                       Ter
         City Limits                                                                                                                     sa
                                                                                                                                          Bl
         Planning Area/Sphere of Influence
Vacant Sites by General Plan Designation
         High Density Residential                                                                                                                               ¡
                                                                                                                                                                ¤  101
         Low Density Residential
         Rural Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bloo
                                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                        m
         Hillside Residential                                                                                                                                                                            fi e
                                                                                                                                             0       0.25    0.5                   1                          ld
                                                                                                                                        Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Av
                                                                                                                                        Source: City of Gilroy (2013), Santa Clara County GIS (2013)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Map Date: 12/4/2013

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
Page 13-76                                    Background Report
                                       Adopted December 1, 2014
     CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                     TABLE 13-55
                                VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED PARCELS 2014-2022 PLANNING PERIOD
                                                                    City of Gilroy
                                                                           2014
Map                           General Plan               Permitted      Projected      Income
  ID   APN      Acres         Designation        Zoning   Density         Units       Category                                Notes
A    81023005    37.5   Rural Residential        A-1    1 du per lot             1 Above Moderate
B    78347003    88.0   Hillside Residential     RH     0.5-1 du/ac             40 Above Moderate
     78320048
C                       Low Density Residential  R-1    3-7.25 du/ac               Above Moderate Potential for lot consolidation
     78320049     3.9                                                           11
D    80820008     8.6   Low Density Residential  R-1    3-7.25 du/ac            25 Above Moderate
E    80839066     6.4   Low Density residential  R-1    3-7.25 du/ac            18 Above Moderate
     81023001     0.3                                                            2
     81028025     0.3                                                            1
     81028026     0.4                                                            1
     81028027     0.4                                                            1
     81028028     0.5                                                            1
     81028029     0.6                                                            1
     81028030     1.2                                                            1
                        Low Density Residential  R-1    3-7.25 du/ac               Above Moderate
F    81028031     0.4                                                            1
     81028032     0.5                                                            1
     81028033     0.5                                                            1
     81028034     0.5                                                            1
     81028035     0.6                                                            1
     81028036     0.6                                                            1
     81028037     0.5                                                            1
     Subtotal     7.3                                                           15
                                                                                                  Underutilized site rezoned in 2012 to implement 2007-2014
                                                                                                  Housing Element. Old building remodeled; Majority of lot
LI-1 79014025
                                                                                                  used for storage of granite slabs; Owner has expressed
                  2.1   High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac             36 Very Low/Low   interest in redevelopment
     Background Report                                                                                                                    Page 13-77
     Adopted December 1, 2014
     CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           TABLE 13-55
                                     VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED PARCELS 2014-2022 PLANNING PERIOD
                                                                         City of Gilroy
                                                                                2014
Map                                 General Plan                Permitted    Projected      Income
  ID   APN          Acres           Designation         Zoning   Density       Units       Category                                    Notes
                                                                                                          Underutilized site rezoned in 2012 to implement 2007-2014
                                                                                                          Housing Element. Used car lot with old, small buildings as
     79014075                                                                                             office; Existing use anticipated to discontinue and
                                                                                                          redevelop to residential uses; Adjacent to single-family
                        0.7    High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac           14 Very Low/Low      units to the west and an old motel site to the south
                                                                                                          Underutilized site rezoned in 2012 to implement 2007-2014
                                                                                                          Housing Element. Lollipop Land Preschool not anticipated
     79014091                                                                                             to redevelop, but vacant space around building has
                                                                                                          potential for redevelopment to residential uses; Single-
                        0.8    High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac           13 Very Low/Low      family units
     Subtotal           3.5                                                          63
     79015036           1.3    High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac           23 Very Low/Low      Vacant site rezoned in 2012 to implement Housing Element.
                                                                                                          Underutilized site rezoned in 2012 to implement 2007-2014
                                                                                                          Housing Element. Motel in old building in poor condition;
LI-2 79015041
                                                                                                          Existing use anticipated to discontinue and redevelop to
                        1.1    High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac           22 Very Low/Low      residential uses.
     Subtotal           2.3                                                          55
LI-3 79036002           1.1    High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac           19 Very Low/Low      Vacant site rezoned in 2012 to implement Housing Element.
     79035001           3.3    High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac           68 Very Low/Low      Vacant site rezoned in 2012 to implement Housing Element.
     Subtotal           4.4                                                          87
LI-4 79021041           3.9    High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac           78 Very Low/Low      Vacant site rezoned in 2012 to implement Housing Element.
LI-5 80801016           7.2    High Density Residential R-4    20-30 du/ac          140 Very Low/Low      Vacant site rezoned in 2012 to implement Housing Element.
     Total                                                                          533 423 Lower-Income, 110 Above Moderate-Income
     Source: City of Gilroy, 2014
     Page 13-78                                                                                                                              Background Report
                                                                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
 Summary of Residential Capacity
Table 13-56 summarizes the City of Gilroy’s capacity to meet the RHNA for the 2014-2022 planning
period. After accounting for capacity from developments under construction, approved projects,
planned projects, vacant and underutilized sites, the Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan, remaining capacity
in the Hecker Pass Specific Plan, and remaining capacity in the Downtown Specific Plan, the City of Gilroy
has a surplus of 1,088 lower-income units, 637 moderate-income units, and 1,713 above moderate-
income units.
                                                 TABLE 13-56
                            SITES SUMMARY 2014-2022 PLANNING PERIOD
                                                   City of Gilroy
                                                        2014
                                       Very                                     Above
                                                    Low-      Moderate-
                                       Low-                                   Moderate-           Total
                                                  Income        Income
                                     Income                                    Income
  2014-2022 RHNA                        236          160                217              475            1,088
  Developments Under
                                              19                         76              292              387
  Construction
  Approved Projects                            0                         10              494              504
  Planned Projects                           265                        273               95              633
  Vacant and Underutilized Sites             423                          0              110              533
  Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan              322                        495              876            1,693
  Remaining Capacity from Hecker
                                               0                          0              320              320
  Pass Specific Plan
  Remaining Capacity from
                                             455                          0                0              455
  Downtown Specific Plan
  Total Capacity                            1,484                       854            2,187            4,525
  Adjusted RHNA Need 2014-2023        Surplus of 1,088      Surplus of 637  Surplus of 1,713 Surplus of 3,451
 Source: City of Gilroy, 2014
Background Report                                                                                   Page 13-79
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Section 13.4                      Constraints
Governmental Constraints
Governmental constraints are policies, standards, requirements, and actions imposed by the
government that may have a negative impact on the development and provision of housing for a variety
of income levels. These constraints may include building codes, land use controls, growth management
measures, development fees, processing and permit procedures, and site improvement costs. State and
Federal agencies play a role in the imposition of governmental constraints; however, these agencies are
beyond the influence of local government and are therefore not addressed in this analysis.
The City of Gilroy regularly communicates with the local development community via phone and in-
person meetings to hear concerns about potential development constraints including processing
procedures, fees, development standards, and other City policies and requirements. Potential
constraints and opportunities for improvements are identified on an on-going basis through
consultation with the development community and internal staff review and recommended changes are
presented to the City Council for consideration.
Land Use Controls
Land use controls include General Plan policies, zoning regulations and standards, permit processing
requirements, and development fees.
General Plan
The General Plan constitutes the highest-level policy document for the City of Gilroy. The Land Use
Element of the General Plan identifies the location, distribution, and density/intensity of the land use
within the city. Residential densities are measured in dwelling units per acre (du/ac). The 2002 Gilroy
General Plan identifies six residential land use designations. Table 13-57 summarizes Gilroy’s residential
land use designations by total acres and permitted density ranges.
Page 13-80                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                      TABLE 13-57
                               RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                        City of Gilroy
                                                             2002
                Designation                                   Description                   Permitted Density
    Rural Residential (RR)                    Applied to areas designated for part-time   0.4 du/ac
                                              farming and the keeping of livestock. Only
                                              very low density residential development
                                              is considered appropriate, and is generally
                                              considered to be ancillary to agricultural
                                              use of the site.
    Residential Hillside (RH)                 Applied to developable hillside areas with  0.5 to 4.0 du/ac
                                              slopes of 10 percent or greater (but less   (Actual allowed density
                                              than 30 percent). Development in these      on a site-specific basis
                                              areas must follow special design and        according to the
                                              setting guidelines criteria to preserve     formula set forth in the
                                              hillside environment.                       Residential Hillside
                                                                                          Zoning District
                                                                                          requirements)
    Low Density Residential (R1/R2)           Applied to existing areas of predominantly  3.0 to 7.25 du/ac
                                              single-family detached homes.
    Medium Density Residential (R3)           This area is intended primarily for multi-  8.0 to 16.0 du/ac
                                              family structures, but can also contain
                                              single-family detached homes, with or
                                              without secondary units. Buildings are
                                              typically two stories tall, and are usually
                                              located in transition areas between lower
                                              density neighborhoods and higher density
                                              developments or commercial areas.
    High Density Residential (R4)             This area is intended primarily for multi-  16.0 to 30.0 du/ac
                                              family structures, such as apartments or
                                              condominiums, with buildings typically
                                              two or more stories.
    Neighborhood District (ND)                This area is intended to create new         3.0 – 30.0 du/ac
                                              neighborhoods that reflect a similar mix of (average density of 6 –
                                              housing throughout the city, avoiding       12.5 du/ac)
                                              concentrations of specific housing types in
                                              some areas. These new neighborhoods
                                              will be predominantly single-family in
                                              character, with duplexes, town homes,
                                              condominiums,         and       apartments
                                              interspersed.
   Source: City of Gilroy General Plan, 2002.
Background Report                                                                                            Page 13-81
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
The City’s General Plan allows for a range of densities and housing types to meet the needs of all income
levels. Assembly Bill 2348 established “default” density standards. If a local government has adopted
density standards consistent with the established population criteria, sites with those density standards
are accepted as appropriate for accommodating the jurisdiction’s share of regional housing need for
lower-income households. Pursuant to AB 2348, Gilroy is considered a “suburban” jurisdiction with a
“default” density of 20 dwelling units per acre. Densities of at least 20 units per acre are allowed in the
High Density Residential, and Neighborhood District. Densities of 20 units per acre are also allowed in
the Downtown Specific Plan Designations, described below.
Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan
The Glen Loma Ranch Specific Plan has a series of residential neighborhoods throughout the Specific
Plan area. Each neighborhood has an established range of residential units as well as potential types of
residential products. The neighborhoods are predominantly single family in character, but integrate
different types and prices of housing to meet the full range of housing needs. While the overall acreage
of the Specific Plan is approximately 359 acres, the developable residential acreage of the Specific Plan
area is approximately 192 acres. Based on the forecasted unit count of each neighborhood, the Glen
Loma Ranch Specific Plan will establish the following mix of housing units:
       R-1 Residential Uses at 63 percent or 120.6 acres: 759 units
       R-2 Residential Uses at 17 percent or 33.5 acres: 286 units
       R-3 Residential Uses at 12 percent or 22.7 acres: 326 units
       R-4 Residential Uses at 8 percent or 15.3 acres: 322 units
The housing mix would produce a total of 1,693 market rate/exempt units. The City of Gilroy has
allocated a total of 1,443 market rate Residential Development Ordinance (RDO) allocations to the Glen
Loma Ranch. The remaining 250 units are affordable units exempt from the RDO allocation process.
Hecker Pass Specific Plan
The Hecker Pass Specific Plan is the mechanism designated by the City of Gilroy’s General Plan for
implementing the goals and policies for the Hecker Pass Area. The Hecker Pass Specific Plan projects the
development of 521 housing units. The Specific Plan designates three “clusters” for residential
development: North Cluster (57 units), West Cluster (205 units), and East Cluster (244 units). The
Specific Plan aims to provide for a variety of housing types in each cluster, but provides some flexibility
for how that variety is achieved. The Hecker Pass Area will develop in a manner consistent with the units
allocated to the Specific Plan area by the RDO process.
Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan
The Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan covers over 160 acres in the central portion of the city of Gilroy. The
area extends from Leavesley Road/Welburn Avenue on the north to Luchessa Avenue to the south. The
Specific Plan divides the Downtown into six districts. The six districts are as follows:
       Downtown Historic District: minimum 20 units per acre
       Downtown Expansion District: minimum 20 units per acre
       Civic/Cultural Arts District: maximum FAR 1.5 (from Monterey Street to Church Street); maximum
        FAR 1.0 (from Church Street to Dowdy Street)
Page 13-82                                                                                  Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       Transitional District: maximum 20 units per acre
       Cannery District: minimum 20 units per acres
       Gateway District: maximum 30 units per acre
In contrast to the single-use zoning based on land use type, the Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan is based
on geographic areas called planning districts. In this approach, each district has a unique vision and a
tailored range of uses and development standards that support the desired future condition. The
housing mix in the Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan area is projected to produce 1,576 residential units
over a 20-year period. The Specific Plan expects 60 percent of undeveloped property to buildout and 10
percent of developed properties to redevelop. Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan units are exempt from the
City’s RDO Allocation application, thus the City Council can permit special exception to the assigned
numerical limits for a calendar year provided that the exception does not adversely affect the City’s
ability to provide services.
Zoning Ordinance
The Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 30 of the Gilroy City Code) is the primary tool for implementing the
General Plan. It is designed to protect and promote public health, safety, and welfare, as well as to
promote quality design and quality of life. The City of Gilroy’s residential zoning designations control
both the use and development standards of each residential parcel, thereby influencing the
development of housing. The City has found that the maximum development limits established by the
Zoning Ordinance do not pose a constraint to the development of housing.
Table 13-58 summarizes permitted uses in residential districts. Single-family residential zoning includes
three districts: A1, RR, and R1. Single-family units are permitted as a matter of right in all single-family
residential districts. Accessory dwelling units are allowed in single-family zoning districts under Section
30.11.10(c) of the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
Multi-family residential zoning includes R2, R3, R4, and RH districts. Condominiums are permitted as a
matter of right in R3, R4, and RH districts. Duplexes are permitted as a matter of right in R2, R3, and R4
districts. Townhouses are permitted as a matter of right in the R3, R4, and RH districts. Multiple family
buildings are permitted as a matter of right in R3 and R4 districts. Single-family dwellings are permitted
as a matter of right in all multi-family residential districts.
The City of Gilroy has also established a Neighborhood District (ND) zone. Land in the ND district may be
used as specified by a Master Plan or Specific Plan adopted for each Neighborhood District area. Each
area is required to provide a mixture of low-, medium-, and high-density residential units, and other
compatible uses such as parks, schools, and neighborhood-serving commercial facilities.
Residential development is permitted in some commercial districts to enable development of mixed-use
projects. A single residential dwelling unit in conjunction with a commercial use is allowed as a matter of
right in the Neighborhood Commercial (C1) and Shopping Center Commercial (C3) districts; and in the
Professional Office (PO) district with a Conditional Use Permit. Multifamily residential units are allowed
in these districts in conjunction with nonresidential uses under Conditional Use Permit approval. All
residential unit developments within these commercial districts are required to comply with the
following guidelines:
Background Report                                                                                   Page 13-83
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       The number of residential units shall not compromise the quality or character of any existing or
        proposed business located on the same property;
       The number of residential dwellings shall be limited by the availability and provision of off-street
        parking stalls;
       All bedrooms proposed for residential units shall meet minimum square footage requirements;
        and
       Open space shall be provided, when feasible.
Residential dwelling units are also permitted as a matter of right in all Downtown Specific Plan districts.
In the Downtown Historic District (DHD) and the Downtown Expansion District (DED), residential units
are unconditionally permitted on the second story or above. Anytime residential uses are proposed for
the first floor, a Conditional Use Permit is required. In the Civic/Cultural Arts District, residential units
may be allowed on the ground floor if they are located between Eigleberry Street and Church Street
behind a business. Residential units in all six Downtown Specific Plan districts must also comply with the
same guidelines set forth within commercial districts. Table 13-59 summarizes the development
standards for residential, commercial, and Specific Plan zoning designations.
The Zoning Code allows for buildings up to three stories in height in the R3 zone and six stories in the R4
zone. The Downtown allows for three to four stories depending on location. There is no maximum lot
coverage requirement. The maximum building footprint is dictated by the minimum setback
requirements. The combined setback and building height requirements work together to allow
development to achieve the maximum density allowed in the zone. Based on residential units approved
and constructed complying with these standards, the City has determined that maximum building height
and setback standards do not unreasonably impact the cost and supply of housing nor the ability of
projects to achieve maximum densities. The densities generally match the General Plan land use
designations; and setback and height requirements relate well to the densities permitted.
The following projects were approved under the City’s current multi-family development standards:
       Garlic Festival Building: 24 condos on 0.46 acres that was approved in 2006 and completed in
        2007-2008 (net density of 52 units/acre) (Downtown SP zone);
       4th Street Commons: 16 condos on 0.32 acres that was approved in 2005 and completed in 2009
        (net density of 50 units/acre) (Downtown SP zone); and
       South County Housing Development: 26-unit single-room occupancy development approved in
        2010 (net density of 16 units/acre) (R-4 PUD zone).
As the City continues to approve new housing projects, it demonstrates its commitment to
accommodating the regional housing needs allocations. Any perceived constraint on development is
minimal and does not impede construction of affordable housing for all income levels.
Page 13-84                                                                                    Background Report
                                                                                      Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                          TABLE 13-58
                                                           HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONE
                                                                City of Gilroy Zoning Ordinance
                                                                               2014
    Housing Types Permitted                          A1     RR  R1    R2     R3   R4     RH      ND     PO     C1    C3     HC     CM     CI     M1       M2
    Accessory Dwelling Unit                            --    P   P      P    --    --     P       *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
    Condominiums                                       --    --  --     --    P     P     P       *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
    Duplex                                             --    --  P      P     P     P     --      *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
    Mobile Home Park                                   --    --  C      C     P     P     --      *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
    Multi-Family Building                              --    --  --     --    P     P     --      *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
    Residential Care Homes (> 6 Residents)             --    C   C      C     C     C     C       *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
    Residential Care homes (< 6 residents)             --    P   P      P     P     P     P       *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
                                                                                                                  1     1
    Residential Unit                                   --    --  --     --   --    --     --      --     C      P     P      --     --     --     --      --
    Single-Family Dwelling or Modular Home             --    P   P      P     P     P     P       *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
    Townhouse                                          --    --  --     --    P     P     P       *      --     --    --     --     --     --     --      --
    Emergency Shelters                                 C     C   C      C     C     C     C       C      C      C     C      C      P      C      C        C
  Notes:
  P = Permitted by Right without Discretionary Review; C = Conditional Use Permit Required; * = Refer to master plan or specific plan adopted for the
  neighborhood district area in which the property is located.
  1
   Residential units may be allowed in conjunction with an existing business. Residential Units in the C3 zones may be allowed when located on the second or
  third floor of building. More than one residential unit may be allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to section 30.50.30. All residential
  unit projects within commercial zones shall comply with the following guidelines.
  Source: City of Gilroy Zoning Ordinance, Section 11. 10.
Background Report                                                                                                                                    Page 13-85
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                         TABLE 13-59
                                              SUMMARY OF RESIDENTIAL ZONING REQUIREMENTS
                                                                          City of Gilroy
                                                                               2014
                 Standard                               A1             RR                 R1                 R2                 R3                  ND
Minimum Lot Size
                                                      20 ac.         2.5 ac.          6,000 sq. ft.     8,000 sq. ft.       8,000 sq. ft.            *
(Lots created prior to February 2006)
Minimum Lot Size
                                      1               20 ac.          2.5 ac          6,600 sq. ft.     8,880 sq. ft.       8,880 sq. ft.            *
(Lots created after February 2006)
Maximum Building Height                               35 ft.            30               35 ft.            35 ft.              45 ft.                *
Minimum Front Yard                                    22 ft.            26               26 ft.            26 ft.              26 ft.                *
Minimum Front Yard Cul-de-Sac Lots                    22 ft.            22               22 ft.            22 ft.              22 ft.                *
Minimum Street Side Yard                              21 ft.            21               21 ft.            21 ft.              21 ft.                *
Minimum Side Yard                                     12 ft.            12                6 ft.             6 ft.              12 ft.                *
Minimum Rear Yard                                     15 ft.            15               15 ft.            15 ft.              15 ft.                *
Notes:
*
  Refer to the Master Plan or Specific Plan adopted for the Neighborhood District area in which the property is located.
Garage setbacks must be a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line for lots created prior to February 2006. For lots created after February 2006,
garage setbacks must be a minimum of 34 feet from the front property line (the face of curb).
1
  Usable lot area did not increase. Lots created after February 2006 include sidewalk and parkway, which were previously publicly owned.
Source: City of Gilroy Zoning Ordinance, Section 11.20, 201
Page 13-86                                                                                                                                   Background Report
                                                                                                                                      Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            TABLE 13-60
                    SUMMARY OF COMMERCIAL AND DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN ZONING REQUIREMENTS
                                                                             City of Gilroy
                                                                                  2014
                Standard                           PO          C1     C3         DHD         DED           CCA                 TD            CD            GD
                                               8,000 sq.
Minimum Lot Size                              ft. (prior to
                                                              None   None          --           --           --                 --            --            --
(Lots created prior to February 2006)         September
                                                  2005)
                                               8,880 sq.
                                                    ft.
Minimum Lot Size
                                                  (after      None   None          --           --           --                 --            --            --
(Lots created after February 2006)
                                              September
                                                  2005)
Maximum Building Height (ft.)                     35 ft.      35 ft. 75 ft.      50 ft.      50 ft.        50 ft.             40 ft.       50 ft.         40 ft.
                                                                               0 (min)/     0 (min)/      0 (min)/          0 (min)/      0 (min)/
Minimum Front Yard (ft.)                          31 ft.      31 ft. 41 ft.                                                                               15 ft.
                                                                               15 (max)     15 (max)    None (max)          15 (max)      15 (max)
Minimum Street Side Yard (ft.)                    21 ft.      21 ft. 21 ft.        0            0             0                 10         10 ft.         15 ft.
Minimum Side Yard (ft.)                            6 ft.        *     0 ft.        0            0             0                  0          0 ft.         10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)                              *          *     0 ft.        0            0             0                  0          0 ft.         10 ft.
                                                                                                     1.5 (Monterey St.
                                                                                                                             1.5 (20
                                                                                                       to Church St.)                        2.0          0.75
Floor Area Ratio                                    --         --      --         2.5          2.5                             du/                 1              1
                                                                                                     1.0 (Church St. to            1    (40 du/ac)     (30 du/ac)
                                                                                                                               ac)
                                                                                                        Dowdy St.)
Notes:
*
  Setback from rear or side property line shall match the setback required along the same property line for the most restrictive adjacent property. (There is no
setback required if the adjacent property is in the same zoning district).
1
  Use either floor area ratio or stand alone residential density to determine project size.
Source: City of Gilroy Zoning Ordinance, Section 19.20, 2014.
Background Report                                                                                                                                     Page 13-87
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Parking Requirements
Table 13-61 summarizes the residential parking requirements in Gilroy. Parking requirements do not
constrain the development of housing directly. However, parking requirements may reduce the amount
of available lot area for residential development. The City requires that one parking space per dwelling
be in a carport or garage, allowing greater flexibility in site design and building configuration.
                                                      TABLE 13-61
                                RESIDENTIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS
                                                        City of Gilroy
                                                              2014
       Type of Residential Development                                 Required Parking Spaces
                                                                                (off street)
      Single- and Two-family dwellings                 Two stalls per dwelling units, one of which shall be a
                                                       covered carport or garage (each space must be at least 10
                                                       feet by 20 feet)
      Multiple family dwellings                        One and one-half stalls per one bedroom or two bedroom
                                                       dwelling unit and two stalls for each unit having three or
                                                       more bedrooms or rooms that could be used as bedrooms.
                                                       One stall for every four units for guests.
                                                       One stall for each unit shall be covered with a garage or
                                                       carport.
      Accessory dwelling units (detached)              One stall per unit
      Downtown Specific Plan Residential Parking Requirements
      Residential units < or equal to 800 sq. ft.      One space per unit plus one guest space per six units
      Residential units > 800 sq. ft.                  1.5 spaces per unit plus one guest space per four units
      Source: City of Gilroy Zoning Ordinance, Section 31.21.
Planned Unit Development Combining District
The City uses the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Combining District designation to allow more
flexibility in site and building requirements, including yard, building height, lot coverage, and
landscaping. The PUD Combining District is an optional alternative to the underlying zoning district that
is used at the request of the project applicant. Applicants typically request use of the PUD instead of the
underlying zoning district in order to have more flexible development standards, allowing for more
creative and often more cost-effective development. The intent of the PUD Combining District is to
allow diversification in the relationships of buildings, structures, and open space in building groups; and
the allowable heights of buildings and structures. The PUD also ensures adequate standards related to
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
The establishment of a PUD Combining District may be in combination with any residential, commercial,
or industrial zoning district. A minimum of 75 percent of the land area of parcels designated as being in a
PUD Combining District are for uses permitted by the base zoning district. Other land uses to a
maximum of 25 percent may be permitted in accordance with a Planned Unit Development Approval.
This allows the City’s review authorities to provide flexibility for the development of constrained lots
Page 13-88                                                                                              Background Report
                                                                                                Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
and development incentives for projects proposing public benefits, such as the provision of affordable or
special needs housing.
All site and building requirements, including yard, building height, lot coverage, and landscaping are
specified in the Planned Unit Development Approval outlined in Section 50.50 of the Zoning Ordinance.
If a parcel is located in a PUD Combining District, a building permit shall not be issued for any
development until the Planning Commission and City Council have approved the development.
The City defines a planned unit development as:
        Land that is planned and developed as a whole.
        A single development operation or a definitely programmed series of development operations,
         including all lands and buildings.
        Including principal and accessory structures and uses substantially related to the character of the
         surrounding district.
        A program of comprehensive and detailed plans, which will include all site and architectural
         design plans.
        A program that should include the operation and maintenance of such areas and facilities that
         will be for common use and benefit by some or all of the occupants of the development, but in
         most cases not be provided, operated, or maintained at the general expense of the City of Gilroy.
The following single family residential projects were approved under the City’s current development
standards and are within the R-1 PUD zoning district:
        Rancho Hill Phase 2: 71-lot, single-family subdivision that was approved in 2006;
        Rancho Hill Phase 3: 107- lot, single-family subdivision that was approved in 2007;
        Rancho Meadows Phase 4: 41-lot, single-family subdivision that was approved in 2011; and
        K Hovnanian: 10-home, single-family subdivision that was approved in 2012.
Historic Site and Neighborhood Combining Districts
The intent of the Historic Site and Neighborhood Combining Districts is:
        To preserve historic sites and neighborhoods that represent important elements of Gilroy’s past
         or contribute to the community’s identity or educational resources;
        To enhance the visual character of Gilroy by encouraging and regulating the compatibility of
         architectural styles within historic sites and neighborhoods;
        To identify and designate areas that have a significant concentration or continuity of sites,
         buildings, or objects unified by past events or physical development; and
        To encourage restoration of historic buildings and neighborhoods throughout the city.
Permitted uses in both Historic Site and Neighborhood Combining Districts include all uses that are
permitted in the base district. Any use that is listed as a conditional use for the base district may be
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-89
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
allowed to locate within a Historic Site or Neighborhood Combining District subject to the Planning
Commission making all of the following findings:
       The proposed conditional use is compatible with the historic nature of the property and would
        require minimal alteration to the building or site;
       All proposed and/or required alterations would not alter the historic significance of the building
        or site; and
       The site is adequate to accommodate any required parking, landscaping, or other amenities
        required as a condition of approval of the conditional use permit.
Applications to construct new structures, or alter, change, modify, remove, or significantly alter the
exterior of any structure within a Historic Site or Neighborhood Combining District require architectural
and site approval according to Section 50.40 of the Zoning Ordinance.
The Historic Heritage Committee reviews and makes recommendations to the Planning Commission on
applications for architectural and site approval that involve significant changes. The Planning Director
reviews and may issue architectural and site approval for changes in Historic and Neighborhood
Combining Districts that are not considered significant. All decision-making bodies are bound by uniform
standards adopted by the City Council or Planning Commission relating to the intent, scope, or review of
requirements of architectural and site approval.
Density Bonus Ordinance
Government Code sections 65915 through 65918, known as the density bonus law, were enacted to
encourage developers to build affordable housing by requiring local governments to provide meaningful
incentives in exchange for those affordable units. The required incentives include both a density bonus
and exceptions from City development standards. In order to qualify for these incentives a developer
must commit to make available at least five percent of the units in a project to persons of very low
income or ten percent of the units to persons of low income. In exchange, the City must grant a density
bonus of 20 percent to the project. Projects restricted to seniors must be provided a 20 percent density
bonus.
A developer who commits to make available at least 10 percent of the units in a project to persons of
moderate income must be granted a density bonus of five percent. Commitments by a developer in
excess of the affordability minimums listed above increase the required density bonus up to a maximum
of 35 percent. In addition, exceptions from one or more of the City’s development standards may be
requested based on the percentage of affordable units provided.
The City addresses the density bonus requirement through the implementation of Section 30.46.40 of
the Gilroy City Code. The City amended its Density Bonus Ordinance in April 2014 to comply with State
law.
Residential Care Facilities
The City’s Municipal Code defines a “residential care facility” as a resident-occupied dwelling, licensed
by the State/County in where children and/or adults are cared for on a full-time, live-in basis. Residential
care facilities for less than six people are permitted in all residential districts except the Agriculture
District (A-1). Residential care facilities for more than six people are permitted in all residential districts
Page 13-90                                                                                     Background Report
                                                                                       Adopted December 1, 2014

  CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
  except the A-1 district with a Conditional Use Permit. Residential care facilities can also be located in the
  ND district, but are subject to a Master Plan or Specific Plan adopted for the area.
  Emergency Shelters, Transitional Housing, and Single Room Occupancy Units
  Emergency Shelters
  State Housing Law requires that cities identify sites that are adequately zoned for emergency shelters
  (i.e., homeless shelters). Government Code Section 65583 (Senate Bill 2) was enacted to support the
  needs of the homeless by removing barriers to and increasing opportunities for development and/or
  operation of emergency shelters and transitional and supportive housing facilities in California. To fulfill
  the requirements of Senate Bill 2 the City amended the Zoning Ordinance in April 2014 to allow
  emergency shelters as a matter of right in the Commercial Industrial (CM) zoning district and in all other
  zoning districts with a conditional use permit. Emergency shelters are subject to performance standards
  listed in Section 30.41.32 of the City code, including a limit of 50 beds per room, requirements for
  management plans and floor plans, guidance for waiting and intake areas, and regulations for parking
  and lighting. These performance standards comply with State law.
  The Commercial Industrial (CM) zoning district allows for commercial uses and low intensity
  manufacturing and industrial uses. It is located with convenient access to the City’s transportation
  corridors and is adjacent to existing retail and service establishments.
  Table 13-62 summarizes the zoning district’s total land and development standards. There are a total of
  188.34 acres of land within the CM zoning district and approximately 6.11 acres of vacant land. There
  are opportunities for redevelopment or adaptive reuse of sites within the CM district.
                                                        TABLE 13-62
    TOTAL LAND AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN CM ZONING DISTRICT AND
                                  DOWNTOWN GILROY CANNERY DISTRICT
                                                         City of Gilroy
                                                              2014
                                                            Side Yard                                    Maximu
                                                                           Side (All
 Zoning         Total      Minimum         Front Yard        Setback                                        m
                                                                          other side     Rear Yard
 District      Acres       Lot Area         Setback       (Adjacent to                                  Building
                                                                             yards)
                                                              street)                                    Height
                                                                        Match setback  Match setback
                                                                        required along required along
                                                                        the same       the same
                                                                                                         Max. 35
    CM         188.34          None        Min. 26 feet    Min. 26 feet property line  property line
                                                                                                           feet
                                                                        for the most   for the most
                                                                        restrictive    restrictive
                                                                        property       property
Source: City of Gilroy, Municipal Code, 2014.
  Background Report                                                                                   Page 13-91
  Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Transitional Housing
Transitional housing is a type of housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and
families to permanent housing. Residents of transitional housing are usually connected to supportive
services designed to assist the homeless in achieving greater economic independence and a permanent,
stable living situation. Transitional housing can take several forms, including group quarters with beds,
single family homes, and multifamily apartments, and typically offers case management and support
services to help return people to independent living (often six months to two years). Under State law,
transitional housing must be considered a residential use and can only be subject to those restrictions
that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. The City amended its Zoning
Ordinance in April 2014 to allow transitional housing in all residential zoning districts. The Housing
Element includes a program to make further amendments to fully comply with State law and allow
transitional housing in all zones that allow residential uses.
Supportive Housing
The State define “supportive housing” as housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the
target population and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing
resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to
live, and when possible, work in a community.
Senate Bill 2 requires that transitional and supportive housing must be considered a residential use and
permitted wherever residential uses are allowed. The City amended its Zoning Ordinance in April 2014
To allow supportive housing in all residential zoning districts. The Housing Element includes a program
to make further amendments to fully comply with State law and allow transitional housing in all zones
that allow residential uses.
Single Room Occupancy Units
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) residences are small, one-room units occupied by a single individual, and
may either have a shared or private kitchen and bathroom facilities. SROs are rented on a monthly basis
typically without a rental deposit, and can provide an entry point into the housing market for extremely
low-income individuals, formerly homeless, and disabled persons.
Single-room occupancy units are currently (2014) not specifically defined or included in the City’s Zoning
Ordinance. However it should be noted that the City approved a 26-unit SRO project in 2010.
Accessory Dwelling Units
Accessory dwelling units provide additional opportunities to provide housing for people of all ages and
economic levels, while preserving the integrity and character of single-family residential neighborhoods.
The City of Gilroy permits accessory dwelling units in the RR, R1, R2 and RH districts, provided certain
requirements are met. The City does not require RDO allocations for accessory dwelling units.
Requirements for accessory dwelling units include:
       The unit is not for sale and may be rented.
       The lot contains one existing single-family unit.
Page 13-92                                                                                  Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       The existing single-family unit must have at least two parking spaces, one of which must be
        covered. One additional parking space consisting of a minimum 200 square feet is required for
        the accessory dwelling unit. The additional parking space may be uncovered and/or located in
        the driveway, provided that the parking requirement for the single-family dwelling unit has been
        met.
       The accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to a one-bedroom unit with the overall floor area not
        to exceed 600 square feet in size, not including garage areas. All accessory dwelling units shall be
        limited to a single story, unless a conditional use permit is approved.
       Any construction shall conform to height, setback, lot coverage, architectural review, site plan
        review, fees, charges, and other zoning requirements generally applicable to residential
        construction in the zone in which the property is located.
       The accessory dwelling unit shall contain water, sewer, and gas and/or electric utility connections
        that are in working condition upon its occupancy and can be serviced by the primary residence or
        with separate utility meters.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
The U.S. Census Bureau defines persons with disabilities as those with a long-lasting physical, mental, or
emotional condition. This condition can make it difficult for a person to do activities such as walking,
climbing stairs, dressing, bathing, learning, or remembering. This condition can also impede a person
from being able to go outside the home alone or to work at a job or business.
Reasonable Accommodation Procedures
The provisions of SB 520 require municipalities to analyze potential and actual constraints upon the
development, maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities, and demonstrate
local efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder the locality from meeting the need for
housing for persons with disabilities. Cities are required to include programs that remove constraints
and provide reasonable accommodations for housing designed for persons with disabilities.
Section 50.23 of the Zoning Ordinance addresses Reasonable Accommodation Procedures in the City of
Gilroy. Applications are provided and reviewed by the City’s Community Development Director. The City
amended its Zoning Ordinance in April 2014 to provide more clarity and certainty for applicants.
Zoning and Other Land Use Regulations:
The City has not identified any zoning or other land use regulatory practices that could discriminate
against persons with disabilities and impede the availability of such housing for these individuals.
Examples of the ways in which the City facilitates housing for persons with disabilities through its
regulatory and permitting procedures are:
       The City of Gilroy allows, as a matter of right, residential care facilities for six or fewer persons in
        any residential district except the A-1 district. Group care facilities for more than six persons are
        permitted subject to a conditional use permit in residential districts except the A-1 district.
Background Report                                                                                      Page 13-93
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       Residential care facilities can also be located in the ND district, but are subject to a Master Plan
        or Specific Plan adopted for the area.
       The City of Gilroy defines a “family” as one or more persons, occupying premises and living
        together as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club,
        fraternity, or sorority. This definition is consistent with State law, and does not pose a constraint
        on the development of housing for persons with disabilities.
       Parking requirements for residential care facilities are not specified in the City’s Municipal Code,
        however the City allows for some variation from the application of its parking standards. Section
        31.34 of the Municipal Code states, “The parking ratio shall be determined by the Planning
        Director for uses that are not specifically included, and that are not closely related to other uses
        included in the parking space requirement schedule.”
       Resources provided by the City for reasonable accommodations and fair housing for people with
        disabilities include retrofit grants for the homes of very low income disabled residents with
        funding coming from the Federal Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and Gilroy’s local
        Housing Trust Fund. The trust fund also provides funding to nonprofits that investigate fair
        housing complaints, perform accessibility audits on new construction, provide community
        education on fair housing for disabled people, and provide referrals to accessible units and in-
        home assistance.
Building Codes and Enforcement
The City of Gilroy’s building and safety codes are adopted to preserve public health and safety, and
ensure the construction of safe and decent housing. These codes and standards also have the potential
to increase the cost of housing construction or maintenance.
Building Codes
The City of Gilroy has adopted the 2013 California Building Code, which is based on the 2012
International Building Code and establishes construction standards for all residential buildings. The
latest edition of the California Building Code shall be submitted to the Council from time to time
together with changes or modifications as are reasonable and necessary because of local climatic,
geological, or topographical conditions, or as otherwise permitted by State law. The regulations set forth
are designed to ensure the safety and welfare of Gilroy’s residents. Local amendments to the California
Building Code can be found in Appendix B. The amendments do not create constraints to additional
housing and are necessarily included to accommodate for various conditions specific to Gilroy.
Americans with Disabilities Act
The Federal Fair Housing Act of 1988 (FHA) and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) are Federal
laws intended to assist in providing safe and accessible housing. ADA provisions include requirements
for a minimum percentage of units in new developments to be fully accessible for persons with physical
disabilities. Compliance with these regulations may increase the cost of housing construction as well as
the cost of rehabilitating older units, which may be required to comply with current codes. However, the
enforcement of ADA requirements is not at the discretion of the City, but is mandated under Federal
law.
Page 13-94                                                                                    Background Report
                                                                                      Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Development and Permit Fees
Various development and permit fees are charged by the City and other agencies to cover
administrative processing costs associated with development. These fees ensure quality development
and the provision of adequate services.
Development Impact Fees
Development impact fees add to the cost of residential development. However, they are seen as a more
cost effective mechanism for financing the new infrastructure required to support new development.
The fees allow for the consolidation of infrastructure projects when it is more cost-effective to do so
and, by law, must be linked to the actual impact of the specific project. The City believes that the system
of planning infrastructure and financing it with development fees serves both the developer and the
community by promoting orderly development and by fairly distributing the cost to all new
development.
Table 13-63 lists the typical development fees for single family and multifamily developments. The
typical development impact fees for a single family unit within a subdivision are $49,278, and typical
fees for a multifamily unit in a planned unit development are $33,181. Fees for traffic, sewer, water, and
public facilities are deferred until a building permit is granted. The majority of fees are impact fees,
which are necessary to provide infrastructure, facilities, and services that support new housing units.
In their simplest form, impact fees raise the money necessary to pay the cost to build infrastructure
needed to serve new residents and businesses. Impact fees were developed as a funding mechanism to
ensure that the existing residents of a community are not burdened with the expense of building new
infrastructure to serve new growth. Due to the subprime mortgage crisis in 2008, however, the fiscal
environment of all levels of government was dramatically altered. Overtime, the City has reduced its
impact fees; based on the effects of the recession on material costs, property values, and labor rates.
The City’s development impact fees are roughly 20 percent lower than the fees identified in the previous
(2007-2014) Housing Element. As shown in Table 13-66 and 13-67, development impact fees can total
over $49,278 for a single-family unit, which is approximately 14 percent of total development costs, and
over $33,181 per unit for multifamily development projects, which is approximately 16 percent of total
development costs.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-95
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                     TABLE 13-63
                                     ESTIMATED DEVELOPMENT FEES
                                                       City of Gilroy
                                                             2013
                                                                 50-unit Residential             50-unit Apartment
                              Fees                                                  1,3                         2,4
                                                                   Subdivision                       Complex
     Residential Development Allocation                                             $10,085                     $10,085
     Tract Map                                                                      $13,835                            --
     Architectural Site Review                                                        $5,450                      $3,325
     Final Map                                                                             --                          --
                       5
     Building Permit                                                              $238,801                      $50,802
     Public Works Fees Due at Time of Submittal
     Public Works Service                                                             $6,210                      $3,270
     Plan Check and Inspection                                                      $86,000                     $86,000
     Storm Drain                                                                      $5,640                      $8,860
     Fees Deferred Until Building Permit
     Traffic Impact                                                               $498,650                     $404,200
     Sewer                                                                        $534,300                     $289,100
     Water                                                                        $214,700                      $86,850
                     6
     Public Facility                                                              $842,400                     $708,750
     Construction Water                                                               $7,827                      $7,827
     Total                                                                      $2,463,898                   $1,659,069
     Per Unit                                                                       $49,278                     $33,181
     Notes:
     1
      10 acres, 2,000 square foot homes on 6,000 square foot lots
     2
      800 square foot 2-bedroom, 1-bath units
     3
      10 acres; 2,000 Linear feet of front frontage; $1,000,000 Cost Estimate of Improvements; low density
     4
      10 acres; 2,000 Linear feet of front frontage; $1,000,000 Cost Estimate of Improvements; high density
     5
      Assumes a 5 percent increase in fees from current fees schedule
     6
      Includes parks, libraries, fire and police facilities, City hall, etc. The City provides credit for developers
     that build facilities.
     Source: City of Gilroy, 2013
Local Processing and Permit Procedures
The City has a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) that meets every week to review preliminary plans
for compliance with City ordinances and standards, identify on-site or off-site improvements, and
determine the adequacy of the application. This provides the applicant an opportunity to evaluate his
compliance with the development process early in the process, in order to minimize the need for later
revisions to the application.
Page 13-96                                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-64 illustrates the typical development timelines for various applications and permits.
                                                 TABLE 13-64
                              APPROXIMATE DEVELOPMENT TIMELINES
                                                  City of Gilroy
                                                              Typical
              Type of Approval or Permit                                          Approval Body
                                                        Processing Time
    Conditional Use Permit                                       3-4 months          Planning Commission
    Variance                                                     3-4 months          Planning Commission
    Zone Change/Zoning Amendment                                6-12 months                     City Council
    General Plan Amendment                                      6-12 months                     City Council
    Architecture and Site Review                                 3-6 months              Planning Manager
    Planned Unit Development                                     6-9 months                     City Council
    Tentative Tract Map                                          6-9 months                     City Council
                            1
    Negative Declaration                                         6-9 months Same as project approval body
                                  1
    Environmental Impact Report                                 9-12 months Same as project approval body
    Final Subdivision Map                                        2-4 months                    Engineering
    Parcel Map                                                   1-2 months                    Engineering
    Note: The Negative Declaration and Environmental Impact Report comes out of an Initial Study and is
    processed with the application that is being submitted at that time.
    Source: City of Gilroy.
Both single-family and multi-family projects are required to request allocations through the RDO
process. The application process happens once every 10 years; the last RDO cycle was from 2004 to
2013. However, as of November 1, 2012, the City has deferred the competition for the 2014-2023 RDO
cycle and has instead implemented an RDO interim exemption for projects making application during
the 2013 and 2014 calendar years. Subsequent to receipt of allocations, single family projects are
required to file applications for Tentative Subdivision Maps and Architectural and Site Reviews. These
applications can be filed and processed concurrently. The review and approval process typically takes up
to one year to complete. After approval of these applications, Final Subdivision Maps must be submitted
and approved. This process typically requires two to four months to complete. Once Final Maps are
recorded, Building Permit Applications may be filed, which typically takes 3 to 4 months for approval.
Multi-family projects are required to file and receive approval for Architectural and Site Review
Applications and Building Permit application, but are not required to submit Tentative and Final
Subdivision Maps. The review and approval of multi-family projects typically takes 4 to 6 months to
complete, and application for Building Permits takes 3 to 4 months.
Residential projects involving two or more units must receive Architectural and Site Review approval
prior to construction. If a project does not require a subdivision map or PUD zoning, the Architectural
and Site Review application is approved at the staff level. If a project requires subdivision or PUD zoning,
the Architectural and Site Review application is reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by
the City Council as part of the review of those other applications. Applications are reviewed to ensure
that the development addresses and adequately meets the requirements; the development
requirements can be found in Appendix D of this document.
Background Report                                                                                     Page 13-97
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
On-and Off Site Improvements
The City requires on- and off-site improvements for new developments, which are intended to meet
health and safety requirements of the community. Residential developers are responsible for
constructing road, water, sewer, and storm drainage improvements on new housing sites. Standards for
the City, recently updated in August 2014, include local street rights-of-way and curb-to-curb widths,
sanitary sewer and storm drainage lines, street lighting, erosion control, landscaping, and easements.
Notably, all streets must be designed in accordance with accepted engineering principles and conform
to the design standards, the standard details, and the complete streets resolution approved by City
Council. All exceptions to the general guidelines must be approved by the City Engineer prior to the
approval of the tentative map. These requirements are similar to those of other jurisdictions and are not
considered a constraint on development.
Residential Development Ordinance
In terms of housing production, the most significant procedure is the allocation of building permits
through the Residential Development Ordinance (RDO). The RDO was first established in 1979 to
monitor the amount of residential growth in the City. In past years, the City Council has reviewed and
revised the RDO limits to reflect market changes and the city’s vision.
The City recognizes that subjecting affordable housing projects to the overall RDO may serve as a
constraint to provide the total number of allocations needed to meet Gilroy’s RHNA. However, there is a
consensus in the community that the RDO plays a very important role in managing growth and
protecting the community’s quality of life. Furthermore, on the current and most recent Housing
Element cycles, the RDO was not a constraint. The City’s 2002 General Plan update focused on updating
the RDO to address the concerns expressed by the members of the General Plan Update Committee.
There was strong consensus that the RDO serves the City well as a growth management tool, although
many expressed the need to revise its procedures, allocation numbers, and/or the evaluation criteria
used to judge competing projects. Rather than remove the overall cap of the RDO by exempting
affordable units, the General Plan update focused on a number of strategies to reconfigure the RDO and
the development environment in general in a manner that supports affordable housing goals and
achieves other important community goals. These strategies include:
      Establish the General Plan as the guiding document on which the RDO is based;
      Continue to prioritize affordable housing projects;
      Ensure a mix of housing types in areas of new residential development;
      Take a more proactive and aggressive role in supporting affordable housing;
      Create a specific geographic exemption area;
      Establish a more aggressive “accessory dwelling unit” program;
      Provide an exemption for mixed-use and live-work units; and
      Promote the construction of assisted living units.
The RDO only applies to residential development. This application of the RDO is to ensure that
residential growth is metered so that the City can provide and fund adequate services to support
residents. These services include, but are not limited to, schools, parks, fire services, and police services.
Page 13-98                                                                                  Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
In comparison, commercial and industrial developments do not require these services to the extent that
residential developments need them. In addition, commercial and industrial developments support
themselves by providing a tax base to fund services that serve both businesses and residents in the city.
Commercial and industrial developments provide an important source of revenue for the City’s
economic development.
Exemptions
The Residential Development Ordinance applies to all residential development projects constructed
within the city of Gilroy, except for those listed as exempt. The following types of residential projects are
exempted from the provisions of the RDO:
      A Small Project Exemption may be granted to projects proposing 12 or fewer dwelling units. All
       projects submitted under this Small Project Exemption category shall require City Council review
       and approval. Tentative maps submitted with an application for this exemption must be
       accompanied by an architectural and site approval application, except projects proposing to
       create single-family lots for homes to be custom designed and built. Projects proposing more
       than 12 dwelling units submitted for a Small Project Exemption, may be considered by the City
       Council and granted exemption if the City Council determines that the project has all the
       following special circumstances:
                The project meets the intent of the RDO Small Project Exemption;
                The project needs only a few more than 12 units to completely build-out; and
                The project will not create any remainder lots.
      Replacement dwellings are exempt provided that the number of exempted new dwelling units do
       not exceed more than four units, the number of dwelling units removed for such replacement on
       any parcel. Relocation of dwelling units existing within Gilroy to another site shall be exempt.
      A residential development project sponsored by a non-profit organization funded by Federal,
       state, or local government is exempt, so long as such organization is one of the following:
                An organization that receives annual operating grants in excess of $100,000 from
                 government sources; or
                An organization that qualifies as a Community Housing Development Organization
                 (CHDO)
Development projects receiving this exemption must be no more than 75 units and must be specifically
approved for the exemption by the City Council. All requests under this exemption shall be processed
through an RDO affordable housing exemption application. Public hearings before the Planning
Commission and City Council will be held to consider this application.
      A project that meets the standards established by the “RDO Affordable Housing Exemption
       Procedure” is exempt if the project consists of 75 units or less and is specifically approved for
       exemption by the City Council.
      Large residential projects, which have received an approved residential development allocation
       of at least 100 units, may receive an allocation credit when specific portions of their project have
       been sold to a secondary builder or contractor.
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-99
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       An infill exemption may be granted to projects proposing four or fewer dwelling units that meet
        the following criteria:
                  All street improvements must be in place, including water, sewer, and storm drains;
                  The project must be surrounded by developed property, except that the project may be
                   adjacent to an undeveloped or underdeveloped property which itself would otherwise
                   qualify under this exemption; and
                  The project shall not be located on the edge of a developed area of the city, so that it, if
                   built, would create or extend development in any way into a previously undeveloped
                   area of the city.
       A project proposing a single dwelling unit may qualify for a Non-discretionary Single Unit
        Exemption if it meets the following criteria:
                  When no discretionary approval from the City is required;
                  The project is located in either R1 or A1 zoning district; and
                  No other dwelling units exist on the property.
       A project proposing a single dwelling unit may qualify for a Discretionary Single Unit Exemption if
        it meets the following criteria:
                  A discretionary approval from the City is required; and
                  No infrastructure is required as a prerequisite to the development of the property.
       Transitional housing units that meet the standards established by the City’s adopted Transitional
        Housing Policy are exempt if specifically approved for exemption by the City Council.
Projects located within the City’s Downtown Commercial area as defined in the General Plan are
specifically approved for exemption by the City Council.
RDO Affordable Housing Exemption Procedures
In order to meet the current and future housing needs of all income segments of the community, the
City of Gilroy provides exemption from the Residential Development Ordinance annual allocations for
affordable housing projects. The City requires that 100 percent of the housing units granted under this
exemption must be sold and/or rented at prices that are affordable to very low-, low-, or moderate-
income households. The procedure for this exemption is as follows:
       The applicant applies for an RDO Affordable Housing Exemption, and submits all required fees at
        the time of application. Consideration for the approval of this application is made in accordance
        with the criteria for exempt categories as described above.
       The applicant must specify the number of units to be constructed and identify the number of
        units that will be affordable to households with very low-, low-, and moderate-incomes.
       Rental and/or sale prices of all units shall be reviewed and approved by the City.
Page 13-100                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                   Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       The applicant must receive approval of the RDO exemption prior to Tentative Map Approval. In
        situations where a Tentative Map is not required, the applicant must receive approval of the RDO
        exemption prior to Architectural and Site Review approval.
       After approval of the application, and prior to receiving Tentative Map approval (or Architectural
        and Site approval in situations where Tentative Maps are not required), the applicant must enter
        into a contract with the City agreeing to provide affordable housing as delineated in the RDO
        Affordable Housing Exemption policy.
       The applicant will advertise the existence and terms of the agreed upon policy to the general
        public and accept applications from prospective purchasers and tenants.
Annual Numerical Limits
The City Council, after considering economic, public service, environmental, housing, and other
information deemed relevant to the residential development program of the City, determines the
maximum total number of dwelling units which should be built during a subsequent 10-year goal period.
Each year of a 10-year goal period, the City Council holds a public hearing, which can be continued from
time to time. Then the Council adopts a resolution reaffirming, readjusting, and resetting the numerical
limits for each subsequent calendar year remaining in the 10-year goal period.
The numerical limit for a given calendar year is expressed as the total number of dwelling units, for
projects not exempt from the RDO, for which building permits may be issued in that calendar year. The
numerical limit for one year may not exceed 130 percent of the average of the numerical limits for the
remaining years in the 10-year goal period, or 13 percent of the 10-year goal, whichever is less. There is
no set formula for determining the number of exempt units. Historically, the City Council has reserved
one quarter to one third of all units for exempt projects.
Background Report                                                                               Page 13-101
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 13-65 summarizes Gilroy’s maximum allotted RDO growth numbers from 2004 to 2013. The total
RDO allocation, including market rate units, exempt units, and Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan units,
within the planning period exceeds the City’s unmet RHNA need. There is currently a backlog of
approximately 1,500 units from the 2004 to 2013 cycle which have not been constructed. As of
November 1, 2012, the City has deferred the competition for the 2014-2023 RDO cycle to allow itself an
opportunity to review and potentially modify the Residential Developmental Ordinance, and allow for
the unbuilt units from the current cycle to be completed. To ensure the RDO continues to provide
capacity to meet the City’s RHNA, the Housing Element will include a program to monitor the RDO.
                                               TABLE 13-65
                                     RDO GROWTH NUMBERS
                                                City of Gilroy
                                                 2004-2013
                        Years               Market Rate Units        Exempt (Counted) Housing
                         2004                                  294
                         2005                                  398
                         2006                                  289
                         2007                                  166
                         2008                                  202
                                                                                 970
                         2009                                  252
                         2010                                  236
                         2011                                  236
                         2012                                  244
                         2013                                  163
                         Total                               2,480                             970
         Source: City of Gilroy.
Interim Exemption Ordinance
On February 3, 2013 the City amended its Zoning Ordinance to include an RDO Interim Exemption
Ordinance for projects on properties with previously awarded allocations as well as projects on
properties without previously awarded allocations. The RDO Interim Exemption Ordinance allows the
development of new or modified residential projects in the interim period between now and the time
the City Council completes modifications to the Residential Development Ordinance (through the
completion of the General Plan).
For projects on properties with previously awarded allocations, no RDO allocation is required for a
project that meets all the following criteria:
      The project must be located within city limits by the effective date of the ordinance codified in
       this chapter.
      All necessary discretionary planning applications for the project, including a request for
       performance agreement approval must be submitted and deemed complete for processing no
       later than April 3, 2014.
      All discretionary planning approvals for the project, including performance agreement approval,
       must be obtained within one year of the determination that the project is complete for
Page 13-102                                                                               Background Report
                                                                                   Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
       processing. This deadline may be extended at the discretion of the city council upon written
       request by the project applicant prior to the deadline and upon a finding by the city council that
       the failure to obtain planning approvals was due to circumstances beyond the applicant’s control.
      The performance agreement shall be on a form provided by the City and shall include, but not be
       limited to, the following:
                For project requiring a final map—that the project receive final map approval within six
                 months of the last discretionary planning approval and that building permits be received
                 for all units in the project within six months of approval of the final map.
                For a project that does not require a final map—that building permits be received for all
                 units in the project within six months of approval of the last discretionary planning
                 application. These performance agreement requirements must also be conditions of the
                 discretionary project approvals.
      An applicant must make separate application to the city council for an RDO interim exemption.
       Approval of the exemption by the city council shall be required prior to a determination that the
       project is complete for processing.
      The proposed project must be of a quality that is equivalent to or greater than the project for
       which the current allocation was approved. For the purpose of this criterion, quality is defined to
       include site design, building design, and project amenities.
      All discretionary approvals for the project must be reviewed by the planning commission and
       approved by the city council. Public hearings are required pursuant to section 30.51.30.
For projects on properties without previously awarded allocations, no RDO allocation is required for a
project that meets all the following criteria:
      The project must be located within city limits and zoned for resident use by the effective date of
       the ordinance codified in this chapter.
      Properties that have a residential zoning other than R4 high density residential must meet the
       criteria enumerated for properties with previously awarded allocations, above.
      Properties that have a residential zoning of R4 high density residential must meet the following
       criteria:
                All discretionary approvals for the project must be reviewed by the planning commission
                 and approved by the city council. Public hearings are required pursuant to section
                 30.51.30.
Application Procedures
All applications for Residential Development Review Projects are submitted to the City of Gilroy
Community Development Department. The Planning Commission then holds a public hearing and
assigns a point score to each residential development project for which the application has been
deemed complete in accordance with the City’s Project Rating Scale. The Planning Commission
competitively evaluates each residential development project and establishes a ranking for each based
upon its assigned point score.
Background Report                                                                                Page 13-103
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
The Planning Commission recommends to the City Council a build-out schedule only for those projects
for which building permits can be issued within the applicable numerical limits. If the Planning
Commission finds that, due to environmental or other reasons, a given project is detrimental to the
public health, safety, and general welfare, the Commission may recommend to the City Council that the
project not be granted a build-out schedule regardless of its score on the Project Rating Scale or
whether or not the applicable numerical limits are fully allocated.
The City Council holds a public hearing and reviews the point scores, rankings, and build-out schedules
and may affirm or modify the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The allocation process
happens every 10 years and takes approximately one year to complete. Each project is assigned a three
to five year window in which units are to be built. If allocated units are not constructed within a three to
five year period, then the City Council may provide an extension, reallocate them, add them to the next
RDO allocation, or eliminate them. More often than not, the City Council has granted an extension. To
date, fewer than five projects have expired and all of the units have been reallocated in the current RDO
cycle. To address the possible elimination of unused allocations, the previous Housing Element includes
a policy program action to review the RDO and revise the policy as appropriate. The City of Gilroy allows
concurrent submittal of remaining entitlements (e.g., subdivision maps and site and architectural
review) with the RDO allocation process. The following describes the RDO application procedures:
       All applications for Residential Development Review of projects are submitted to the City of
        Gilroy Community Development Department.
       Each request for Residential Development Review contains information and fees requested on
        the residential development review application forms. Only applications deemed complete by
        the Community Development Director are considered.
The following describes the competitive evaluation procedures and assignment of build-out schedules:
       The Planning Commission holds a public hearing and assigns a point score in accordance with the
        Project Rating Scale to each residential development project for which the application has been
        deemed complete by the Community Development Director.
       The Planning Commission competitively evaluates each residential development project and
        establishes a ranking for each residential project based upon its assigned point score.
       The Planning Commission recommends to the City Council a build-out schedule only for those
        projects which the Planning Commission determines that building permits can be issued within
        the applicable numerical limits. If the Planning Commission finds that, due to environmental or
        other reasons, a given project is detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare, the
        Commission may recommend to the City Council that the project not be granted a build-out
        schedule regardless of its score on the Project Rating Scale or whether or not the applicable
        numerical limits are fully allocated.
       The City Council holds a public hearing and reviews the point scores, rankings and build-out
        schedules recommended by the Planning Commission and may affirm or modify the
        recommendation. In making its decision, the Council shall give priority to accommodating
        subsequent phasing and build-out of previously approved projects for which substantial public
        infrastructure improvements have been constructed to serve such future phases.
Page 13-104                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                    Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
      The maximum numerical limit for any year does not have to be fully allocated. (Although the City
       Council has the authority to not fully allocate the available units, to date, it has not happened and
       is unlikely to happen in the future.)
      No individual project shall be assigned more than 25 percent of the 10-year housing goal, or 50
       percent of the numerical limit for any year of the build-out schedule as established at the time
       the build-out schedule is assigned. The City Council may, however, grant an exception from this
       limitation to an approved Specific Plan or Master Plan development.)
      Build-out schedules may extend up to five years beyond the expiration of the 10-year goal
       period, provided that no single residential development project may be given a build-out
       schedule extending more than 10 years.
      No building permits may be issued for a residential development project pursuant to a build-out
       schedule granted under the Residential Development Ordinance unless the project is to be built
       on the same physical site as was originally evaluated. Build out schedules are not transferable
       independently of the project for which they are assigned.
      When a building permit is requested for any residential development assigned a build-out
       schedule, the Community Development Director reviews the project for conformance with the
       project as it was proposed when assigned a build-out schedule.
RDO Point System
The Planning Commission uses an established project rating scale to evaluate and rank projects. There
are 200 possible points for each project under review. The following lists criteria used to evaluate
projects for RDO Allocation:
      Locational factors
                City Boundaries (0-16 points)
                Public Facilities and Utilities (0-16 points)
                Infilling (0-20 points)
                Downtown Core (0-18 points)
      Housing Mix
                Housing Type Variety (0-10 points)
                Density Type Variety (0-6 points)
                Housing Cost and Price Reduction (0-4 points)
                Apartments, provides new rental units (0-14 points)
      Design
                Preserving Site Features (0-4 points)
                Circulation (0-10 points)
                Resource Conservation (0-6 points)
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-105
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                 Site Design Coordination (0-8 points) Transit-Oriented Design (0-14 points)
                 Master Plan or Specific Plan (0-18 points)
                 Project Open Space (0-12 points)
       Community Benefit Factors*
                 Cultural and Recreational Benefits (0-2 points)
                 Capital Improvement Benefits (0-8 points)
                 Preservation and Dedication, Open Space (0-2 points)
                 Fire/EMS Features/Mitigation (0-12 points)
*Community Benefit Factors typically exceed standard requirements outlined in the City’s Municipal
Code. Examples of benefits include the following:
       Cultural and Recreational: trail dedication, additional parkland, public art
       Capital Improvements: infrastructure installed prior to demand, infrastructure that exceeds the
        projects “fair share”
       Open Space: dedication or preservation of undevelopable lands or sensitive habitats
       Fire/EMS: donation of fire apparatus
The City reviewed the most recent projects approved under the RDO process and found that out of the
13 market-rate RDO projects that were or are approved, only three that received allocations had
community benefit factors that are completed or are to be completed. None of the 50+ exempt projects
that were approved under the RDO exemptions provided any community benefit type features. This
indicates that the point criteria do not impact the ability of applicants to receive RDO allocations.
Downtown Specific Plan RDO Process
Under the City’s adopted Downtown Specific Plan, 1,576 residential units are projected to be
constructed within a 20-year period. These units are counted separately from the RDO’s market rate and
exempt units. A request for RDO allocation must be reviewed and approved for each individual project
planned for the downtown. All residential and mixed-use projects within the City’s Downtown Specific
Plan require RDO allocation when requesting new units above the historical numbers. The City uses a
Downtown Specific Plan Exemption (DSPE) application to review these requests. The application is first
reviewed by the Planning Commission and then forwarded to the City Council for approval. This process
gives the City Council the ability to monitor the total number of units allocated under the Downtown
Specific Plan, as well as controlling the actual number of units for any specific project.
Neighborhood District Policy
The purpose of the Neighborhood Districts is to create neighborhoods that are attractive, safe, diverse,
and healthy, containing housing that is affordable to a variety of income groups. Developments within
the City’s Neighborhood District are required to set aside 15 percent of its units to be affordable to very
low-, low-, and moderate-income households. All affordable units must be developed on-site and a
payment of an in-lieu fee of development of units off-site is not allowed. To promote compliance with
this requirement, a policy is included in the Housing Element to review current incentives and regulatory
concessions to encourage the development of low- and moderate-income housing. With the exception
Page 13-106                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
of a handful of infill sites, all vacant residential areas are included within Neighborhood Districts.
Through the Neighborhood District General Plan designation, the City hopes to promote a more
integrative, comprehensive, and creative approach to neighborhood planning. The minimum densities
for residential land use in the Neighborhood District shall be at least:
       5 percent at a density of 7.25 to 9 units/acre (R2);
       10 percent at a density of 9 to 16 units/acre (R3); and
       3 percent at a density of 16 to 30 units/acre (R4).
A maximum of 82 percent of each Neighborhood District may be constructed at a density of 7.25 units
per acre or less. The target densities for residential land uses in the Neighborhood District (excluding
land required for streets, schools, parks, resource protection, neighborhood commercial, or other
infrastructure and/or amenities) shall provide for at least:
       10 percent at a density of 7.25 to 9 units/acre (R2);
       15 percent at a density of 9 to 16 units/acre (R3); and
       5 percent at a density of 16 to 30 units/acre (R4).
The City has found that the Neighborhood District Policy does not unduly constrain the cost and supply
of housing and offers multiple incentives to developers that meet the policy’s target densities. These
incentives include:
       Receiving full build-out;
       Receiving additional points in the RDO competition;
       Receiving earlier RDO build-out assignments and shorter build-out periods; and
       Specific Plan and Master Plan projects may receive Residential Development allocations outside
        of the RDO competition process
Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints
Environmental Constraints
Environmental hazards affecting housing units include geologic and seismic conditions, which provide
the greatest threat to the built environment. The following hazards may impact future development of
residential units in the city.
Seismic Hazards
The topography of Santa Clara County consists of three principal geologic features: the Santa Clara
Valley, the Santa Cruz Mountains, and the Diablo Range. The area is dominated by a complex system of
faults associated with motion between the Pacific and North American plates. The most significant fault
is the San Andreas Fault. The area is seismically active and includes other major, active strike-slip faults,
including the Calaveras fault, as well as active folding and thrust faulting. The Sargent fault, also located
northeast of the City of Gilroy, has significant potential to cause seismic shaking.
As required by the State of California, the Gilroy General Plan contains policies regarding geologic and
seismic hazards within the Public Safety and Seismic Safety section of the Natural Environment Chapter.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-107
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
The goal of the City of Gilroy General Plan Geologic and Seismic policies is to reduce the risk of damage
and injury from natural hazards to an acceptable level and to conserve natural resources, open space,
and agricultural land. Specifically, the policies regulate and/or prohibit development in hazardous areas,
and attempt to reduce potential seismic, geologic, and flooding hazards to life and property to an
acceptable level of risk.
Soils
The soils in the Gilroy area consist of gravels, silts, and clays that are often poorly drained with flooding
and deposition occurring along the major streams. Because these soils exhibit site-specific properties,
site-specific studies should be completed at the project design stage to characterize the suitability and
behavior of soil for specific development applications.
The Gilroy General Plan contains policies regarding erosion, sedimentation, and expansive soils within
the Public Safety and Seismic Safety section of the Natural Environment Chapter. These policies are:
      Require all application for new development to submit soil reports.
      Restrict development on steep slopes and slopes susceptible to landslides and soil creep.
      Require appropriate erosion and deposition control through site development, construction, and
       use.
Restrict urban development and expansion in areas subject to major flooding, drainage problems and
saturated soil conditions unless measures to reduce these hazards to an acceptable level are provided.
Flooding
The city of Gilroy area lies within two major watersheds: the Uvas Creek watershed and the Llagas Creek
watershed. Several major flood control projects have been completed since 1982 that have significantly
affected drainage in the City. The City of Gilroy Flood Plain Management Ordinance was adopted to
promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas. It includes provisions designed to:
      Protect human life and health;
      Protect lands adjacent to the flood plain, as well as both upstream and downstream areas, from
       increases in flooding;
      Reduce costs to the City of Gilroy that would result from flooding and development in flood
       hazard areas;
      Control development that will contribute to a demand for public investment in flood control
       works,
      Control development that will contribute to flood losses if public streets, sewers, water, and
       other utilities must be expanded to serve the development; and
      Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood
       insurance in the Federal Flood Insurance Program.
Toxic and Hazardous Wastes
Hazardous waste management in Gilroy includes three areas: control of production, control of disposal,
and control of transportation of hazardous waste. Programs of regular inspections and monitoring to
Page 13-108                                                                                   Background Report
                                                                                      Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
ensure compliance with local, State, and Federal regulations are implemented in order to reduce the
risks associated with the use and handling of hazardous materials and waste.
A very limited number of hazardous materials are produced in the city. Among those produced by point
sources are waste oil, antifreeze, solvents, x-ray solutions, and materials associated with graphic design.
Hazardous wastes associated with non-point sources include waste oil, antifreeze, and other pollutants
associated with motorized vehicles. The City of Gilroy’s Hazardous Materials Specialists and
Pretreatment Inspectors and the County Health Department regularly inspect activities that store
and/or use hazardous materials.
Fire Hazards
The City of Gilroy receives fire protection from the Gilroy Fire Department. The areas outside the city are
under the jurisdiction of the South Santa Clara County Fire Protection District (SSCCFPD). The two
jurisdictions have a mutual aid agreement that allows aid to be provided on an as-needed basis between
the two during major emergencies.
High Fire Hazard (or “Mutual Threat Zones”) areas are designated by the SSCCFPD. These include much
of the hillsides on the western boundary of the city. The City of Gilroy Fire Department has in place a
hazard (weed) abatement program. The program is an annual inspection and weed removal program
that manages high hazard parcels. Engine companies survey all areas of the city once a year and manage
undeveloped, unmanaged parcels that have overgrown weeds. The City’s Hillside Development
Guidelines contain policies relating to fire hazards.
Noise
One of the primary noise sources in the Gilroy area is traffic on local roadways, primarily the result of
tire noise on the road surface and the Union Pacific Railway line. Other noise sources typical in Gilroy as
in all urban areas include construction, barking dogs, children playing, industry, and recreational
activities. Over flying aircraft are also occasionally audible in the Gilroy area. These sources are not
significant compared to the noise produced by the dominant transportation sources.
The City is responsible for evaluation noise impacts as part of the review process for approval of new
project proposals, remodel projects, or request for use permits. Conditions of project approval may
include conditions to mitigate noise levels for project occupants and nearby neighbors. There is no noise
impact fee. The cost of construction, as well as maintenance of noise mitigation measures, is borne by
the developer. The City of Gilroy aims to separate residential areas from sources of noise pollution by
open land wherever possible.
Vegetation and Wildlife Habitat
Vegetation and wildlife habitat within the Gilroy area include both developed and natural areas.
Developed areas include urban and agricultural land. Habitats associated with developed areas are
predominant in the city. Natural communities include annual grassland, coastal oak woodland, and
valley foothill riparian habitat.
The 2002 General Plan includes policies aimed at protecting creeks and waterways from urban
encroachment and degradation. The General Plan also designates natural resource areas for
preservation as open space areas and encourages clustering of new housing development in open
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-109
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
grasslands and on gentler slopes rather than in areas such as wooded canyons, bluff faces, riparian
zones, and steep hillsides.
Rare and Endangered Species
There are 29 Significant Natural areas in Santa Clara County. Only one, called Farman Canyon, is located
within Gilroy. Farman Canyon Pond is a known breeding ground for the California tiger salamander, a
Federal candidate species for listing as threatened or endangered and included on the California
Department of Fish and Game Natural Diversity Database as a species of special concern. California tiger
salamanders inhabit the southern portion of the Eagle Ridge property, located south of Uvas Creek and
west of Santa Teresa Boulevard. In 1996, a report describing a plan to mitigate the impacts to the
California tiger salamander was prepared. This plan called for mitigation measures that aimed to
preserve grassland adjacent to Farman Canyon Pond.
Agricultural Lands
The main components of the City of Gilroy’s Agricultural Mitigation Policy are:
      Policy Application and Requirements:
                 The policy requires mitigation for the conversion of agricultural lands to urban uses at a
                  1:1 replacement ratio. There are three methods of mitigation established when
                  mitigation is necessary. The policy establishes the criteria for determining when
                  mitigation would be required, what lands are acceptable for preservation, how in-lieu
                  fees would be determined, and requires the in-lieu fees to be used for the
                  establishment of permanent agricultural conservation easements on prime farmlands
                  around the Gilroy area. In-lieu fees for agricultural conservation easements in the City
                  are estimated to be $5,000-$10,000 per acre based on comparable open space
                  easements. The in-lieu fee is site specific and is determined by appraisal of the subject
                  property. The City’s Agricultural Mitigation Policy closely follows the recommendations
                  set forth by the Santa Clara County Local Agency Formation Commission’s policies
                  related to the preservation of agricultural lands and open space. The three methods of
                  mitigation are:
                      Mitigation 1: Purchase an equal amount of land (1:1 ratio) of agricultural land within
                       the “Preferred Areas” and the transfer of the ownership of this land to the Open
                       Space Authority or other City-approved agency.
                      Mitigation 2: Purchase of development rights to a 1:1 ratio on agricultural land
                       within the “Preferred Areas” and the transfer of ownership of these rights to the
                       Open Space Authority or other City-approved agency. The purchase value of this
                       agricultural easement will be based upon the appraisal of purchasing development
                       rights and not fee-title rights.
                      Mitigation 3: Payment of an in-lieu fee will be based upon the lowest appraisal of
                       purchasing development rights in the “Preferred Areas.” The in-lieu fees will include
                       all normal and customary administrative and transactional fees charged on a cost
                       recovery basis. The in-lieu fees will be maintained by the City in an escrow account
                       and adjusted no more than every two years based on appraisals for the “Preferred
                       Areas.”
      Farmland Preservation Areas (“Preferred Areas”):
Page 13-110                                                                                  Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                The policy establishes a preferred area for the preservation of agricultural lands. This
                 area is located within the City’s Sphere of Influence and outside the General Plan 20-
                 year boundary, east of Highway 101 and south of Masten Avenue. This area contains the
                 greatest concentration of “Prime” and “Statewide Important” farmland remaining in the
                 south county area. Lands preserved can be located outside of the preferred
                 preservation area when mitigation occurs in conjunction with a specific plan process or
                 when approved by the City Council.
       “Right-to-Farm” Disclosures:
                The policy requires the disclosure of nearby agricultural activities in deeds for any lands
                 subdivided and developed within 1,000 feet of the preferred preservation area. Overall,
                 this would apply to only a few areas in the city. However, it establishes agriculture as a
                 priority in the community and gives forewarning to those areas where it could apply.
       Agricultural Buffer:
                 The policy requires new developments to establish a minimum of 150 feet for an
                 agricultural buffer adjacent to permanent agricultural and open space areas. This
                 applies only to a few areas in the city, and would aim to reduce potential conflicts
                 between agricultural and non-agricultural uses.
       Possible Exemptions:
                The policy allows for certain exemption from the 1:1 mitigation ratio as follows:
                     Up to 100 feet in width of a permanent agricultural buffer area;
                     Public facilities established in the City’s General Plan or Parks Master Plan; and
                     Lands dedicated for public right-of-ways that service the overall community, not just
                      the specific development
The City has found that the Agricultural Mitigation Policy does not unduly constrain the cost and supply
of housing. The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires all feasible mitigation for
significant unavoidable impacts. Upon certification of the City’s General Plan EIR, the City Council
established the Agricultural Mitigation Policy to implement the mitigation measures identified in the
General Plan EIR for loss of agricultural lands. Therefore, significant impacts as determined under CEQA
would be subject to the City’s Agricultural Mitigation Policy.
Infrastructure Constraints
Water
The Llagas Groundwater Sub-basin serves as Gilroy’s potable water source for most residential,
municipal, industrial, and agricultural land uses. The City is a large user of the sub-basin, but private
wells also draw upon its groundwater resources. The sub-basin is about 15 miles long, three miles wide
at its northern boundary, and six miles wide at its southern boundary. It covers 74 square miles, and has
a storage capacity of 150,000-160,000 acre-feet. It is estimated that the long-term average groundwater
yield for the sub-basin is 44,300 af/yr maximum, (which is not all usable storage), and the operational
yield is 150,000 af/yr. The Llagas Sub-basin is supplied by aquifers and has a good storage capacity that
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-111
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
is naturally and artificially recharged. Artificial recharge occurs from several area reservoirs, off-stream
pond facilities, and natural streams.
The City depends solely on local groundwater from wells for its water supply. Currently, there are nine
active wells and 10 storage reservoirs that serve three water pressure zones. The City’s water supply
system relies on well pumping from disperse sources to supply system pressures in areas of lower
elevation during peak demand conditions.
The South County Regional Wastewater Authority implements the Gilroy/Morgan Hill Recycling Project.
Preliminary construction was completed in 1994 to comply with Title 22 requirements. Up to nine
million gallons per day of wastewater is treated for use in landscape and agricultural crop irrigation and
some industrial processes.
According to the 2002 General Plan, projected water demand for the Llagas Sub-basin is 73,000 af/yr at
the intermediate action level (corresponding to the year 2020 demand level), with an upper bound
demand of 80,000 af/yr. These levels assume that the water conservation measures from the Integrated
Water Resource Plan are implemented in full. Also, these demands are not equivalent to the
groundwater pumping amounts, because some of this demand will be met with recycled water. Gilroy
will continue to meet its future demands through its integrated Water Resource Plan.
Sewer
The City sewer collection system consists of approximately 110 miles of six-inch through 33-inch
diameter sewers. The “backbone” of the system consists of trunk sewers that convey the collected
wastewater flows to the Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP). The WWTP, operated by the South
County Regional Wastewater Authority (SCRWA), treats the collected wastewater from the City.
During dry weather conditions, the average and peak wastewater hour flows from the City are 3.6 and
7.9 mgd (million gallons per day), respectively. At build out conditions of the 2002 General Plan, the
average and peak hour dry weather flows are anticipated to approach 7.6 and 16.6 mgd, respectively.
Wet weather flows are based on infiltration and inflow entering the sewer system. The hydraulic model
used in the evaluation projects average and peak hour flows of 5.8 mgd and 14.5 mgd. Applying the
same storm event during the build out conditions of the 2002 General Plan, the modeled system
experienced average and peak hour flows of 9.8 mgd and 20.4 mgd.
According to the City’s Sewer System Master Plan, the existing system was well planned to meet the
needs of existing customers. In anticipation of future growth, the City has planned and constructed
sewer facilities in conjunction with new street construction. Some project improvements in the master
plan will mitigate flows caused by infiltration and inflows that occur during significant storm events.
Non-Governmental Constraints
Land Prices
Land costs have a demonstrable influence on the cost and availability of affordable housing. Land prices
are determined by numerous factors, most important of which are land availability and permitted
development densities. As land becomes less available, the price of land increases.
Page 13-112                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
In Gilroy, proximity to the employment centers of Silicon Valley and the scarcity of adequate housing
opportunities in northern Santa Clara County have influenced upward pressure on housing costs.
According to online listings from Zillow.com, in February 2014, 24 vacant residential parcels were listed
for sale in the city. These vacant parcels ranged in price from $175,000 to $1,100,000. The prices of land
vary depending on a number of factors, including size, location, the number of units allowed on the
property, and access to utilities. The asking price for land available ranged from $1.09 to $14.58 per
square foot, with an average price of $5.20 per square foot (or $243,000 per acre).
Developed residential, commercial, and industrial properties that are zoned for residential uses can also
be redeveloped with new housing developments. The cost to clear an acre of land for redevelopment
significantly increases the cost of development, as do the local, State, and Federal policies relating to
relocation and replacement of low-income housing. Depending on the existing improvements that must
be removed to redevelop a site, the total cost to acquire a parcel, relocate occupants, and possibly
mitigate hazardous materials can be quite expensive. This can pose a problem for development if Gilroy
rents or sales prices cannot support the higher cost development.
Construction Costs
Construction costs vary widely according to the type of development, with multi-family housing being
somewhat less expensive to construct than single-family homes, on a per square foot basis. They are
also influenced by market demands and market-based changes in the cost of materials.
In 2014, RS Means (a reliable published source for construction industry costs) estimated that the hard
construction costs in the San Jose area were $168 per square foot for a typical one- to three-story multi-
family residential construction with wood siding and frames and a floor area of 22,500. Based on the
International Code Council Building Valuation Data, a one- and two-family residential construction
would cost approximately $118 per square foot. This equals a rough estimate of $160,000 for a 1,000
square foot apartment and $236,000 for a 2,000 square foot single-family home.
A reduction in amenities and the quality of building materials can result in lower construction costs and
lower purchase prices. Per-unit costs also decline with the size of the project, as developers benefit from
economies of scale and are able to produce housing at a lower per-unit cost. However, high quality
design and sufficient tenant amenities are generally required by City policies and standards to maintain
minimum health and safety standards, and to achieve a minimum standard of design quality.
Background Report                                                                                Page 13-113
Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Total Development Costs
Table 13-66 shows a rough estimate of the total development cost for a 50-unit single family
development with 2,000 square foot single family homes on 6,000 square foot lots in the City of Gilroy.
Based on the assumptions described below, a unit would cost an estimated $346,478 to build, including
land costs, construction costs, site improvements, and impact fees.
                                                      TABLE 13-66
                 ESTIMATED SINGLE FAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT COSTS1
                                                      City of Gilroy
                                                            2014
                                    Type of Cost                             Estimated Cost per Unit
                           2
                Land Costs                                                                            $31,200
                Site Improvement Costs                                                                $30,000
                                     3
                Construction Costs                                                                  $236,000
                Development Impact Fees (Table 13-63)                                                 $49,278
                Total Development Costs                                                             $346,478
                1
                  Assumes 50 unit single family development on 10 acres, with 2,000 square foot single-
                family homes built on 6,000 square foot lots
                2
                  Assumes an average land cost of $5.20 per square foot, $243,000 per acre
                3
                  Assumes $118 per square foot construction costs
Table 13-67 shows a rough estimate of the total development cost for a 50-unit apartment complex with
800 square foot multifamily units in the City of Gilroy. Based on the assumptions described below, a
multifamily unit would cost an estimated $199,731 to build, including land and construction costs, site
improvements, and impact fees.
                                                      TABLE 13-67
                   ESTIMATED MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT COSTS1
                                                      City of Gilroy
                                                            2014
                                Type of Cost                                 Estimated Cost per Unit
                         2
             Land Costs                                                                                 $12,150
             Site Improvement Costs                                                                     $20,000
                                  3
             Construction Costs                                                                        $134,400
             Development Impact Fees (Table 13-63)                                                      $33,181
             Total Development Costs                                                                   $199,731
             1
               Assumes a 50-unit multifamily building with average unit size of 800 square feet (2.5 acres)
             2                                                  ,
               Assumes an average cost of $5.20 per square foot $243,000 per acre
             3
               Assumes construction costs are $168 per square foot
Page 13-114                                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Financing
Mortgage interest rates have a large influence over the affordability of housing. Higher interest rates
increase a homebuyer’s monthly payment and decrease the range of housing that a household can
afford. Lower interest rates result in a lower cost and lower monthly payments for the homebuyer.
When interest rates rise, the market typically compensates by decreasing housing prices. Similarly, when
interest rates decrease, housing prices begin to rise. There is often a lag in the market, causing housing
prices to remain high when interest rates rise until the market catches up. Lower-income households
often find it most difficult to purchase a home during this time period.
As shown in Table 13-68, the number of loan applications increases as income increases. The percentage
of persons denied for a home loan in the San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara Metropolitan Area is highest
for the very low-income (less than 50 percent of the MFI) category with 25.8 percent.
                                                TABLE 13-68
                                    MORTGAGE LENDING RATES
               City of San Jose, City of Sunnyvale, and City of Santa Clara MSA
                                                       2012
                                Total                 Loans             Applications   Percentage
 Income Group
                           Applications            Originated              Denied        Denied
<50% MFI                                1,132                   601                292         25.8%
50-79% MFI                              2,622                 1,695                419         16.0%
80-99% MFI                              2,048                 1,422                238         11.6%
110-119% MFI                            2,292                 1,651                230         10.0%
>120% MFI                             11,092                  8,376                956          8.6%
Total                                 19,186                 13,745              2,135        11.1%
Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, HMDA Data, 2012.
Background Report                                                                                   Page 13-115
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
As shown in Figure 13-7, mortgage rates decreased from 2007, hitting a historic low in 2013 at 3.41
percent for the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage. In 2013 interest rates started to increase, but remain
historically low as of 2014. The mortgage banking crisis that began in 2008 affected the availability of
construction financing and mortgage loans. Lenders that had once offered mortgage loans more freely
became much more restrictive after 2008. Lenders required downpayments of 20 percent and credit
scores higher than 680 to receive competitive interest rates. These restrictions placed homeownership
out of reach for many, though in 2013 lenders have begun to ease the qualifications required for a
competitive mortgage rate. As the economy continues its slow recovery, lenders may continue to make
mortgage loans more accessible, although they may never be as easy to obtain as they were prior to
2008.
                                   FIGURE 13-7 MORTGAGE RATES
                                          January 2003-January 2013
               7
               6
               5
               4
                                                                                      1 yr ARM
               3                                                                      15 yr FRM
               2                                                                      30 yr FRM
               1
               0
                 Notes: Mortgage Rates:
                          ARM-Adjustable Rate Mortgage
                          FRM- Fixed Rate Mortgage
                 Source:  Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey, January 2014.
Interest rates are determined by national policies and economic conditions and there is little that a local
government can do to affect these rates. However, in order to extend home buying opportunities to
lower-income households, jurisdictions can offer interest rate write-downs. Additionally, government
insured loan programs may be available to reduce mortgage down payment requirements.
While there is more scrutiny of developer’s credentials and banks are requiring a higher loan-to-value
ratio, the cost of construction financing is historically low, with prime rates below 5 percent in 2013.
Faced with a lagging housing market, the Federal Reserve has been cutting interest rates since late 2007,
enabling many projects to pencil out that would not otherwise. Where financing is available,
construction capital seems to be directed at the best transactions – those with large, established, and
well-capitalized sponsors. Given recent trends, the availability of financing is likely to be less of a
constraint on new housing construction during this Housing Element planning period than it has been in
the recent past. The City is already noticing an increase in new projects and an increase in stalled
projects restarting.
Page 13-116                                                                                  Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Appendix A: Review of 2007-2014 Housing Element Policies and Actions
                                                                                                                                 TABLE A-1
                                                                                     REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                   2009-2014
                                                           Housing Actions                                                                     Status                                     Achievement                                         Recommendation
GOAL 1: Provide for a housing stock of sufficient quantity composed of a variety and range of types and costs.
Housing Production
Policy 1-1: Encourage provision of a variety of housing options for Gilroy residents.
Action 1-1.1: Accessory Unit Development                                                                                                     Completed In 2007, the City adopted the Accessory Dwelling Unit Ordinance to streamline          No additional changes
To ensure the City’s existing policies and procedures for accessory dwelling units are effective in providing additional affordable housing            applications and simplify permit processes for owners. The City encourages the             are needed to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               regulations. Replace
opportunities, the City shall review and identify revisions, as appropriate, to further encourage the development of accessory dwelling                development of these units in existing neighborhoods. In 2010, four permits were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                with a program to
units.                                                                                                                                                 issued for accessory units. In 2012, the City eliminated the requirement of an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             disseminate information
Objective: Review/revise existing policies and procedures for accessory dwelling units                                                                 architectural and site review for secondary units on the second story of a home        about accessory units.
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                              (new and existing homes).
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review by June 2012
Action 1-1.2: Encourage Mixed-Use Development                                                                                                  Ongoing The City adopted the Neighborhood Districts policy in 2005 as well as the                 Retain program.
The City will continue to implement the Downtown Specific Plan and encourage and coordinate activities with the Downtown Business                      Downtown Specific Plan in 2006. Since 2005, the downtown districts have seen
Association and Economic Development Corporation to encourage mixed-use development.                                                                   almost 800 units approved for development, many with commercial and retail uses
Objective: Promote mixed-use development                                                                                                               on the first floor and residential uses on the remaining floors. As of 2012, the City
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                              has been working with downtown Business Associates to promote mixed-use
Funding Source: General Fund/private business funding                                                                                                  development in the core areas downtown.
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
Action 1-1.3: Mobile Home Development                                                                                                          Ongoing The Mobile Home Rent Stabilization Ordinance was designed to curb unreasonable           Retain as a policy.
The City will continue to conserve existing affordable mobile home opportunities in Gilroy, encouraging appropriate maintenance and                    rent increases on park tenants and establish a process for rental increase disputes
management of existing mobile home developments.                                                                                                       between park owners and tenants. The mobile home ordinance regarding
Objective: Conserve existing mobile home development                                                                                                   development is still in effect to facilitate the development of mobile homes. The
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                              City encourages developers to consider sites in proximity to transportation and
Funding Source: General Fund                                                                                                                           other services within the urban boundary for new projects.
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
Background Report                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 13-117
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                   TABLE A-1
                                                                                    REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                   CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                      2009-2014
                                                            Housing Actions                                                                       Status                                    Achievement                                        Recommendation
Action 1-1.4: Encourage Affordable Housing Development                                                                                            Ongoing The City’s Affordable Housing Exemption was designed to encourage private               Retain program.
The City will review and revise, as appropriate, current incentives and regulatory concessions available to developers for the                            developers to construct affordable units by granting an exemption from the City’s
development of affordable housing throughout the City, and especially within the Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan area and                                   Residential Development Ordinance. Since 2005, 350 exemptions have been
Neighborhood District. Incentives and regulatory concessions may include, but are not limited to; fee waivers, parking reductions,                        allocated to developers of high density projects.
expedited permit processing, and reduced setbacks. The City can also provide technical assistance, information on state and federal
funding opportunities, and marketing to potential developers.
The City will continue to monitor development within the City’s Downtown area on an annual basis to ensure the implementation of
the Specific Plan’s policy on encouraging the development of a mix of retail, office and higher density residential uses. The City will
encourage the development of uses within the area to closely follow the recommended land use assumptions contained in the Specific
Plan. If, based on its annual review, the City finds that the proportion of residential uses to non-residential uses are not being
developed as assumed in the Specific Plan, the City will investigate additional incentives, concessions or assistance and revise programs
as appropriate.
Objective: Encourage affordable housing development
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review incentives and regulatory concessions within one year of Housing Element adoption; revise as
appropriate; monitor the effectiveness of incentives and regulatory concession annually, thereafter ongoing monitoring of
development within the Downtown Gilroy Specific Plan.
Policy 1-2: Ensure adequate land is available to meet all Gilroy’s housing needs.
Action 1-2.1: Facilitate Infill Development                                                                                                       Ongoing In 2009, the City reviewed regulatory incentives to encourage infill development.       Retain program.
The City shall coordinate efforts with the Planning Department, private and non-profit developers, and other housing related groups to                    Fee waivers were made available through the Downtown Specific Plan for new and
encourage the construction of residential development through a menu of regulatory incentives (i.e. streamlined review, reduced                           rehabilitation developments from 2006-2013. In 2010, the City granted an
development standards, fee waivers, and other methods that will effectively encourage infill development).                                                extension of the unreinforced masonry (URM) building retrofit requirements for
                                                                                                                                                          property owners in order to encourage development downtown. Through the
The City will monitor infill development on an annual basis to ensure the effectiveness of programs to encourage housing development.                     Special Criteria for Housing Infill Opportunities Sites Program a Shovel-ready
If, based on its annual review, the City finds that additional programs are needed to facilitate infill development, the City will investigate            Ordinance was put in place in 2010, allowing for the completion of infill projects
additional incentives, concessions or assistance and revise programs as appropriate.                                                                      within three years from the approval timeframe. Three projects were approved to
Objective: Encourage and facilitate infill development                                                                                                    start construction in 2010.
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund/State funding
Implementation Timeline: By June 2012; monitor infill development and effectiveness of incentives annually
Page 13-118                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Background Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                TABLE A-1
                                                                                     REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                   2009-2014
                                                            Housing Actions                                                                    Status                                    Achievement                                           Recommendation
Action 1-2.2: Provision of Adequate Sites                                                                                                    Completed An environmental report was completed in 2012, and the council adopted the               Program completed.
The City shall revise the General Plan and Zoning Code to ensure the availability of adequate sites to accommodate projected future                    rezoned sites in 2013. On January 10, 2013, the Planning Commission voted 5-0              Delete program.
construction needs by income category. The City will establish and codify land use designations that will meet the projected need for                  (one Commissioner absent and one vacant Commission seat) to recommend
the 2007-2014 planning period, and the identified shortfall from the 1999-2006 planning period. To accommodate development of                          adoption of the Mitigated Negative Declaration and approval of the text
affordable units, a minimum standard of 20 du/acre, in compliance with the provisions set forth in AB 2348, shall be implemented.                      amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Downtown Specific Plan to establish a
                                                                                                                                                       minimum density of 20 units per acre in the R-4 High Density Residential zoning
The City will select from the identified candidate sites listed on Table B-14 for rezoning to meet at least 50 percent of the remaining                district and for the residential component of mixed use projects in the Historic,
RHNA need on sites zoned exclusively for residential uses. The selected sites will permit owner-occupied and rental multi-family uses as               Expansion, and Cannery Districts.
a matter of right, without a conditional use permit or other discretionary action. For candidate sites selected that currently are
identified with capacity of less than 16 units, the City will implement lot consolidation through Action 1-2.3 of this Housing Element to              The Commission also voted 5-0 to recommend the City council redesignate Areas
ensure these sites meet the minimum 16 unit/site standard.                                                                                             two, 3.3, four, and five and rezone Areas one, two, three, four, and five. The Areas
                                                                                                                                                       the Planning Commission did not recommend for redesignation and rezoning
Prior to selecting the specific sites for rezoning, the City will undertake a public participation program to notify property owners,                  include 3.1, 3.2, and six.
identify additional opportunity sites, and solicit input on the sites from the community. Based on the City’s evaluation of the candidate
sites, revisions to the Zoning Code will be drafted. The draft Zoning Code revisions will be analyzed under CEQA requirements. The
Zoning Code revision process will culminate in a public review period and adoption by the City Council.
Objective: Identification of adequate sites; rezone a minimum of 52.5 acres to require a minimum density of 20 du/acre; ensure at least
26.25 acres (to accommodate 525 lower-income units) are exclusively for residential use
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Public participation program starting in September 2011; draft revisions to Zoning Code by May 2012.
Action 1-2.3: Encourage Lot Consolidation                                                                                                              The City Council rezoned four areas to the R-4 zoning district to implement the        Delete program.
The City will encourage and facilitate the consolidation of vacant and underutilized lots for residential development, especially those                Adequate Sites Program in the previous Housing Element. Three of the four areas
                                                                                                                                                       consist of multiple parcels. There is one area with two parcels that are under the
identified in the Adequate Site Program, through a variety of incentives, including but not limited to: incentives such as assistance with
                                                                                                                                                       same ownership. In another area, three lots have been consolidated and an
on- or off-site infrastructure costs, and other pre-development costs associated with the assemblage of multiple parcels. Consolidation
                                                                                                                                                       application is currently being processed. In the third area, the owners of two of five
will provide the opportunity to develop vacant and underutilized lots to their fullest potential. The City will evaluate the                           parcels are marketing their properties together.
appropriateness of a variety of incentives and provide this information to the developers, owners, and other interested parties through
the City’s website and/or print material at City Hall.                                                                                                 This program is no longer needed since several of the small parcels
Objective: Encourage and facilitate lot consolidation                                                                                                  identified as potential sites in the Adequate Sites program were not
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                              included in the rezoned sites. All of the sites identified in the inventory for
Funding Source: General Fund/State funding                                                                                                             lower-income housing in the 2015-2023 Housing Element are large enough
Implementation Timeline: Investigate and develop incentive program ,as appropriate, by June 2012                                                       sites that consolidation will not be required in order to make a project
                                                                                                                                                       feasible.
Background Report                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 13-119
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                 TABLE A-1
                                                                                    REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                 CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                    2009-2014
                                                          Housing Actions                                                                       Status                                    Achievement                                           Recommendation
Action 1-2.4: Monitor Permit Requirements, Processing Procedures and Land Use Controls                                                          Ongoing  The City has been reviewing permitting processes and RDO policies and programs            Retain program.
Permit requirements, processing procedures and land use controls may impact the cost, supply, timing and affordability of residential                    on an ongoing basis in order to identify constraints to the maintenance,
development. To ensure permit requirements and processing procedures do not constrain residential development, the City shall                            improvement, and development of affordable housing for all income levels and
evaluate current requirements and procedures on an annual basis. The City will consult builders and other parties engaged in housing                     person with disabilities. In 2012, the Engineering Department reduced public
development activities to identify concerns. If permitting requirements including fees and processing timelines, are determined to be a                  facilities development fees in order to relieve constraints on the development of
constraint to residential development, the City shall modify permitting requirements and/or procedures to address constraints.                           residential projects.
Objectives: Monitor permit requirements, processing procedures and land use controls, and modify as appropriate
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Annual evaluation and implement changes as appropriate
Policy 1-3.1: Encourage resource conservation in residential development.
Action 1-3.1: Efficient Use of Energy Resources in Residential Development                                                                               The City did not adopt policies; the City Council felt that the additional financial
The City shall support energy conservation by adopting the Green Building Policies developed by the Santa Clara County Cities                            burden of policies was unwarranted in the downturn of the economy.
Association Green Building Collaborative. The City has adopted the Collaborative’s three goals and utilizes a checklist as part of the
residential and commercial application process to track voluntary implementation of green building.
Objective: Increased energy efficiency
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
GOAL 2: Maintain and conserve a housing stock that is in a sound, safe and sanitary condition.
Housing Rehabilitation
Policy 2-1: Promote maintenance and rehabilitation of structures in poor condition and take action to prevent poorly maintained properties from further deterioration.
Action 2-1.1: Housing Rehabilitation                                                                                                            Ongoing  The Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) is published on an annual basis for             Retain program.
To enhance the quality of existing neighborhoods, the City shall continue to implement the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program.                   rehabilitation of multi-family properties in the Neighborhood Revitalization
The City will continue utilizing Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds and the Gilroy Housing Trust fund to assist in the                       Strategy Area (NRSA). The City uses CDBG funds and Gilroy’s Housing Trust Fund to
improvement of substandard housing.                                                                                                                      assist in improvement of substandard housing. Between the fiscal years of 2008 to
Objective: Rehabilitate sixteen lower-income housing units                                                                                               2014, 26 rehabilitation loans were issued using CDBG funds. The City also works
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                                with Code compliance staff to identify properties that may be eligible for financial
Funding Source: CDBG (HUD)/Gilroy Housing Trust Fund                                                                                                     assistance for code enforcement as well as those properties that can be created or
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing                                                                                                                         maintained as affordable housing units.
Action 2-1.2: Code Enforcement Program                                                                                                          Ongoing  In 2012, the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) supplemented the City’s             Retain program.
To ensure continued maintenance of housing quality, condition, and use, the City shall continue to enforce the City’s building codes to                  General Funds to pay for a portion of code officer staffing to support code
address, existing exterior and interior code violations. Within current staffing limits, the City will contact owners of units identified as             enforcement in Gilroy’s NRSA. From 2008-2014, 119 housing cases were resolved.
substandard, offering inspection services and providing information on the City’s Rehabilitation Loan Program and landlord/tenant                        The Gilroy Housing Trust Fund (HTF) provided a grant to the Project Sentinel for
information and mediation services.                                                                                                                      tenant landlord mediation services, which were frequently used in tandem with
Objective: Housing code enforcement                                                                                                                      code enforcement efforts. HTF funds of $10,000 were set aside to be used for
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                                emergency code abatement, but were not needed.
Funding Source: General Fund/CDBG (HUD)/Gilroy Housing Trust Fund
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
Page 13-120                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Background Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                 TABLE A-1
                                                                                     REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                 CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                    2009-2014
                                                           Housing Actions                                                                      Status                                     Achievement                                        Recommendation
Action 2-1.3: Community Development Block Grant Program                                                                                         Ongoing The City continues to administer its CDBG funds. In addition to the accessibility    Retain program.
The City will continue to administer the City’s Community Development Block Grant Program for all eligible activities, including                        retrofit work and code enforcement described above, CDBG funds provided
acquisition, rehabilitation, home buyer assistance, economic development, homeless assistance, public services, and public                              employment services, programs for low income youth and frail elderly, as well as
improvements. The City will continue to inform non-profit organizations of funding availability through the City’s website and                          public improvements in the NRSA. Between 2008 and 2014, CDBG funds provided
informational packets at City Hall.                                                                                                                     Senior Daycare services to 464 individuals.
Objective: Implement Community Development Block Grant Program
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: CDBG (HUD)
Implementation Timeline: Annually
Action 2-1.4: Housing Trust Fund                                                                                                                Ongoing The City continues to administer the HTF. The City has provided funds for 27 units   Retain program.
The City will continue to administer the City’s Housing Trust Fund for all eligible activities, including new construction, acquisition,                of permanent supportive housing (Sobrato Apartments) and homebuyer assistance
rehabilitation, home buyer assistance, homeless assistance, public services related to housing, and preservation of affordable housing.                 (through a grant to the Housing Trust of Santa Clara County). Regarding homebuyer
The City will continue to inform non-profit organizations of funding availability through the City’s website and informational packets at               assistance, the City originated 42 downpayment assistance loans directly through
City Hall.                                                                                                                                              the City’s Housing Trust Fund from 2008 to 2012. This program has been
Objective: Implement Housing Trust Fund                                                                                                                 suspended, however, due to the lack of income funds to the Housing Trust in the
Responsible Agency: Programs                                                                                                                            past couple of years. The City funded nonprofits to provide services related to
Funding Source: Housing Trust Fund                                                                                                                      homelessness, domestic violence, fair housing, foreclosure prevention, emergency
Implementation Timeline: Annually                                                                                                                       rental assistance, transitional housing, and services for persons with disabilities.
                                                                                                                                                        From 2008-2014, the City’s HTF was used to provide services to 4,731 individuals.
Action 2-1.5: Acquisition and Rehabilitation of Units with Non-profit Entities                                                                  Ongoing In 2012, the South County Collaborative, an organization of nonprofit agencies and   Retain program.
The City will seek opportunities for acquisition and rehabilitation of existing substandard single-family or multi-family units, particularly           City representatives, agreed to set up a task force to meet in 2013 to explore
in conjunction with a non-profit entity. The City shall investigate the most effective means for outreach to the non-profit organizations               opportunities for housing for extremely low-income people, as these are the clients
to maximize participation.                                                                                                                              that most of these agencies serve. Members of the South County Homeless
Objective: Partnership opportunities                                                                                                                    Outreach Task Force were also involved.
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: Housing Trust Fund/CDBG (HUD)
Implementation Implement outreach strategy by June 2011
GOAL 3: Retain the existing housing stock.
Preservation and Conservation of Existing Housing Stock
Policy 3-1: Ensure long-term affordability of existing below-market rate housing units.
Background Report                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 13-121
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                             TABLE A-1
                                                                                    REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                             CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                2009-2014
                                                          Housing Actions                                                                   Status                                     Achievement                                          Recommendation
Action 3-1.1: Monitoring of Units At-Risk of Converting to Market Rate                                                                      Ongoing The City provides for regular monitoring of deed-restricted units and works with           Retain program.
The City shall provide for regular monitoring of deed-restricted units that have the potential of converting to market rate. In order to            HUD and the local county Housing Authority on programs to maintain at-risk units.
proactively address units at-risk of conversion, the City shall develop a program to partner with non-profit housing providers and                  In 2012, HUD reported on the status of HUD subsidized properties, and none were
develop a preservation strategy. This strategy will at least include annual contact with property owners of affordable units,                       found to be at risk of converting to market rates. Three properties that had
identification of funds to purchase and preserve affordable units, noticing of tenants and technical assistance with applications for               received City funding for rehabilitation were monitored and also found to be not at
funds.                                                                                                                                              risk. Reduced CDBG and Housing Trust Fund revenues restricted the amount of
Objective: Develop proactive preservation strategy                                                                                                  funds set aside for a preservation strategy, but fortunately this funding was not
Responsible Agency: Community Development/HUD                                                                                                       required in 2012.
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Implement strategy by June 2011
Action 3-1.2: Resale Control on Owner-Occupied Below Market Rate Units                                                                      Ongoing In 2008, the City finalized a resale restriction agreement for 30 years that is to be      Retain program.
The City will continue to implement resale controls on owner-occupied Below Market Rate (BMR) units to ensure that affordable units                 used for for-sale affordable housing units produced in the City. In 2012, annual
provided through public assistance or public action are retained for 30 years or more as affordable housing stock.                                  contact was made through a mailpiece to all BMR owner-occupied units.
Objective: Conserving owner-occupied affordable units
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
Action 3-1.3: Rent and Income Restrictions on Rental Below-Market Rate Units                                                                Ongoing Affordable multi-family rental projects provide a 55-year affordability agreement           Retain program
The City will continue to implement rent and income restrictions on rental Below Market Rate (BMR) units to ensure that affordable                  with the City.
units provided through public assistance or public action are retained for 30 years or more as affordable housing stock.
Objective: Conserving rental affordable units
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: CDBG/Housing Trust Fund
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
Policy 3-2: Preserve historic residential resources.
Action 3-2.1: Review of Existing Regulations and Policies                                                                                   Ongoing The Historic Heritage Committee meets as needed to review permits and                      Retain program.
The City will continue to consult with the Historic Heritage Committee, and review the appropriateness and applicability of existing                applications for structures in the downtown area and reviews regulations and
regulations and policies that further encourage the preservation and enhancement of historic resources in the City.                                 policies to encourage preservation of historic resources in the City. The City
Objective: Preservation of historic residential resources                                                                                           continues to partake in ongoing dialogue with the Historic Heritage Committee.
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
GOAL 4: Increase access to decent and suitable housing for all Gilroy residents.
Increasing Access to Housing Opportunity
Policy 4-1: Promote homeownership opportunities.
Page 13-122                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Background Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                             TABLE A-1
                                                                                    REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                            CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                               2009-2014
                                                          Housing Actions                                                                  Status                                     Achievement                                       Recommendation
Action 4-1.1: Funding Sources to Assist in Homeownership                                                                                   Ongoing  In 2005, the City created a Housing Trust Fund to provide down payment assistance      Retain program.
The City will pursue potential sources of additional funding for homeownership assistance, including the availability of State HCD,                 to home buyers. In 2012, applications were made for CalHome down payment
CalHFA funds, and County funds. The City will improve public outreach activities through the compilation of resources for down                      assistance for low-income households. As well, the City requested an extension for
payment assistance, silent second mortgages and other means of acquiring a home.                                                                    BEGIN down payment assistance funds for a new housing development that was
Objective: Access to funds for homeownership assistance                                                                                             scheduled to expire in 2013. The City received a one-year extension for funds to
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                           2014.
Funding Source: Housing Trust Fund, State and County financing sources, and MCC Certificate Program through Santa Clara County
Implementation Timeline: Development of resources for public dissemination by June 2011;                                                            Between 2008 and 2014, 31 households received BEGIN downpayment assistance
Ongoing review of additional funding sources                                                                                                        in homeownership, two received HT Silicon Valley assistance, and 42 households
                                                                                                                                                    received assistance from the Gilroy Housing Trust Fund.
Policy 4-2: Encourage the provision of new affordable housing.
Action 4-2.1: Funding Sources for the City of Gilroy Housing Trust Fund                                                                    Ongoing  The City continues to identify additional funds for the City’s Housing Trust Fund. Retain program.
The City will continue to use the Housing Trust Fund to support affordable housing opportunities, seeking funds from public and private
sources to implement or supplement the City’s housing programs, in accordance with administrative guidelines.
Objective: Additional funds for the Gilroy Housing Trust Fund
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: Housing Trust Fund
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
Action 4-2.2: Expedited Project Review of Affordable Housing Developments                                                                Completed  The expedited review process was made available in 2012.                           Delete program.
The City shall review development standards, processes and requirements and revise project review, processing and building plan
check, as appropriate, to ensure project reviews are not constraints to the development of affordable housing.
Objective: Establish expedited processing standards
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review and adopt changes by June 2012
Action 4-2.3: Review and Revise Development Fees                                                                                         Completed  In 2012, the public facilities impact fees were reduced by the Engineering         Delete program.
The City will review required development fees including in-lieu fees, development impact fees and processing fees and revise, as                   department. Since the 2007-2014 Housing Element was prepared, the City has
appropriate, with the aim of reducing constraints for the development of residential projects.                                                      reduced fees by roughly 20 percent.
Objective: Review of Development Fees
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review by June 2012
Action 4-2.4: Amend Density Bonus Ordinance                                                                                              In process The City amended the Density Bonus Ordinance in April 2014 to comply with State    Delete program.
To further the effectiveness of the Density Bonus Ordinance and to be in compliance with the requirements of SB 1818, AB 2280 and                   Law.
Federal and State Fair Housing Law, the City shall review and revise the existing Density Bonus Ordinance, as appropriate.
Objective: Amend Density Bonus Ordinance
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review and revise by June 2011
Background Report                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 13-123
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                               TABLE A-1
                                                                                   REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                               CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                  2009-2014
                                                           Housing Actions                                                                     Status                                         Achievement                                          Recommendation
Action 4.2.5: Affordable Housing through Neighborhood Districts                                                                                On Hold.    The City adopted the Neighborhood District policy in June 2005. The ND Policy              Retain program.
The City will review and revise, as appropriate, the Neighborhood District Policy to ensure that it encourages the development of                          requires 15 percent of all new housing be affordable to lower-income and
housing that is affordable to a variety of income groups by comparing its features with the Residential Development Ordinance and                          moderate-income households. Affordable housing is to be disbursed throughout
making any changes to ensure the two policies are compatible and designed to reach the same goals.                                                         the overall community. Since the City adopted the ND Policy, one project has
Objective: Encourage a diversity of housing types                                                                                                          submitted a specific plan for city review and approval in 2010. The City Council has
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                                  deferred review of the neighborhood district and RDO until completion of the
Funding Source: General Fund                                                                                                                               General Plan in order to utilize the policy direction from that document.
Implementation Timeline: Initial review of Neighborhood District Policy by June 2012
Action 4-2.6: Residential Development Ordinance                                                                                              Incomplete.   In 2012, the City began work on the RDO Interim Exemption Ordinance that               Retain program. Identify
The City will review and revise, as appropriate, the Residential Development Ordinance to ensure that it does not pose a constraint on         On hold     facilitated infill development. The proposed new exemption would allow                   time frame as after
                                                                                                                                                 until                                                                                                  General Plan
the maintenance, improvement and development of housing; and provides capacity to meet the City’s RHNA need. Furthermore, the                              developers to construct residential projects in the interim period between now and
                                                                                                                                             completion                                                                                                 completion.
City will encourage the development of housing that is affordable to a variety of income groups through the Residential Development                        the time the City Council completes modifications to the Residential Development
                                                                                                                                                of the
Ordinance by comparing its features with the Neighborhood District Ordinance and making any changes to ensure the two policies are             General     Ordinance or the RDO Interim Exemption sunsets, whichever occurs first. This
compatible.                                                                                                                                 Plan. Interim  exemption would not affect the affordable housing required in Neighborhood
                                                                                                                                            exemption is   District Areas, as developments in those areas would still be regulated by the
To date, unused RDO allocations have not been eliminated. The City will review the RDO’s potential to eliminate unused allocations to       in place until Neighborhood District Policy.
ensure accommodation of projected housing needs. Before any unused allocations are eliminated, the City will review the remaining             that time.
RDO allocations to ensure it meets the remaining RHNA need for the current planning period.
Objective: Ensure the Residential Development Ordinance does not impede residential development
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Initial review of RDO policy by June 2012 and revise as appropriate
Action 4-2.7: Water and Sewer Service Priority                                                                                                Completed    During 2011-2012, the treatment plan capacity increased providing ample water              Delete program.
The City’s Water and Sewer Service Priority Policy will be reviewed every five years starting in 2011 to ensure future affordable projects                 service.
will receive service priority.
Objective: Water and sewer service priority to lower-income households
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review every 5 years, starting June 2011
Action 4-2.8: Consider Adoption of Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance                                                                               On hold     This policy is currently on hold per the City Council.                                     Delete program.
The City will consider adoption and implementation of an inclusionary zoning ordinance, which proposes a 20 percent affordable
housing requirement for all new residential developments of 10 or more units.
Objective: Review and potentially adopt and implement Inclusionary Zoning
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund/Housing Trust fund
Implementation Timeline: June 2013
Page 13-124                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Background Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                   TABLE A-1
                                                                                     REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                  CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                     2009-2014
                                                            Housing Actions                                                                      Status                                       Achievement                                        Recommendation
Action 4-2.9: Section 8 Referrals                                                                                                                Ongoing   The City continues to provide referral services and information to residents about      Retain program.
The City will continue to provide referral services and information to City residents.                                                                     the Section 8 program. Staff provides the phone number to the Housing Authority
Objective: Provide Section 8 referrals                                                                                                                     to residents inquiring about voucher availability. The residents are advised that
Responsible Agency: Community Development/Housing Authority of Santa Clara County                                                                          they will most likely be put on the waiting list to obtain a voucher. Staff does not
Funding Source: HUD                                                                                                                                        currently have a system in place to track every resident who requests the phone
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing                                                                                                                           number of the Housing Authority. The Housing Authority does provide HCD staff
                                                                                                                                                           annual data that includes the number and family type and ethnicity or race of the
                                                                                                                                                           wait list participants and program participants.
Policy 4-3: Provide housing opportunities for Special Needs groups.
Action 4-3.1: Compliance with SB-2                                                                                                              In process The City amended the Zoning Ordinance in April 2014 to comply with State laws
In compliance with SB 2, the City will analyze and revise the existing Zoning Ordinance to allow for emergency shelters, transitional                      regarding emergency shelters and transitional and supportive housing.
housing and supportive services to homeless individuals and families. The City will comply with the requirements of the State in the
following manner:                                                                                                                                          The City also approved emergency shelters and transitional housing under previous
                                                                                                                                                           zoning. A specific location was identified and approved in 2004-2005 for a new
       Provide at least one zoning category in which emergency shelters can be located without discretionary approvals. The subject
                                                                                                                                                           emergency shelter facility; however, no funding was available for a non-profit to
        zoning category(ies) shall include sites with sufficient capacity to meet the local need for emergency shelters. The City is
                                                                                                                                                           build the shelter. Late in 2009, an application was submitted for the redesign of the
        considering the Commercial Industrial (CM) zoning district and the Cannery District within Downtown Gilroy to allow emergency
                                                                                                                                                           emergency shelter site into permanent housing for the chronically homeless.
        shelters without discretionary approvals if they meet the requirements in the City’s Homeless Shelter Guidelines, which will be
        revised pursuant to Government Code Section 65583(a)(4).
                                                                                                                                                           In 2010 the City Council approved the Architectural and Site Plan and a Residential
       Ensure the provisions of the Housing Accountability Act are enforced and prohibit the denial of emergency                                          Development Ordinance (RDO) Affordable Housing Exemption for a 26-unit
        shelter/transitional/supportive housing facility via discretionary approvals if it is consistent with adopted regulatory standards.                apartment project, in lieu of a homeless shelter, to be developed by South County
                                                                                                                                                           Housing. The project is scheduled for completion in December 2013 and the
       Evaluate development standards and regulatory provisions to ensure that standards encourage rather than discourage
                                                                                                                                                           permanent loan will be executed at that time with a 55-year term.
        development.
       Amend Zoning Code to allow transitional/supportive housing as a residential use, subject only to those requirements of other
        residential uses in the same zone.
Objective: Compliance with SB-2
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Within 6-months of Housing Element adoption
Action 4-3.2: Zoning to Encourage and Facilitate Single-Room Occupancy Units                                                                   Incomplete  No action was taken on this program.                                                    Retain program.
The City shall revise the Zoning Code to establish explicit definitions for and regulatory standards addressing single-room occupancy
units.
Objective: Amend Zoning Code to include SROs
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review and amend Zoning Code by June 2011
Background Report                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 13-125
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                             TABLE A-1
                                                                                   REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                             CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                                2009-2014
                                                           Housing Actions                                                                  Status                                    Achievement                                           Recommendation
Action 4-3.3: Housing for Large Families                                                                                                    Ongoing The Affordable Housing Exemption Program encourages developers to include              Retain program.
The City shall review and revise the Zoning Code, as appropriate, to incorporate appropriate regulatory incentives, financial incentives            rental housing units with bedrooms of three or more in 20 percent of the units.
and other policies that encourage the development of rental housing units with three or more bedrooms to accommodate the needs of
large families. The City shall encourage and support the development of rental and for-sale housing for large families within future
affordable housing projects through various strategies and programs that may include: assistance with site identification and
entitlement processing; and modifying development standards and granting concessions and incentives.
Objectives: Encourage large family housing
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review Zoning Code by June 2012 and revise as appropriate
Action 4-3.4: Housing for Persons with Disabilities                                                                                         Ongoing The City continues to fund local agencies that provide services to disabled persons    Retain program.
The City will continue to comply with Federal and State housing laws through the implementation of its reasonable accommodation                     as well as periodically reviews the regulations and procedures to determine any
procedures. Additionally, the City will periodically review its regulations and procedures to determine any constraints on housing for              constraints on housing for persons with disabilities. In 2012, the Zoning Code was
persons with disabilities.                                                                                                                          reviewed, a Certified Access Specialist Program (CASP) inspection was in place, and
Objectives: Remove constraints on the development of housing for persons with disabilities                                                          accessible grants were provided with CDBG funds. The City amended its reasonable
Responsible Agency: Community Development                                                                                                           accommodation ordinance to provide more clarity in April 2014.
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Periodically review Zoning Code and reasonable accommodation procedures
Action 4-3.5: Development of Housing for Seniors                                                                                            Ongoing The City encourages new residential facilities for seniors, especially those that are  Retain program.
The City will encourage senior housing, including residential care facilities, to locate in or near residential neighborhoods that are              close to services and existing senior facilities. In 2012, the City reduced public
convenient to public transit and within walking distance of shopping and restaurants. The City will consider areas for new senior                   impact fees.
housing development, and incorporate appropriate regulatory incentives, financial incentives, and other policies that encourage the
development of housing for seniors. The City will continue to accept Senior only and Affordable Senior Housing projects through the
RDO Exemption program to encourage the development of these projects.
Objectives: Development of housing for seniors
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Review Zoning Code by June 2012 and revise as appropriate
Action 4-3.6: Development of Housing for Extremely Low-Income Households                                                                    Ongoing In 2012, the Extremely Low Income (ELI) Housing Task Force of the South County         Retain program.
The City shall review and incorporate appropriate regulatory incentives, financial incentives and other policies that encourage the                 Collaborative was created and began meeting regularly in 2013. The Task Force
development of housing units for households earning 30 percent or less of the median family income for Santa Clara County. The City                 identifies monthly rentals for $300-4000 in the city as well as funding for case
shall encourage and support the development of housing for extremely low-income households within future affordable housing                         management for the households. In 2012, 26 extremely low-income units were
projects through various strategies and programs that may include: assistance with entitlement processing; fee deferrals; and                       constructed in Gilroy.
modifying development standards and granting concessions and incentives for projects that provide housing for lower income families.
Objectives: Development of household units for extremely low-income households
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: State and Federal funding for multi-family housing
Implementation Timeline: Review Zoning Code by June 2012 and revise as appropriate
Page 13-126                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Background Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Adopted December 1, 2014
CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                             TABLE A-1
                                                                                   REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                            CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                               2009-2014
                                                          Housing Actions                                                                  Status                                       Achievement                                       Recommendation
Action 4-3.7: Development and Conservation of Housing for Farm Workers                                                                        Not    There was no activity or requests from developers related to this program. The City    Retain program.
The City of Gilroy will continue to partner with the Santa Clara County Housing Authority and various non-profit organizations to         completed  was not able to implement this program given a lack of staff resources and a lack of
explore and implement ways of providing affordable farm worker housing. City will assist with requests by developers for State and                   financial resources for farm worker housing.
Federal funding (USDA) for development of multi-family housing within city limits
Objectives: Housing for farm workers
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Outreach to Santa Clara Housing Authority and non-profit organizations annually and identify and pursue
development, as appropriate
Action 4-3.8: Consistency with the Employee Housing Act                                                                                  Incomplete  No action was taken.                                                                   Retain program.
The City will update the Zoning Code to be consistent with the Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety Code 17021), which generally
requires employee housing to be permitted by-right, without a CUP, in single-family zones for less than six persons, and in agricultural
zones with no more than 12 units or 36 beds.
Objectives: Consistency with Employee Housing Act
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Revise Zoning Code by June 2011
Action 4-3.9: Review Reasonable Accommodation Procedures                                                                                  In process Section 50.23 of the Zoning Ordinance addresses Reasonable Accommodation               Delete program.
The City will review the Reasonable Accommodation Procedures, specifically requirements of “Potential Benefit” and “Potential                        Procedures in the City of Gilroy. Applications are provided and reviewed by the
                                                                                                                                                     City’s Community Development Director. The City amended the Reasonable
Impact,” and revise, as appropriate, with the aim of reducing constraints on the development of housing for persons with disabilities.
                                                                                                                                                     Accommodation Procedures in April 2014 to provide more clarity and certainty for
Objective: Review of Reasonable Accommodation Procedures
                                                                                                                                                     applicants.
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Revise Zoning Code by June 2012
Policy 4-4: Promote fair housing standards.
Action 4-4.1: Fair Housing Counseling                                                                                                      Ongoing   In 2010, the City provided funds to non-profit agencies to provide 25 cases of fair    Retain program.
The City will continue to provide funds to and contract with Project Sentinel or a comparable agency to provide fair housing assistance              housing counseling assistance and disseminate fair housing information to tenants
including landlord/tenant counseling, homebuyer assistance, and amelioration or removal of identified impediments.                                   and landlords every year. Currently, the City has an ongoing contract with non-
Objective: Fair housing counseling                                                                                                                   profits to provide counseling, assistance, and removal of identified impediments.
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: Gilroy Housing Trust Fund/CDBG
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
GOAL 5: Increase awareness of and participation in housing programs.
Increasing Access to Housing Opportunity
Policy 5-1: Promote partnerships in the production of various housing types.
Background Report                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Page 13-127
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                            TABLE A-1
                                                                                  REVIEW OF 2007-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                            CITY OF GILROY
                                                                                                                               2009-2014
                                                          Housing Actions                                                                  Status                                    Achievement                                         Recommendation
Action 5-1.1: Interagency Collaboration for Lower Cost Housing                                                                             Ongoing In 2009, the City applied and received financial assistance for for-sale housing         Retain program.
The City will continue participation in Countywide housing assistance programs, and collaborate with other public agencies and non-                construction loans and down payment assistance. The City also applied for tax
profit housing sponsors in the use of available programs to provide lower-cost housing in Gilroy.                                                  credits for multi-family housing projects, including, at the time, current
Objective: Interagency collaboration                                                                                                               developments as well as those that were proposed.
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: Housing Trust Fund/CDBG                                                                                                            The City meets quarterly with other regional City staff in order to compare best
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing                                                                                                                   practices for BMR housing and Down Payment Assistance Programs (DAP) as well
                                                                                                                                                   as to update City policies. In 2012, the City participated in ongoing county-wide
                                                                                                                                                   collaboration and outreach in this program..
Action 5-1.2: Collaboration with Development Community                                                                                     Ongoing This is an ongoing program.                                                              Retain program.
The City will continue to establish relationships with and provide technical assistance to both for-profit and non-profit development
companies working in the area of affordable housing, facilitating innovative partnerships and collaborative approaches to affordable
housing development. The City will especially utilize the Housing Advisory Committee to address housing issues and provide outreach
to the development community.
Objective: Collaboration with Development Community
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
Policy 5-2: Consolidate and disseminate housing related information.
Action 5-2.1: Community Access to Housing Information                                                                                      Ongoing In 2012, the City used web-based media outreach to advertise community                   Retain program.
To ensure the Gilroy community is provided the highest level of access to information, the City shall evaluate the effectiveness of                meetings, homebuyer education classes, and new BMR development outreach.
existing outreach and community education efforts and develop a comprehensive outreach strategy. The outreach strategy will                        Mediums included the City’s Facebook page, the City’s website, and various
consider various methods of delivery, including print media, mailers, web-based information, and other methods that consider                       community links.
economic and cultural considerations unique to the City of Gilroy.
Objective: Comprehensive housing resources
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Develop housing information strategy by June 2011
Action 5-2.2: Annual Review of Housing Element                                                                                             Ongoing The 2012 report was submitted in June 2013. The City is in the process of preparing      Retain program.
Pursuant to HCD Requirements, the City will conduct an annual implementation review of the Housing Element. The review will include                the 2013 report.
the following information: a log of new residential development permits and completion reports; inventory of units built in the
Extremely Low-, Very Low- and Low-Income categories, an update or inventory of approved projects; an annual estimate of population
from the State Department of Finance; and available vacant land and zoning survey.
Objective: Annual Housing Element review
Responsible Agency: Community Development
Funding Source: General Fund
Implementation Timeline: Annually to HCD
Page 13-128                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Background Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Appendix B: Community Outreach
Housing Advisory Committee Meeting Summary
Staff and the Housing Element Consultants held a meeting on January 8, 2014 to inform the Housing
Advisory Committee (HAC) of the 2015-2023 Housing Element Update. At the meeting, the consultants
presented preliminary findings from the Housing Element Background Report, and sought input from
the HAC on the major housing issues facing Gilroy residents and potential policy solutions to address the
issues.
Major Housing Issues and Barriers to Affordable Housing
       There’s a need for permanent supportive housing for special needs people (homeless, seniors,
        extremely low-income households) with disabilities (physical and mental).
       Need housing for extremely low-income families where one or more parents has a disability.
       Need more extremely low-income units or a deeper subsidy.
       The extremely low-income population will be huge in the future.
       There’s not enough housing for young singles (college student); many work part time for
        minimum wage. These individuals may be living with their families, couch surfing, or living in their
        cars (i.e., homeless). There aren’t enough rooms for rent.
       Need to help population of single adults without documentable sources of income.
       There is a long waiting list for affordable senior housing (no turnover).
       City’s regulations on granny units are a source of affordable housing (there was a question about
        the City’s regulations).
       Parking requirements are a barrier for granny units (one parking space per granny unit but can
        use the driveway).
       Need more education about granny units.
       Need better information about availability of affordable housing—need to find a more sound
        mechanism of quantifying available units.
       The waiting lists for affordable housing are very long—need affordable housing in every category.
       Need more HUD money/more Section 8 vouchers. The waiting list is too long (about 20,000
        people). Section 8 is not designed to be temporary, so it’s hard to get the voucher and people
        aren’t willing to give them up.
       Rezoned parcels are too small for affordable housing (for for-profit developers).
       Biggest barrier is the cost of land (lease land for cheap to non-profit developers).
Background Report                                                                              Page 13-129
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
      Be willing to do a pocket project of higher density in lower-density areas (not zoned for high
       density).
      Housing for sex offenders is a problem.
      Need housing for veterans.
      Need more incentives from the State.
      Need more studio apartments downtown behind businesses (zoning currently allows for a
       maximum building height of up to four stories).
      County was willing to commit 20 percent of future “Boomerang” Redevelopment Agency funding,
       but now they are looking at what the cities will do. Need to have more regional conversations
       about housing.
      Code enforcement issues—need incentives for landlords to bring units up to code.
      Gilroy could use more services (mental health triage center).
      Need housing available at $300/month price point; this is where the subsidy is most needed.
      Other housing authorities transition people out of Section 8.
      More State funding is needed (State transaction fee).
Opportunities and Potential Solutions for Providing Housing
      Develop a task force for development plans for housing.
      Day laborers can call the Compassion Center and Maria Day Worker Center in Mountain View to
       get more information.
      More money for affordable housing; partner with the County and City for housing money.
      San Francisco is seeing micro units (small units with a bedroom and the roof-top garden is the
       “family room”). This type of housing could work in Gilroy’s climate. The City could do a study of
       micro units and revise the zoning code to allow them.
      High density housing in the downtown area has been well-received by the community because it
       supports businesses downtown.
      At the County, CDBG money is used for grants for housing rehabilitations (about 10 homes/year);
       the Planning Department reaches out to owners with code issues.
      Gilroy has a home access program and $10,000 of CDBG for compliance issues.
Page 13-130                                                                              Background Report
                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Stakeholder Workshop Summary
On March 6, 2014, the City held a Stakeholder Workshop at the Public Library. Approximately 20 local
agencies, community organizations, stakeholders, and residents attended the workshop. At the
workshop, City staff and the Housing Element consulting firm, Mintier Harnish, presented a brief
overview of the Housing Element Update and facilitated an interactive discussion to solicit ideas from
participants about the most critical housing issues facing Gilroy residents and new ways the City and
community might address these issues.
Major Housing Issues and Barriers to Affordable Housing
The discussion of housing in Gilroy focused on the significant need for affordable housing and the lack of
resources to address that problem. Stakeholders said Gilroy’s low-income residents were facing rising
rents, landlords unwilling to accept rental subsidies, substandard housing, and wages that do not cover
housing costs. Stakeholders pointed out that Gilroy’s disabled residents have difficulties finding
accessible housing, and building new accessible housing is expensive. Many representatives from
nonprofit service providers mentioned that public funding for housing programs have been drying up in
the last few years and it is difficult to serve everyone who needs help. A City housing planner position
was cut, further reducing the resources local government can offer to address housing problems.
Meeting notes:
       Landlords will not accept subsidies
       Developers want to build high-income housing
       Need transitional housing for recently incarcerated.
       School sites
       Rent increases
       Poor housing quality.
       Need smoke-free new housing
       Parking standards
       Council review
       There are many large households in low-income areas.
       Need more employers and jobs.
       Staff resources at City.
       Need new, affordable housing for the disabled that is wheelchair accessible.
       Landlords won’t accept Section 8 vouchers now; rates are stable and rent increases.
       Universal design costs.
       Affordable unit costs.
       Less parking near transit.
       There are 1,417 homeless individuals
       Minimum wage equals no housing.
       Takes six to nine months to find affordable housing.
       Not replacing affordable housing once used.
Background Report                                                                               Page 13-131
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Opportunities and Potential Solutions for Providing Housing
Stakeholders felt incentives and subsidies were necessary to provide more affordable housing in Gilroy.
Local and state governments could provide incentives to housing developers to encourage the
production of more affordable housing. Renters need subsidies to fill the gap between what they can
afford and the cost of safe, suitable housing. Stakeholders acknowledged that government funds may
not be able to fund all the needed incentives and subsidies, and believe it may be worthwhile to look to
private industry, particularly the technology sector, for funding. Stakeholders also felt that Gilroy did not
offer enough housing options and offered several suggestions for unit types that could solve some
housing problems, including: more transitional housing, micro-units, single room occupancy housing,
boarding houses, and more accessible units.
Meeting notes:
      Greater foreclosure and eviction assistance.
      Greater mixed-income housing—housing above retail.
      Greater transitional housing.
      Rental subsidies
      Greater incentives to build low-income housing such as impact fees.
      Micro-units
      Renters ombudsperson
      Funds to bring units up to code; do not raise the rent in lieu of raising funds.
      Need more SROs
      Boarding houses
      Smoke free Ordinance
      Make it more attractive for for-profit developers to build affordable housing.
      Require developers to build affordable phase first
      Inclusionary housing.
      Universal design
      Shared parking
      Local Section 8 with CDBG
      Flip Foreclosures
      Gilroy Foundation Partnership
      Tech Philanthropy
      Land Banking
Page 13-132                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                    Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Town Hall Forum Responses
QUESTION: What are the unmet housing needs in the city? What can the City do to help
provide for those needs?
    1. No apartments and no permits
    No building permits given out until every foreclosure is bought. Every building permit must
    have the TRUE IMPACT cost factored into it. The last time they built a stack of homes, the
    rest of us (except those who live in apartments) got hit with a new tax to build a new
    school.
         Comment: Is it possible to force foreclosures to be sold BMV?
    2. Encourage "granny" units by reducing fees, streamline permit
    Small, affordable homes can increase the housing opportunities for seniors, singles or
    couples, our fastest growing population groups. "Granny" units (small studios or 1 BR units
    built in back of single family homes) could offer homeowners the chance to have a rental
    they can easily keep an eye on and gain some income. It also gives those looking for a small
    place to have a choice other than an apartment. Right now the City charges $20,000+ for a
    permit. The result has been few legal units and numerous illegal, substandard units. If that
    was reduced to less than $5,000 and was streamlined, more people would build or upgrade
    their current units. An easy way to increase affordable housing in Gilroy.
         Comment: I disagree. I believe that if I needed to take care of my parents someday I
             would allow them to live in my home. I agree that the impacts are larger than they
             seem. I see many houses with "granny units" in my neighborhood that have become
             investment properties to make some easy money on section 8 renters.
         Comment: Adding these, or any, dwellings, impacts the roads (traffic), schools, and
             other infrastructure. $20k is not enough. The impact fee should be $50k for every
             ROOM.
    3. Affordable housing. Support the Compassion Center
    Gilroy needs more affordable housing. They also need more affordable senior housing. The
    City should support the Compassion Center, St. Joe's and the Lord's Table. Find a way to
    keep the Armory open more so that the homeless population doesn't have such limited
    hours & season. Offer more services for seniors.
         Comment: "Affordable housing" = FUTURE SLUM
    4. Solar for every new home
    Install solar panels on every new home.
         Comment: I like it - as long as the cost is passed on to the buyer (i.e. not paid for
             through taxes).
    5. More options for low income residents
Background Report                                                                        Page 13-133
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
   More options for low income residents
   6. More Condos
   Build upmarket town homes/condos in infill sites
         Comment: As long as they aren’t apartments. Condos at least pay their fair share of
            property taxes.
   7. Electric vehicle charging stations at every new home (220V)
   Install electric vehicle charging stations at every new home in Gilroy.
         Comment: Not a bad idea, but better would be to simply charge the appropriate
            impact fee so that everyone else doesn't foot the bill for the next new school.
   8. Homeowner workshops
   Education! Education! Education, Many people don't even know where to start in the home
   owning process. We need to invest in our community. When people own their homes as
   opposed to renting, it truly gives them sense of community. Individuals that feel like they
   are part of a community are more likely to contribute to improve our community.
Page 13-134                                                                        Background Report
                                                                            Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Appendix C: Local Amendments to the California
Building Code
Local amendments to the California Building Code include:
      Section 109.2 amended to read, “On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and
       plumbing systems or alternations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as
       required in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule as adopted.”
      Section 109.4 amended to read, “Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code
       has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, the fee for necessary permits shall be
       double the fee established by the current City of Gilroy Comprehensive Fee Schedule or as
       otherwise determined by the building official.”
      Section 111.2 amended to read, “After the building official inspects the building or structure and
       finds no violations of the provisions of this code, City of Gilroy conditions and ordinances, or
       other laws that are enforced by the building and safety division, the building official shall issue a
       certificate of occupancy ( C of O). For residential single family dwelling, the project permit card
       issued by the City of Gilroy shall serve as the certificate of occupancy when properly signed.”
      Section 112. 1 amended to read, “No person shall make a connection from a source of electrical
       energy or fuel gas to any electric wiring system, gas piping system, device, appliance or
       equipment for the installation of which a permit is required, unless such wiring system, gas piping
       system, devices, appliance or equipment has first been inspected by the building official and
       found to comply with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city.”
      Section 402.5, 403.3, 404.3 exceptions deleted.
      Section 406.3.4 amended to change requirements for separation of residence and garage.
      Section 406.3.6 amended to read, “In enclosed private garages attached to R occupancies,
       provide 1 square foot of ventilation area located at the lower 12" of garage wall. Said ventilation
       areas shall be directly communicated with the exterior, but shall not be installed where
       protection of openings is required.”
      Section 903.2 is amended to read in its entirety, “Where required, approved automatic sprinkler
       system in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations as set forth in the Gilroy
       Fire Code and the California Fire Code.”
      Appendix C – Agricultural buildings to be adopted.
      Appendix F – Rodent proofing to be adopted.
      Appendix G – Flood resistant construction to be adopted.
      Appendix I – Patio covers to be adopted.
      Appendix J – Grading to be adopted.
      Section J110.3 added for erosion control.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-135
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
      Section J110.4 added for dust and mud control measures.
      Section J110.5 added for archeological discovery.
      Section J110.6 added for work stoppage, right of entry, notification of violation, abatement of
       violation, penalties, enforcement, and appeals.
      Section 1705.3 Exception 1 amended to read, “Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings
       three stories or less in height above the grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, no
       greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch.
      Section 1807.2 amended to read, “Retaining walls shall be constructed of concrete or masonry
       and be designed by a California State licensed engineer.
      Section 609.3 amended to read, “Water piping shall not be installed in or under a concrete floor
       slab within a building without prior approval of the Building Official”
      Section 609.4 amended for pipe testing.
      Section 701.1.2.a amended to read, “ABS and PVC installations are limited to not more than two
       stories in areas of residential accommodation in a three story building.”
      Section 719 amended for clean outs.
      Section 1201.3.8.1 amended for wall thickness.
Page 13-136                                                                               Background Report
                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Appendix D: Development Requirements
Applications are reviewed to ensure that the development addresses and adequately meets the
requirements for the following:
      Traffic safety and efficiency:
                Traffic volume and conditions on abutting or access streets.
                Street improvements, including lighting.
                Circulation patterns within the development, including the locations and dimensions of
                 vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives, walkways, buildings, and other related
                 facilities.
                Adequacy of off-street parking.
                Surfacing, lighting, and landscaping of off-street parking facilities.
                Location, quantity, height of materials, and shape of landscaped areas.
                Adequacy, location, arrangement, and dimensions of truck loading and unloading
                 facilities.
      Outdoor advertising and signs:
                Potential traffic hazards.
                Appearance.
                Harmony with adjacent development. (This requirement is limited compliance with
                 development standards and design guidelines in the City’s Zoning Ordinance related to
                 outdoor advertising and signs, Section 37, in order to ensure applicant certainty.).
                Favorable image of the City.
                Number, area, bulk, shape, height, location, separation, clearance, projection,
                 illumination, color, and landscaping of such signs.
      Site development:
                Physical characteristics of the site.
                Existing and proposed easements.
                Appearance and harmony of buildings with adjacent development, the character of the
                 neighborhood, and existing and projected public improvements (This requirement is
                 limited to compliance with development standards and design guidelines in the City’s
                 Zoning Ordinance related to site development, Section 32, in order to ensure applicant
                 certainty.).
                Location, appearance, and orientation of structures, open spaces, and activities.
                Determination of boundaries, building setbacks, and uses intended.
      Landscaping:
Background Report                                                                              Page 13-137
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
                Harmony with adjacent development. (This requirement is limited to compliance with
                 development standards and design guidelines in the City’s Zoning Ordinance related to
                 landscaping, Section 38, in order to ensure applicant certainty.).
                Concealment of storage areas, utility installations, or other unsightly development.
                Quantity, location, height, and materials of walls and fences, hedges, screen planting,
                 and landscaped areas.
                Planting of ground cover or other surfacing to prevent erosion and reduce dust.
                Unnecessary destruction of healthy trees.
                Facilities and methods of insuring continued maintenance of landscaping.
      Drainage and flood control and health standards:
                Effect on flood control and storm and surface water drainage facilities.
                Additional flood control and drainage improvements required.
                Minimum health standards.
                Consistency with the City's adopted Flood Plain Management Ordinance 50-9
      Fire protection:
                Additional fire protection improvements required.
                Location, number, and type of such improvements. Adequacy of the water supply for
                 fire protection purposes.
      Environmental impacts:
                Consistency with the City's adopted Environmental Review Procedures and Process.
                Consistency with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
The following conditions are standard on all architectural and site approvals:
      Landscaping: Landscaping plans including specification for an irrigation system shall be approved
       by the Planning Director in accordance with the adopted Consolidated Landscaping Policy, prior
       to issuance of a building permit.
      Trash Enclosures: All trash enclosures shall consist of visually solid fences and gates, six feet in
       height, in accordance with the adopted City of Gilroy standard trash enclosure design plan, or a
       similar design approved by the Planning Director. All trash enclosures shall be located in
       accordance with the approved site plan and the Uniform Fire Code.
      Exterior Lighting: No unobstructed beam of exterior lighting shall be directed outward from the
       site toward any residential use of public right-of-way.
      Mechanical Appurtenances: Mechanical equipment to be located on the roof of a building shall
       be screened by an architectural feature of the building such that it cannot be seen from ground
       level at the far side of the adjacent public right-of-way, whenever possible.
Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage and loading areas must be screened from public view with a
combination of landscaping, solid fencing, and building design and orientation.
Page 13-138                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                    Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Appendix E: Glossary of Terms
Above Moderate-Income Household. A household with an annual income usually greater than 120% of
the area median family income adjusted by household size, as determined by a survey of incomes
conducted by a city of a county, or in the absence of such a survey, based on the latest available
eligibility limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the
housing program.
Apartment. An apartment is one (1) or more rooms in an apartment house or dwelling occupied or
intended or designated for occupancy by one (1) family for sleeping or living purposes and containing
one (1) kitchen.
Assisted Housing. Generally multi-family rental housing, but sometimes single-family ownership units,
whose construction, financing, sales prices, or rents have been subsidized by federal, state, or local
housing programs including, but not limited to Federal state, or local housing programs including, but
not limited to Federal §8 (new construction, substantial rehabilitation, and loan management set-
asides), Federal §s 213, 236, and 202, Federal §221 (d) (3) (below-market interest rate program),
Federal §101 (rent supplement assistance), CDBG, FmHA §515, multi-family mortgage revenue bond
programs, local redevelopment and in lieu fee programs, and units developed pursuant to local
inclusionary housing and density bonus programs.
Below-market-rate (BMR). Any housing unit specifically priced to be sold or rented to low- or
moderate-income households for an amount less than the fair-market value of the unit. Both the State
of California and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development set standards for determining
which households qualify as “low income” or “moderate income.” (2) The financing of housing at less
than prevailing interest rates.
Build-out. That level of urban development characterized by full occupancy of all developable sites in
accordance with the General Plan; the maximum level of development envisioned by the General Plan.
Build-out does not assume that each parcel is developed to include all floor area or housing units
possible under zoning regulations.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG). A grant program administered by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) on a formula basis for entitlement communities and by the
State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for non-entitled jurisdictions. This
grant allots money to cities and counties for housing rehabilitation and community development,
including public facilities and economic development
Condominium. A structure of two or more units, the interior spaces of which are individually owned;
the balance of the property (both land and building) is owned in common by the owners of the
individual units. (See “Townhouse.”)
Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs). A term used to describe restrictive limitations that
may be placed on property and its use, and which usually are made a condition of holding title or lease.
Background Report                                                                              Page 13-139
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Deed. A legal document which affects the transfer of ownership of real estate from the seller to the
buyer.
Density Bonus. The allocation of development rights that allow a parcel to accommodate additional
square footage or additional residential units beyond the maximum for which the parcel is zoned,
usually in exchange for the provision or preservation of an amenity at the same site or at another
location.
Density, Residential. The number of permanent residential dwelling units per acre of land. Densities
specified in the General Plan may be expressed in units per gross acre or per net developable acre.
Developable Land. Land that is suitable as a location for structures and that can be developed free of
hazards to, and without disruption of, or significant impact on, natural resource areas.
Down Payment. Money paid by a buyer from his own funds, as opposed to that portion of the purchase
price which is financed.
Duplex. A detached building under single ownership that is designed for occupation as the residence of
two families living independently of each other.
Dwelling Unit (du). A building or portion of a building containing one or more rooms, designed for or
used by one family for living or sleeping purposes, and having a separate bathroom and only one kitchen
or kitchenette. See Housing Unit.
Elderly Housing. Typically one- and two-bedroom apartments or condominiums designed to meet the
needs of persons 62 years of age and older or, if more than 150 units, persons 55 years of age and older,
and restricted to occupancy by them.
Emergency Shelter. A facility that provides immediate and short-term housing and supplemental
services for the homeless. Shelters come in many sizes, but an optimum size is considered to be 20 to 40
beds. Supplemental services may include food, counseling, and access to other social programs. (See
“Homeless” and “Transitional Housing.”)
Extremely Low-Income Household. A household with an annual income equal to or less than 30% of the
area median family income adjusted by household size, as determined by a survey of incomes
conducted by a city or a county, or in the absence of such a survey, based on the latest available
eligibility limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the
Section 8 housing program.
Fair Market Rent. The rent, including utility allowances, determined by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development for purposed of administering the Section 8 Existing Housing
Program.
Family. (1) Two or more persons related by birth, marriage, or adoption [U.S. Bureau of the Census]. (2)
An Individual or a group of persons living together who constitute a bona fide single-family
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, not including a fraternity, sorority, club, or other group of persons
occupying a hotel, lodging house or institution of any kind [California].
Page 13-140                                                                                 Background Report
                                                                                     Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
General Plan. A comprehensive, long-term plan mandated by State Planning Law for the physical
development of a city or county and any land outside its boundaries which, in its judgment, bears
relation to its planning. The plan shall consist of seven required elements: land use, circulation, open
space, conservation, housing, safety, and noise. The plan must include a statement of development
policies and a diagram or diagrams illustrating the policies.
Goal. A general, overall, and ultimate purpose, aim, or end toward which the City will direct effort.
Green Building. Green or sustainable building is the practice of creating healthier and more resource-
efficient models of construction, renovation, operation, maintenance, and demolition. (US
Environmental Protection Agency)
Historic Preservation. The preservation of historically significant structures and neighborhoods until
such time as, and in order to facilitate, restoration and rehabilitation of the building(s) to a former
condition.
Historic Property. A historic property is a structure or site that has significant historic, architectural, or
cultural value.
Household. All those persons—related or unrelated—who occupy a single housing unit. (See “Family.”)
Housing and Community Development Department (HCD). The State agency that has principal
responsibility for assessing, planning for, and assisting communities to meet the needs of low-and
moderate-income households.
Housing Element. One of the seven State-mandated elements of a local general plan, it assesses the
existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the community, identifies potential
sites adequate to provide the amount and kind of housing needed, and contains adopted goals, policies,
and implementation programs for the preservation, improvement, and development of housing. Under
State law, Housing Elements must be updated every five years.
Housing Payment. For ownership housing, this is defined as the mortgage payment, property taxes,
insurance and utilities. For rental housing this is defined as rent and utilities.
Housing Ratio. The ratio of the monthly housing payment to total gross monthly income. Also Called
Payment-to-Income Ratio or Front-End Ratio.
Housing Unit. The place of permanent or customary abode of a person or family. A housing unit may be
a single-family dwelling, a multi-family dwelling, a condominium, a modular home, a mobile home, a
cooperative, or any other residential unit considered real property under State law.
Housing and Urban Development, U.S. Department of (HUD). A cabinet-level department of the federal
government that administers housing and community development programs.
Implementing Policies. The City’s statements of its commitments to consistent actions.
Implementation. Actions, procedures, programs, or techniques that carry out policies.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-141
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Infill Development. The development of new housing or other buildings on scattered vacant lots in a
built-up area or on new building parcels created by permitted lot splits.
Jobs-Housing Balance. A ratio used to describe the adequacy of the housing supply within a defined
area to meet the needs of persons working within the same area. The General Plan uses ABAG’s
definition which is a job total equal to 1.2 times the number of housing units within the area under
consideration.
Land Use Classification. A system for classifying and designating the appropriate use of properties.
Live-Work Units. Buildings or spaces within buildings that are used jointly for commercial and
residential purposes where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use
as a place of work.
Low-Income Household. A household with an annual income usually no greater than 51%-80% of the
area median family income adjusted by household size, as determined by a survey of incomes
conducted by a city or a county, or in the absence of such a survey, based on the latest available
eligibility limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the §8
housing program.
Low-income Housing Tax Credits. Tax reductions provided by the federal and State governments for
investors in housing for low-income households.
Manufactured Housing. Residential structures that are constructed entirely in the factory, and which
since June 15, 1976, have been regulated by the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 under the administration of the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD). (See “Mobile Home” and “Modular Unit.”)
Mixed-use. Properties on which various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and residential,
are combined in a single building or on a single site in an integrated development project with significant
functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design. A “single site” may include contiguous
properties.
Moderate-income Household. A household with an annual income usually no greater than 81%-120%
of the area median family income adjusted by household size, as determined by a survey of incomes
conducted by a city or a county, or in the absence of such a survey, based on the latest available
eligibility limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the
Section 8 housing program.
Monthly Housing Expense. Total principal, interest, taxes, and insurance paid by the borrower on a
monthly basis. Used with gross income to determine affordability.
Multiple Family Building. A detached building designed and used exclusively as a dwelling by three or
more families occupying separate suites.
Ordinance. A law or regulation set forth and adopted by a governmental authority, usually a city or
county.
Page 13-142                                                                              Background Report
                                                                                  Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Overcrowding Housing Unit. A housing unit in which the members of the household or group are
prevented from the enjoyment of privacy because of small room size and housing size. The U.S. Bureau
of Census defines an overcrowded housing unit as one which is occupied by more than one person per
room.
Parcel. A lot or tract of land.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) A self-contained development, often with a mixture of housing types
and densities, in which subdivision and zoning controls are applied to the project as a whole rather than
to individual lots, as in most subdivisions. Densities and lot sizes are calculated for the entire
development, usually permitting a trade-off between the clustering of houses and provision of common
open space or other amenities.
Planning Area. The area directly addressed by the general plan. A city’s planning area typically
encompasses the city limits and potentially annexable land within its sphere of influence.
Policy. A specific statement of principle or of guiding actions that implies clear commitment but is not
mandatory. A general direction that a governmental agency sets to follow, in order to meet its
objectives before undertaking an action program. (See “Program.”)
Poverty Level. As used by the U.S. Census, families and unrelated individuals are classified as being
above or below the poverty level based on a poverty index that provides a range of income cutoffs or
“poverty thresholds” varying by size of family, number of children, and age of householder. The income
cutoffs are updated each year to reflect the change in the Consumer Price Index.
Program. An action, activity, or strategy carried out in response to adopted policy to achieve a specific
goal or objective. Policies and programs establish the “who,” “how” and “when” for carrying out the
“what” and “where” of goals and objectives.
Redevelop. To demolish existing buildings; or to increase the overall floor area existing on a property;
or both; irrespective of whether a change occurs in land use.
Regional. Pertaining to activities or economies at a scale greater than that of a single jurisdiction, and
affecting a broad geographic area.
Regional Housing Needs Assessment. (RHNA) A quantification by ABAG of existing and projected
housing need, by household income group, for all localities within a region.
Rehabilitation. The repair, preservation, and/or improvement of substandard housing.
Residential. Land designated in the General Plan and zoning ordinance for building consisting of
dwelling units. May be improved, vacant, or unimproved. (See “Dwelling Unit.”)
Residential Care Facility. A facility that provides 24-hour care and supervision to its residents.
Residential Development Ordinance (RDO) A policy of Gilroy to encourage a rate of growth which will
not exceed the City’s ability to provide adequate and efficient public services or the ability of the school
district to provide adequate schools or the ability of the local economy to support such growth.
Background Report                                                                                  Page 13-143
Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Residential, Multiple Family. Usually three or more dwelling units on a single site, which may be in the
same or separate buildings.
Residential, Single-Family. A single dwelling unit on a building site.
Retrofit. To add materials and/or devices to an existing building or system to improve its operation,
safety, or efficiency. Buildings have been retrofitted to use solar energy and to strengthen their ability to
withstand earthquakes, for example.
Rezoning. An amendment to the map to effect a change in the nature, density, or intensity of uses
allowed in a zoning district and/or on a designated parcel or land area.
Second Unit. A self-contained living unit, either attached to or detached from, and in addition to, the
primary residential unit on a single lot. “Granny Flat” is one type of second unit.
Section 8 Rental Assistance Program. A federal (HUD) rent-subsidy program that is one of the main
sources of federal housing assistance for low-income households. The program operates by providing
“housing assistance payments” to owners, developers, and public housing agencies to make up the
difference between the “Fair Market Rent” of a unit (set by HUD) and the household’s contribution
toward the rent, which is calculated at 30% of the household’s adjusted gross monthly income (GMI).
“Section 8” includes programs for new construction, existing housing, and substantial or moderate
housing rehabilitation.
Shared Living. The occupancy of a dwelling unit by persons of more than one family in order to reduce
housing expenses and provide social contact, mutual support, and assistance. Shared living facilities
serving six or fewer persons are permitted in all residential districts by §1566.3 of the California Health
and Safety Code.
Single-family Dwelling, Attached. A dwelling unit occupied or intended for occupancy by only one
household that is structurally connected with at least one other such dwelling unit. (See “Townhouse.”)
Single-family Dwelling, Detached. A dwelling unit occupied or intended for occupancy by only one
household that is structurally independent from any other such dwelling unit or structure intended for
residential or other use. (See “Family.”)
Single Room Occupancy (SRO). A single room, typically 80-250 square feet, with a sink and closet, but
which requires the occupant to share a communal bathroom, shower, and kitchen.
Subsidize. To assist by payment of a sum of money or by the granting to terms or favors that reduces
the need for monetary expenditures. Housing subsidies may take the forms of mortgage interest
deductions or tax credits from federal and/or state income taxes, sale or lease at less than market value
of land to be used for the construction of housing, payments to supplement a minimum affordable rent,
and the like.
Substandard Housing. Residential dwellings that, because of their physical condition, do not provide
safe and sanitary housing.
Page 13-144                                                                                Background Report
                                                                                    Adopted December 1, 2014

CHAPTER 13: HOUSING ELEMENT
Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population as
defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 53260(d), and that is linked to onsite or offsite
services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her
health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
“Target population" means adults with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including mental
illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for
services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act and may, among other
populations, include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care
system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people. [California Health
and Safety Code Sections 50675.14(b) and 53260(d)]
Target Areas. Specifically designated sections of the community where loans and grants are made to
bring about a specific outcome, such as the rehabilitation of housing affordable by very-low and low-
income households.
Tax Increment. Additional tax revenues that result from increases in property values within a
redevelopment area. State law permits the tax increment to be earmarked for redevelopment purposes
but requires at least 20% to be used to increase and improve the community’s supply of very low and
low income housing.
Tenure. A housing unit is “owned” if the owner or co-owner lives in the unit, even if it is “owned only if
it is mortgaged or not fully paid for. A cooperative or condominium unit is “owned only if the owner or
co-owner lives in it. All other occupied units are classified as “rented,” including units rented for cash
rent and those occupied without payment of cash rent.
Townhouse. A townhouse is a dwelling unit located in a group of three (3) or more attached dwelling
units with no dwelling unit located above or below another and with each dwelling unit having its own
exterior entrance.
Transitional Housing. Shelter provided to the homeless for an extended period, often as long as 18
months, and generally integrated with other social services and counseling programs to assist in the
transition to self-sufficiency through the acquisition of a stable income and permanent housing. (See
“homeless” and “Emergency Shelter.”)
Undevelopable. Specific areas where topographic, geologic, and/or superficial soil conditions indicate a
significant danger to future occupants and a liability to the City are designated as “undevelopable” by
the City.
Background Report                                                                                 Page 13-145
Adopted December 1, 2014

