

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                               Page
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
STREET STANDARDS ................................................................................................... 2 
HIGHWAY 99 ................................................................................................................... 4 
   Background .................................................................................................................. 4 
   Highway 99 in the Existing City ................................................................................. 7 
   Highway 99 in the Planned Growth Area .................................................................. 8 
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN STANDARDS ........................................................... 10 
   Types of Bicycle Routes ............................................................................................. 13 
   Regional Bicycle Connections ................................................................................... 14 
LEVEL OF SERVICE .................................................................................................... 15 
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES ........................... 18 
   Complete Streets ........................................................................................................ 18 
   Transit Service ........................................................................................................... 22 
   Connectivity................................................................................................................ 24 
   Mobility for All Ages ................................................................................................. 31 
   Parking ....................................................................................................................... 33 
   Local Economy ........................................................................................................... 36 
   Circulation Goal 1: Complete Streets (Policies 1.1 thorugh 1.10) ......................... 19
   Circulation Goal 2: Complete Streets (Policies 2.1 through 2.5). .......................... 21
   Circulation Goal 3: Transit Service (Policies 3.1 through 3.6) .............................. 23
   Circulation Goal 4: Connectivity (Policies 4.1 through 4.4) .................................. 25
   Circulation Goal 5: Connectivity (Policies 5.1 through 5.12) ................................ 29
   Circulation Goal 6: Mobility for All Ages (Policies 6.1 through 6.4) .................... 33
   Circulation Goal 7: Parking (Policies 7.1 through 7.6) .......................................... 35
   Circulation Goal 8: Local Economy (Policies 8.1 through 8.4).............................. 37
                                             CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                              I

                                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                       2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                               Page
EXHIBITS
  Circulation-1. Circulation Diagram .......................................................................... 5
  Circulation-2. Bicycle Circulation Diagram .......................................................... 11
  Circulation-3. Connected versus Circuitous Street Networks .............................. 24
  Circulation-4. Southeast Plan Area......................................................................... 27
  Circulation-5. Commercial Block Size and Paseos ................................................ 30
  Circulation-6. Parking Placement ........................................................................... 34
  Circulation-7. Truck Routes .................................................................................... 39
TABLES
  Circulation-1. Gridley Street Standards................................................................... 3
  Circulation-2. Level of Service Definition .............................................................. 16
                               CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                              II
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
INTRODUCTION
This Circulation Element addresses the movement of people, goods, resources, and
services in the Gridley Planning Area. In this Element, the words “circulation” and
“transportation” are used to refer to both the infrastructure of travel (streets, sidewalks,
pathways, bridges, rails, etc.) and the means by which movement occurs (car, truck, train,
bus, bicycle, on foot, etc.). This Element establishes the location, type, and basic
character of the City’s transportation network, as well as the stretch of Highway 99 that
passes through the Gridley area. This Element establishes the City’s service standards for
transportation, discusses the degree to which the transportation network should be
connected, and establishes policy for parking.
This Element supports goals and policies in other elements of the General Plan related to
land use, public health and safety, community character and design, and local economy
by reducing the reliance on cars for better air quality and reduced household
transportation costs; assuring that essential goods and services are provided to Gridley
residents; and supporting a growing local economy.
The City’s ability to meet transportation-related goals depends on development patterns
that support a variety of ways to travel. Goals and policies for pedestrian, bicycle, and
transit-friendliness will not produce the desired results without a supportive mix, density,
and arrangement of land uses. The City’s growth strategy requires the policies of the
Land Use and Circulation elements to work in tandem.
Much of the implementation of the Circulation Element will occur through compliance
with the City’s Public Works Construction Standards (referred to in this Element as “City
Standards”).
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                              1

                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                         2030 General Plan
STREET STANDARDS
Streets in Gridley will be constructed and improved according to the guidance presented
in this Element. The types of streets are listed below, followed by an explanation of the
function of each street.
     9   Arterials are the largest type of City street in Gridley. Arterials provide for
         through traffic movement between nearby cities and through the city, with
         limited direct access to abutting property. Arterials may be two or four lanes.
     9   Collectors provide for through traffic movement within and between
         neighborhoods, as well as access to abutting property. Major collectors
         emphasize through traffic between neighborhoods more than minor collectors,
         which allow more direct access to abutting properties and may serve a single
         neighborhood.
     9   Local Streets provide direct access to abutting land and provide for traffic
         movement within a single-neighborhood or part of a neighborhood. Local Streets
         are designed for low traffic volumes and speeds.
     9   Industrial Streets are Local Streets that serve industrial areas. These streets have
         wider travel lanes and wider allowances for on-street parking compared to other
         streets in Gridley due to the need to accommodate trucks.
City streets will be designed and improved consistent with the standards presented in
Table Circulation-1. The City will allow flexibility for infill projects, where existing
development and property boundaries may make it infeasible to meet City standards.
Arterial, Major Collector, and Minor Collector streets and generalized locations of these
streets are shown in Exhibit Circulation-1, Circulation Diagram. This diagram also shows
the location of Highway 99 and the planned location of a future north/south regional
travel route through the Gridley area. Local Streets are not shown on the General Plan
Circulation Diagram, although policies and standards in this Circulation Element provide
general guidance for the development of both Local Streets and larger streets (such as
Arterial and Collectors). Internal streets, in general, will be constructed by project
applicants while streets serving areawide needs could be constructed by adjacent
developing properties and/or a combination of project construction and application of
City traffic impact fees and capital improvements planning.
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                               2
                                                                                                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                                                                                       2030 General Plan
                                                                          Table Circulation-1
                                                                     Gridley Street Standards
    Street                                                                                                                     Design Speed      On-Street
 Classification      # Lanes        Lane width    Turn Lanes Direct Access        Sidewalk*      Bike Lane     Planter Strip       (mph)          Parking          ROW
Arterial               2–4              12        As directed      Limited       5-12’, both        No**       6’, both sides      25-45            No            60-84’
                                                    by City                          sides
Major                    2              11’       As directed     Moderate        5-12, both       5’, both    6’, both sides      20-30            No            50-60
Collector                                           by City                          sides         sides**
Minor                    2              10’           No          Frequent       5-12’, both       5’, both    6’, both sides      20-25      8’, both sides      66-74’
Collector                                                                            sides         sides**
Local Street             2              10’           No          Frequent        5-6’, both          No       6’, both sides      15-20      8’, both sides      56-64’
                                                                                     sides
Industrial               2              14’       As directed     Frequent      4-6’, one side        No        5’, one side       20-30         10’, both    84’ minimum
Streets***                                          by City                                                                                        sides
Notes:
*        Sidewalks should be at least 5’ except in areas with existing physical constraints and areas anticipated to have very low pedestrian volumes. Streets
         Downtown and other areas with high pedestrian volumes, such as along Highway 99, should have wider sidewalks—at least 6’—regardless of the type of
         street. Sidewalks in commercial areas require sidewalks of between 9.5 and 11.5 feet on both sides with irrigated tree wells (see City Public Works
         Construction Standards, section on Street Design Criteria for more details).
**       See Bicycle Facilities Diagram for the collectors that require bike lanes.
***      Industrial streets internal to proposed developments with the Industrial and Agricultural Industrial land use designations (see Land Use Diagram in the Land
         Use Element that are proposed for industrial development. The Industrial Street standards do not apply to commercial development proposed within the
         Industrial designation. Industrial Streets are more specifically described in the City’s Public Works Construction Standards. See Drawing No. 8 in particular.
         The Industrial Street standards do not apply to collector or arterial roads in industrial areas, although it is possible the curb radii on these streets may need
         to be slightly larger to accommodate large trucks.
                                                                          CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                       3

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
HIGHWAY 99
A major transportation facility in the Gridley area is State Route 99 (Highway 99), which
is under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). The
following discussion describes the City’s general guidelines for Highway 99 in the
existing City, as well as the Planned Growth Area.
BACKGROUND
Highway 99 brings thousands of travelers through Gridley every day. Travelers along this
route represent an important market for local businesses. Over time, the corridor within
the Gridley area has been developed with mostly larger-scale retail and commercial
services. Large surface parking lots and commercial signage for these businesses are very
noticeable along the corridor.
Many properties along Highway 99 have limited connections to and from the
neighborhoods that abut the highway corridor. In fact, some properties have access only
via Highway 99. Better access and more connections throughout the corridor, including
more north-south and east-west routes, will benefit Gridley residents and businesses.
Most of the City’s current traffic congestion problems are in the Highway 99 corridor.
Alternative north-south travel routes will help relieve some of this congestion, especially
for local traffic.
Some of Gridley’s schools are located east of Highway 99, whereas most residents live
west of the Highway. Therefore, it is important to consider the needs of schoolchildren,
as well as other pedestrians, in the context of improvements along the highway corridor.
Since the early 1960s, Caltrans has been considering bypass routes for Highway 99 in the
Gridley area. In the 1970s, Caltrans acquired properties east of Gridley in an alignment
that would roughly correspond to a southward extension of Mead Avenue. The Highway
99 bypass was to be part of the interstate highway system east of the Sacramento River.
However, State funding problems and environmental concerns delayed construction. In
the 1980s, the bypass route was evaluated by the California Transportation Commission
(CTC) for possible rescission. After studying different options for freeway connections
between Sacramento and Chico, Caltrans determined that the preferred route was
Highway 70, rather than Highway 99.
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                              4

Exhibit Circulation-1
Circulation Diagram
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
In 1990, the CTC again reviewed the proposed Highway 99 bypass to determine the
viability of this transportation corridor. Caltrans concluded at that time that the bypass
properties were critical to preserve due to projected traffic demand. However, since
Highway 70 was selected as the preferred route in this area, and because Highway 70
improvements have been delayed substantially, this has in turn delayed construction of
Highway 99 bypass improvements.
More recently, CTC again considered rescission of the Highway 99 bypass properties.
The City requested that the California Transportation Commission hold lands in the
eastern portion of the City to be used for a regional transportation alternative to Highway
99.
HIGHWAY 99 IN THE EXISTING CITY
Within existing developed areas, the City will continue to consult with Caltrans on
projects to improve safety and reduce congestion along Highway 99. A variety of
changes can be made along the corridor to improve pedestrian safety and aesthetics. The
following guidelines are recommended:1
     9   Pedestrian crossings. The Cherry Street intersection should be more visible
         through the addition of pedestrian crossing signs, different paving material or
         other techniques. At Spruce Street, the signalization should be changed to favor
         pedestrians just before school and right after school lets out, while also
         facilitating traffic movement.2
     9   Sidewalks. Along the Highway, sidewalks should be widened and off-set from
         the travel lanes to create horizontal separation between the pedestrian and the
         curb line.
     9   Access. Existing access points along Highway 99 would continue to exist, but
         new direct driveway access should be discouraged where properties can be
         accessed from local streets instead. New driveway access will be discouraged
         also where new development can share an existing access point to Highway 99.
     9   Aesthetics. Landscaping should be added – specifically, street trees that provide
         shade for pedestrians and enhance the visual character (see the Community
1
    Some of the recommendations in this Circulation Element are from the City’s 2002 Streetscape
    Design Plan for Highway 99, which was developed through substantial public outreach and
    coordination with emergency service providers.
2
    Fore more details, please refer to City of Gridley: A Traffic Safety Evaluation by John Turner
    and Ed Ruzak, P.E. This study was prepared in coordination with the Gridley Public Works
    and Police Departments by the UC Berkeley Institute of Transportation Studies.
                                       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                   7

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                              2030 General Plan
         Character and Design Element). Overhead utility lines along the Highway 99
         corridor should be undergrounded, as funding allows.
To complement the Highway 99 improvements, the City will provide as many alternative
north-south routes as possible for local residents to use in times when the Highway is
congested.
HIGHWAY 99 IN THE PLANNED GROWTH AREA
Within the Planned Growth Area, the Highway 99 corridor will provide a more rural
aesthetic environment. This will include both the preservation of orchard trees and other
existing vegetation along Highway 99, as well as new landscaping.
Planned Growth Area development will contribute toward Highway 99 corridor
improvements designed to ensure safety, access, connectivity, positive aesthetics, and
also ensure adequate roadway capacity. Although contemplated mostly for the Planned
Growth Area, the concepts discussed in this section can also apply to the existing Sphere
of Influence along Highway 99 as properties annex to the City.
Speed limit signs are one way to slow traffic. However, motorists often travel at speeds
they perceive to be safe based on street design and traffic conditions. The speed at which
motorists feel safe is sometimes called the “design speed.” The design speed can be
reduced using several simple techniques, described below:
     9   Narrower lanes cause drivers to slow down. For example, lane widths can be
         reduced from 12 to 11 feet.
     9   Planted medians are another way to slow traffic speeds.3 Medians also provide a
         physical separation between oncoming traffic and a refuge for crossing
         pedestrians who cannot make it safely across the entire roadway at one time.
         Medians with turn pockets at key intersections dramatically reduce the number of
         conflict points and therefore increase traffic safety. Medians not only slow traffic
         and improve safety, but also can increase the effective roadway capacity.4
3
    Studies on city streets show reduced speeds with the addition of raised medians. Raised
    medians combined with curb extensions (bulbed intersections) reduce speeds even further.
    Although raised, landscaped medians have a higher initial cost and require maintenance, long-
    term costs are roughly equivalent to paving.
4
    Continuous medians with turning pockets can increase the street capacity by 25 percent or
    more, compared to a five-lane section with a center two-way-left-turn lane.
                                      CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                 8

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
    9    Highly visible pedestrian crossing improvements, such as different paving
         materials, slightly raised paving materials, and pedestrian warning lights
         embedded in the pavement can provide important warnings to drivers to be alert
         for pedestrians.
The roadway capacity of Highway 99 is important because the highway is one of the
major north-south routes in California. The City will continue to seek construction of a
Highway 99 bypass east of Gridley to serve regional needs. But using the current
roadway system and future growth estimates, at General Plan buildout, the Highway
could have more than 30,000 cars per day.5 The corridor design should ensure adequate
capacity to convey regional through traffic, while also providing a safe environment and
meet local transportation needs.
The City will consult with BCAG and Caltrans on improvements within and adjacent to
the Highway 99 right-of-way according to the following guidelines:
    9    Lower design speeds for safety. The design speed of Highway 99 in the Planned
         Growth Area should be lower, in order to communicate to drivers to slow down
         when entering the City.
    9    Lower design speeds to increase capacity. While it may seem counterintuitive,
         roadway capacity can actually be higher at slower speeds, since vehicles do not
         need as much spacing.
    9    Access. There should be safe pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle crossings of
         Highway 99 at 1/4th-mile intervals and right in/right out access every 1/8th mile.
         This spacing limits access enough to ensure adequate traffic movement, while
         also allowing for safe connectivity between planned growth areas of Gridley.
         Intersections are shown on the Circulation Diagram at South Avenue, Road J,
         Road H, Road G, and Ord Ranch Road in the Planned Growth Area. Right in,
         right out access points are shown at Hinamin Drive and Road I. Direct access for
         properties to Highway 99 in the Planned Growth Area will not be allowed, and
         medians should be used to control access and limit conflict points.
    9    Aesthetics. Existing orchard trees and other vegetation should be preserved on
         each side of the Highway. Landscaped, earthen berms west of Highway 99 will
         provide pleasant, rural aesthetics for travelers entering from the north, as well as
         noise reduction and air pollution buffering for homes in the Planned Growth
         Area. Overhead utility lines along the Highway 99 corridor should be
         undergrounded, as funding is available. Please refer to the Open Space and
         Community Character Elements for more details on the design approach along
         Highway 99 in the Planned Growth Area.
5  Based on the latest Butte County Association of Governments (BCAG) estimates. BCAG is
   updating its traffic model as of the writing of this General Plan.
                                       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                    9
                                                                               CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                           2030 General Plan
    9    Bicycle/Pedestrian Path and Drainage. West of the Caltrans right-of-way, and
         behind the landscaped earthen berms will be a naturalized drainage corridor and a
         pedestrian/bicycle pathway. See the Open Space Element for more details.
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN
STANDARDS
Bicycling is not only a popular form of recreation, but also an increasingly popular
method of travel throughout the region. With a flat topography, mild climate, and
compact development footprint, Gridley is well-suited for biking and walking. Compact
development patterns, mixing of land uses, and street design that make biking and
walking safe and enjoyable are prerequisites for pedestrian and bicycle access and use.
While other elements of this General Plan address land use patterns and community
design to support bicycle and pedestrian travel, this Element focuses on, and describes
bicycle and pedestrian improvements that support bicycling and walking.
The City will provide the opportunity for pedestrians and bicyclists to reach destinations
around town along city streets, as well as bicycle and pedestrian paths that are separated
from the street network. Selected bicycle routes will also connect Gridley with other
communities.
Exhibit Circulation-2 illustrates general locations of the City’s bicycle and pedestrian
system.6 This network will connect Gridley’s residential areas with important
destinations, such as schools, parks, jobs, and Downtown.
Most streets in Gridley can serve as Class III bicycle routes—streets that are shared by
bicyclists and vehicles with bicycle signage to make drivers aware. These routes are not
shown in Exhibit Circulation-2, which focuses on existing and future bike lanes and bike
paths. Bike lanes are also called Class II bike routes, whereas bike paths are also called
Class I bike routes.
6
   The Bicycle and Pedestrian Diagram and the bicycle standards presented in this section
   incorporate information from the City’s 2003 Bicycle Plan.
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                              10

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                      Exhibit Circulation-2
                                       Bicycle Circulation
                                            Diagram
                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                           11
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TYPES OF BICYCLE ROUTES
    9   Class I Bicycle Path: Provides a separated                                                 A Class I Bicycle Lane provides a 
                                                                                                   separated right‐of‐way for the 
        right-of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles                                             exclusive use of bicycles and 
        and pedestrians with minimal cross flow. Bike                                              pedestrians. 
        and pedestrian paths provide both transportation
        and recreational benefits.
                                                             Source: EDAW, 2007.
    9   Class II Bicycle Lane: Provides a striped lane                                                   A Class II Bicycle Lane 
        for one-way bicycle travel on a street or highway.                                               provides a striped lane 
        Bike lanes are usually five feet wide and are                                                    for bicycle travel along a 
        recommended on streets that connect to popular
        destinations. Bike lanes provide higher levels of
        riding comfort for cyclists compared to Class III
        routes. They also have the additional benefits of
        calming traffic, increasing vehicle sight distances,
        and increasing the distance between cars and
        pedestrians.                                         Source: City of Gridley. 2003 Bicycle Plan.
    9   Class III Bicycle Route: Provides for shared use                                                 A Class III Bicycle Route 
        among pedestrian and motorists. Class III routes                                                 provides for shared use 
        are used where street volume or design does not                                                  among pedestrians 
        allow bike lanes. Marked routes serve as                                                         motorists.
        connectors between other bike facilities or
        provide direction to destinations. Route signage
        heightens drivers’ awareness of bicycles.
                                                             Source: City of Gridley. 2003 Bicycle Plan.
                                   CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                             13

                                                                               CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                           2030 General Plan
REGIONAL BICYCLE CONNECTIONS
The City anticipates connections with surrounding cities and nearby recreation areas. In
the future, bicycle routes should connect Gridley to Biggs, Oroville, and Colusa. To the
west, routes will connect with the Sacramento River, Gray Lodge and other recreation
areas. To the east, routes will connect with the Thermalito Afterbay, the Feather River,
and other recreational areas. Completing these regional bikeway connections will require
coordination with the County, BCAG, and nearby jurisdictions.
Potential connections to Biggs could occur along the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way
and the extension of Washington Street northward into the Biggs Planning Area. Bike
lanes could also be extended northward into the Biggs Planning Area. Despite previous
plans that have called for bicycle facilities along Highway 99 and West Biggs-Gridley
Road, this Element does not identify these alignments, due to safety considerations.
Potential connections to Oroville could occur east of Gridley along Larkin Road and the
Feather River, where future bike lanes have been anticipated.7 Oroville plans non-paved
multi-use recreational trails along Larkin Road and Highway 99 in the southeastern
extremity of the City’s Study Area.8
Obermeyer Avenue and Ord Ranch Road could provide good connections to Larkin
Road, which has been planned as a bicycle route. However, these street profiles are likely
too narrow to accommodate bike lanes. The only other option presently for bike lanes is
East Gridley Road.
7
   Caltrans District 3 Office of Regional and Transit Planning. December 2003. Butte County
   Association of Governments. Countywide Bikeway Master Plan for Butte County. 1998.
8
   City of Oroville. 2030 General Plan.
                                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                14

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
LEVEL OF SERVICE
The following is a description of the City’s level of service (LOS) standards and context
to help the reader understand these standards. LOS is a measure of congestion and will be
used for traffic impact analysis, and the planning, scheduling, funding, and
implementation of street improvements.
LOS is a way of describing perceived traffic flow, measured primarily at the intersection
of two or more streets where there are traffic controls (stop signs, signal lights, etc.). The
most common way to express LOS is by assigning a letter from “A” to “F.” LOS “A”
represents free flow conditions, while LOS “F” represents the most congested traffic
conditions (long lines at intersections to total gridlock). Please refer to Table
Circulation-2 for Level of Service definitions used in Gridley.
The City will use LOS D as the goal for street segments, as measured on a daily basis
(average daily trips).9 The City’s goal for intersections during the peak-hour level is also
LOS D.10 The application of this LOS standard will balance the need to provide
convenient vehicular travelways during peak hours of demand with the desire to
accommodate pedestrian and bicycle access. The City may elect to exceed this LOS
standard, considering trade-offs with other community planning and environmental goals
and policies.
9
    Street “segments” are the parts of streets between intersections.
10
    Level of service for roadway segments is measured according to the number of average daily
    trips (ADT), whereas the level of service at intersections depends on the amount of traffic
    during the peak periods of demand.
                                       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                  15

                                                                                                                                          CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                                                                      2030 General Plan
                                                                   Table Circulation-2
                                                                Level of Service Definition
                                        Signalized Intersection                                 Unsignalized Intersection
                                                                         Avg. Delay /                               Avg. Delay /
  Level of                                                                 Vehicle                                     Vehicle
  Service                            Description                          (seconds)           Description            (seconds)         Roadway (Daily)
    "A"     Uncongested operations, all queues clear in a single-           < 10.0    Little or no delay.                < 10    Completely free flow.
            signal cycle.
    "B"     Uncongested operations, all queues clear in a single         10.0 - 20.0  Short traffic delays.             10-15    Free flow, presence of
            cycle.                                                                    Delay                                      other vehicles noticeable.
    "C"     Light congestion, occasional backups on critical             20.0 - 35.0  Average traffic delays.          15 - 25   Ability to maneuver and
            approaches.                                                               Delay                                      select operating speed
                                                                                                                                 affected.
    "D"     Significant congestions of critical approaches but           35.0 - 55.0  Long traffic delays.             25 - 35   Unstable flow, speeds,
            intersection functional. Cars required to wait through                    Delay                                      and ability to maneuver
            more than one cycle during short peaks. No long                                                                      restricted.
            queues formed.
    "E"     Severe congestion with some long standing queues on          55.0 - 80.0  Very long traffic delays,        35- 50    At or near capacity, flow
            critical approaches. Blockage of intersection may                         failure, extreme                           quite unstable.
            occur if traffic signal does not provide for protected                    congestion.
            turning movements. Traffic queue may block nearby                         Delay
            intersection(s) upstream of critical approach(es).
    "F"     Total breakdown, stop-and-go operation.                         > 80.0    Intersection blocked by            > 50    Forced flow, breakdown.
                                                                                      external causes.
Source: 2000 Highway Capacity Manual
                                                                   CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                              16
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
LOS E is considered acceptable by the City for
Highway 99 and intersections with Highway 99.
The City will consult with Caltrans to achieve
LOS E along the State Highway, considering
physical constraints and traffic-calming objectives.
Some communities use LOS “C” as their
objective to which streets are designed. LOS
“C” represents light congestion at intersections
during the peak hour, with occasional line-up of
cars that is usually cleared at each signal cycle.
Some communities use peak traffic volume and
LOS as the primary basis for designing their
streets. When peak-hour LOS is used as a
primary basis for designing streets and related
improvements, this can create and perpetuate a
system that focuses on expanding street capacity
to address growing peak-hour traffic congestion
as a community grows. Although adding street
capacity is sometimes the simplest reaction to
traffic congestion, larger streets can create
problems for pedestrians and bicyclists and
encourage even more automobile use. Large
streets bring noise and air pollution, divide
communities, and make other means of travel
more difficult.
To accommodate LOS C with buildout of the
General Plan would require wider streets than
exist throughout much of the City. These wider
streets would create longer crossing distances
for pedestrians and bicyclists. Developing a
street system to accommodate LOS C during the
two most congested hours of the day would be
expensive – not only to develop, but also to
maintain.
For these reasons and those discussed
previously, the City will use a LOS D standard.
                                                       Source: EDAW, 2008.
                                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                              17

                                                                              CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                           2030 General Plan
GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES
Following are Gridley’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies related to
circulation. These are organized according to key circulation issues: complete streets;
transit service; connectivity; mobility for all ages; parking; and, local economy.
COMPLETE STREETS
Complete streets are those designed to accommodate multiple travel modes. This means
that streets would have not only travel lanes for vehicles, but also room for bicycles,
sidewalks, street trees, and bus stops and pull-out lanes (along bus routes).
Streets with wide travel lanes and long pedestrian crossing distances favor automobile
movements at the expense of walking and bicycling. Intersections with a large turning
radius enable higher speeds around corners, presenting safety challenges for pedestrians.
In areas near apartments, schools, and shops, where pedestrian and bicycle activity is
anticipated, safety and convenience can be improved by using narrower travel lanes,
wider sidewalks, and smaller turning radii.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to complete streets
include:
    9    Our streets, neighborhoods, and civic spaces should provide many gathering
         places where we meet up with our friends and neighbors.
    9    Trees shade us, clean our air, and are pleasing to the eye. A complete urban tree
         canopy that provides a pleasant and attractive streetscape is essential to our
         community’s character and quality of life.
    9    The community should continue to invest in streetscape, infrastructure
         improvements, and other programs downtown that will encourage property
         owners to invest and re-invest in the area.
    9    All of our neighborhoods should be connected to downtown Gridley with safe
         and convenient pedestrian and bicycle routes.
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                               18

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
    9   We should invest in, and support improvements along Highway 99 that draw
        visitors downtown.
    9   We will design our community so that people can walk, bicycle, or use public
        transit if they cannot, or choose not to drive.
    9   Many of our seniors cannot drive, or simply prefer not driving. We will design
        our community so that our seniors can access shopping and health care without
        reliance on cars.
    9   Children in Gridley should be able to safely and conveniently walk to school.
    9   For safe and convenient travel, we need short blocks, connectivity, frequent
        through streets, extension of the historic grid, and ample on- and off-street
        pedestrian and bicycle pathways.
    9   Streetscapes can be inviting, pleasant places to spend time, and these places
        should be designed with people in mind, not strictly to accommodate vehicles.
    9   We believe that the entire community will benefit from improving the Highway
        99 corridor to create an active, pedestrian-friendly area where trees, well-
        designed buildings, and street furniture are the dominant visual features.
    9   We need adequate parkland, additional trails, enhanced recreational programs,
        and recreational facilities to promote the public health and livability of Gridley.
    9   It is important to recognize the high quality of farmland that surrounds the
        community by developing in a land-efficient manner that does not unnecessarily
        or prematurely convert agricultural lands to urban use.
 CIRCULATION GOAL 1:        To ensure that new development accommodates safe and
                            pleasant routes for pedestrians, bicyclists, and drivers.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 1.1     The City’s bicycle network will be safe, accessible, attractive, and
                            convenient.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 1.2     In areas where high pedestrian traffic is anticipated, such as
                            Neighborhood Centers and commercial areas, new developments
                            should have relatively lower curb radii at street intersections to
                            slow traffic, per City standards.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 1.3     In areas with high pedestrian traffic, new developments will install
                            and dedicate streets with lane widths that encourage slower traffic
                            speeds to increase pedestrian safety, per City standards.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 1.4     In areas with high pedestrian traffic, new developments will install
                            and dedicate relatively wide sidewalks that encourage pedestrian
                            use, per City standards.
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                               19

                                                                              CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                          2030 General Plan
CIRCULATION POLICY 1.5 New development shall construct and dedicate, and/or participate
                       in fair-share funding of, an integrated system of streets, sidewalks,
                       and on- and off-street bicycle/pedestrian facilities, in compliance
                       with City standards.
CIRCULATION POLICY 1.6 Off-street bicycle and pedestrian pathways will be designed to
                       promote visibility and a feeling of security for users.
CIRCULATION POLICY 1.7 New development shall provide secure bicycle storage facilities in
                       appropriate locations.
CIRCULATION POLICY 1.8 New developments will fund their fair-share of area-wide and City-
                       wide transportation facilities.
CIRCULATION POLICY 1.9 A City-approved transportation impact study is required for
                       proposed multi-family residential developments of more than 150
                       dwelling units, proposed single-family residential developments of
                       more than 100 dwelling units, and nonresidential developments
                       proposing to add more than 10,000 square feet of building space.
                       The City may, as appropriate, exclude infill and affordable housing
                       projects from this requirement.
CIRCULATION POLICY     Traffic studies prepared for Gridley projects will be sensitive to the
1.10                   trip-reducing characteristics of higher-density housing
                       development, affordable housing, and mixed-use development.
Circulation            The City will revise its Public Works Construction Standards to
Implementation         distinguish between Major Collector, Minor Collector, and Local
Strategy 1.1           Streets. Street Design Criteria will be revised for consistency with
                       this Circulation Element. The City will consider reducing the
                       minimum curb return radius, while also considering also the needs
                       of service and emergency vehicles, as follows: 15 to 20 feet for
                       Local Streets, 20 or 25 feet for Minor Collectors, and 25 to 30 feet
                       for Major Collectors. The City will also revise its standards for
                       minimum lane widths for Local Streets to 10 feet and for Minor
                       Collectors to 11 feet.
Circulation            The City will prepare a Nexus Study and update the Impact Fee
Implementation         Schedule to address transportation funding needs, consistent with
Strategy 1.2           this General Plan. The City will ensure that developments
                       contribute their fair share to transportation improvements,
                       including the Highway 99 bypass; improvements to the West
                       Liberty Road/Highway 99 intersection; traffic circles, landscaped
                       medians, and/or parallel parking on wider existing City streets; and
                       other needs identified in the 2030 General Plan update, as
                       appropriate.
                       Transportation impact fees should be structured to best represent
                       that actual level of impact of new development. Residential
                       development impact fees will consider density, the size, and
                       number of bedrooms of residential units in establishing equitable
                       per unit fees. Fees per residential unit will be lower for higher-
                                CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                           20
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                        density projects (on a per-unit basis) and projects with fewer
                        bedrooms, since these types of projects generate fewer trips (per
                        unit). Fair-share commercial traffic impact fees will take into
                        account whether the commercial project is located and designed to
                        attract drivers, or whether it is oriented toward pedestrians. For
                        example, large-scale retail projects adjacent to Highway 99 would
                        have higher traffic generation rates and relatively higher impact
                        fees (per square foot). Smaller-scale retail and service
                        establishments Downtown and integrated into neighborhoods that
                        are designed to promote pedestrian, transit, and bicycle access will
                        have relatively lower impact fees (per square foot).
 Circulation            The City will update the Bicycle Plan to incorporate the Planned
 Implementation         Growth Area and implement policies of the updated 2030 General
 Strategy 1.3           Plan. The City will incorporate connections to existing and planned
                        regional pedestrian/bicycle routes shown on plans adopted by Butte
                        County. The City will provide potential connections with the City
                        of Biggs and will incorporate planned connections shown on plans
                        adopted by the City of Biggs. The City will consult with BCAG,
                        the County, Butte County Air Quality Management District, and
                        other agencies to obtain funding for improvements described in the
                        Bicycle Plan.
 Circulation            Traffic impact reports for Gridley projects will conform to the
 Implementation         policies in this Circulation Element. When calculating traffic
 Strategy 1.4           impacts of development projects, traffic analyses will use models
                        that are sensitive to lower trip-generating characteristics of higher
                        residential densities, mixing homes and destinations in proximity to
                        each other, projects with reduced parking, and other applicable land
                        use planning and site design techniques that reduce travel demand.
 CIRCULATION GOAL 2:    To retrofit existing development for increased pedestrian,
                        bicycle, and transit access.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 2.1 The City will explore opportunities to install traffic circles,
                        landscaped medians, and extended curbs (bulb-outs) on wider
                        existing City streets within the existing City to calm traffic and
                        provide a more pleasant pedestrian environment. Streets wider than
                        45 feet, curb-to-curb, could accommodate these improvements.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 2.2 As funding is available, the City will invest in pedestrian, bicycle,
                        and transit facilities Downtown, such as bus stops, shade trees,
                        textured crosswalks, street furniture, pedestrian lighting, water
                        features, and pedestrian-oriented signage.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 2.3 The City will enhance pedestrian and bicycle access to and from
                        Downtown, as feasible.
                                 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                             21
                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
  CIRCULATION POLICY 2.4    The City will seek funding for pedestrian and bicycle improvement
                            projects in developed areas within current City limits and will
                            incorporate these projects into the City’s Capital Improvements
                            Programming.
  CIRCULATION POLICY 2.5    Development adjacent to Highway 99 between West Liberty Road
                            and Ord Ranch Road shall include wide, separated sidewalks, and
                            shade trees, per City standards.
  Circulation               The City will prepare a plan for pedestrian improvements along
  Implementation            Highway 99, with a focus on the area north of West Liberty Road
  Strategy 2.1              and south of Ord Ranch Road. This plan will describe
                            improvements, including sidewalks, landscaping, street trees, street
                            furniture, and other amenities, as appropriate. Sidewalks should be
                            relatively wide along this stretch of Highway 99 – between 6 and
                            10 feet in width. If appropriate, this improvement plan may become
                            a part of the City’s Public Works Construction Standards and/or
                            Capital Improvements Programming.
  Circulation               Following the General Plan update, the City will consult with
  Implementation            BCAG and Caltrans, as necessary, to synchronize traffic signals
  Strategy 2.2              within the City, as funding allows. The City will consider
                            signalization as a way to improve traffic flow on congested routes
                            without adding vehicle lanes, as well as a way to avoid congestion
                            on City streets during General Plan buildout.
TRANSIT SERVICE
Butte County Association of Governments’ (BCAG) B-Line provides bus service to the
Gridley area. The Gridley Golden Feather Flyer, which is operated by the City, provides
on-call service to seniors (62 and over) and persons with disabilities. Gridley has limited
transit service to other communities at present. However, BCAG routinely updates its
long-range transit plan. The 2030 Gridley General Plan can provide an opportunity for
BCAG to re-evaluate its long-range transit planning as it relates to the Gridley area.
BCAG is currently focused on increasing transit service, particularly between Butte
County communities. Future opportunities may exist to provide access to communities
outside the County. BCAG bus lines could link with other transit providers to allow
transfer service outside the County. Connections to the Yuba City Transit Center would
link Butte County communities with those in the Sacramento area.
With appropriate land use and transportation planning, and effective communication
between the City and BCAG, future residents could greatly benefit from more convenient
transit access to other Butte County communities and beyond. The City’s approach to
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                22

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
land use planning presented in this General Plan provides substantial support for
expanded transit service. Neighborhood Centers serve as nodes of density and
development intensity in the Planned Growth Area that can provide support for transit
service. The City’s focus on infill and redevelopment Downtown and along Highway 99
also promotes a compact development pattern that can support transit.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to transit service
include:
    9    We will design our community so that people can walk, bicycle, or use public
         transit if they cannot, or choose not to drive.
    9    Many of our seniors cannot drive, or simply prefer not driving. We will design
         our community so that our seniors can access shopping and health care without
         reliance on cars.
    9    Our community should grow without having traffic, air quality, and noise
         problems that would sacrifice our small-town character. In the long run, this
         requires pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit to be considered in land use and
         transportation planning on an equal footing with vehicular travel.
 CIRCULATION GOAL 3:         To provide Gridley residents and employees with convenient
                             and predictable transit access.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 3.1      The City will consult with BCAG and other local transit operators
                             to provide more convenient and predictable service throughout
                             Gridley, including the design and location of transit stops and other
                             facilities along transit routes.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 3.2      The City will consult with BCAG to prioritize transit access
                             serving retail, service, and employment centers along Highway 99,
                             Downtown destinations, and Neighborhood Centers in the Planned
                             Growth Area.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 3.3      The City will support transit access to and from locations within
                             Gridley and better connections for Gridley residents and workers to
                             destinations elsewhere in the County and beyond.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 3.4      New development shall construct and dedicate or otherwise
                             accommodate transit facilities consistent with transit agency
                             planning and standards.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 3.5      The City will encourage and provide incentives to encourage local
                             businesses to support transit and create their own travel demand
                             management programs.
                                      CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                 23

                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                2030 General Plan
 CIRCULATION POLICY 3.6     The City will consult with BCAG regarding possible sponsorship
                            of bus routes for future large employers.
CONNECTIVITY
“Connectivity” describes the degree to which there are multiple routes to serve the same
origins and destinations. The traditional grid street pattern is one approach for ensuring a
highly-connected neighborhood. Gridley was originally organized around a grid street
system. Such a street layout is an ideal design to allow for many ways to travel
throughout a community. However, modifications to the grid pattern could also provide a
highly-connected transportation network (Exhibit Circulation-3). In general, a highly
connected street pattern would have:
    9   A dense system of parallel routes, both east-west and north-south, with many
        streets providing through connections;
    9   Few cul-de-sacs, dead-ends, and looped streets;
    9   Frequent intersections; and,
    9   Frequent points of access.
Connected Street Network (Allowed).                         Circuitous Street Network (Not Allowed). 
Exhibit Circulation-3                          Connected versus Circuitous Street Networks
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                               24

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The General Plan is designed to improve and ensure transportation connectivity. Highly
connected streets are convenient for pedestrians, bicyclists, and drivers; they reduce
travel times for emergency responders; and, they increase service efficiencies, such as for
trash collection.
Because the street network is among the most extensive and expensive of the City’s
public infrastructure, Gridley will place special focus on efficiencies and best practices in
construction and maintenance of city streets. The City will attempt to minimize both the
construction and operational costs of streets to promote efficiency of public infrastructure
and service delivery. With a highly-connected street network, traffic is dispersed and it is
less likely that any single street will have high traffic volumes. With lower traffic
volumes, Gridley’s streets can be smaller, more pedestrian-friendly, more pleasant public
spaces. With a relatively narrow profile, streets can be less expensive to construct and
maintain.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to connectivity
include:
     9   Great small towns promote a feeling of connection among residents. New
         development should enhance this sense of connectivity. We should remove
         physical, economic, and social barriers that prevent us from being connected,
         whenever possible.
     9   All of our neighborhoods should be connected to downtown Gridley with safe
         and convenient pedestrian and bicycle routes.
     9   For safe and convenient travel, we need short blocks, connectivity, frequent
         through streets, extension of the historic grid, and ample on- and off-street
         pedestrian and bicycle pathways.
  CIRCULATION GOAL 4:       To improve connectivity in existing developed parts of Gridley.
  CIRCULATION POLICY 4.1    The City will seek ways to better connect existing neighborhoods
                            with Downtown.
  CIRCULATION POLICY 4.2    The City will increase connectivity in the Highway 99 corridor by
                            requiring new east-west and north-south connections in new
                            developments, to the maximum extent feasible.
  CIRCULATION POLICY 4.3    To reduce congestion and increase safety, new development
                            adjacent to Highway 99 should have multiple access to local streets
                            rather than direct access to the Highway.
                                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                25

                                                                                     CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                 2030 General Plan
  CIRCULATION POLICY 4.4      Infill and redevelopment projects should accommodate safe and
                              convenient transit, pedestrian, and bicycle connections to existing
                              employment areas, such as Downtown and the Gridley Industrial
                              Park, to the maximum extent feasible.11
  Circulation                 The City will explore options to improve transportation
  Implementation              connectivity and infrastructure availability in the southeastern
  Strategy 4.1                portion of the City’s Sphere of Influence (SOI). The City will
                              follow the 2030 General Plan update with a long-range planning
                              process to address the lack of connectivity and access. The City
                              may use a specific plan process (as provided by Sections 65450-
                              65457 of the State Government Code), a street system master plan,
                              or some other planning measure(s). In this portion of Gridley’s
                              Sphere of Influence, there are parcels with split zoning and General
                              Plan designations, parcels with inadequate transportation access,
                              and areas without adequate drainage and wastewater infrastructure
                              (see Exhibit Circulation-4). Pedestrian connectivity to destinations
                              throughout the rest of the City is lacking in much of this area.
                              Access improvements for the City’s Industrial Park may require
                              changes in road alignments in this southeastern portion of Gridley.
                              Any road re-alignment should be accompanied by access
                              improvements in this part of the City. At this time, the City does
                              not anticipate that this special planning effort in the southeastern
                              portion of the SOI will involve land use designation changes. If
                              future planning efforts change allowable land use, or if specific
                              projects are proposed, this would be subject to the California
                              Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
11
    The Gridley Industrial Park includes properties east and west of the railroad designated for
    Industrial development in the southern portion of the City. Generally, the Gridley Industrial
    Park includes properties south of Little Avenue and south of Archer Avenue, west of Highway
    99, and east of Losser Avenue.
                                       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                  26

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                      Exhibit Circulation-4
                                      Southeast Plan Area
                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                           27
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 CIRCULATION GOAL 5:    To provide highly connected new neighborhoods and
                        employment areas.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.1 New streets shall be arranged in a grid or other highly connected
                        pattern so that pedestrians, bicyclists, and drivers have multiple,
                        direct routes to nearby destinations.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.2 New neighborhoods shall be highly connected internally, highly
                        connected with adjacent new neighborhoods, and highly connected
                        with adjacent existing neighborhoods.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.3 New developments shall provide stubbed street connections to
                        adjacent areas planned for development. The minimum interval for
                        connections to adjacent planned development areas is 600 feet.
                        This 600-foot interval standard does not apply to areas adjacent to
                        the railroad, Highway 99, or other barriers to connectivity beyond
                        the control of the applicant.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.4 The maximum average block length for City streets in new
                        developments is 450 feet, unless unusual existing physical
                        conditions warrant an exemption. The maximum block length in
                        new developments is 660 feet. “Block length,” for the purpose of
                        this policy, is the distance between four-way intersection
                        centerlines. Block length can also be measured along the one leg of
                        a three-way intersection that terminates into a cross street. Areas
                        designated for Industrial and Agricultural Industrial development
                        are exempt from this policy.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.5 New commercial developments should divide larger blocks in half
                        with small private streets with vehicular lanes, sidewalks, and street
                        trees, where feasible (see Exhibit Circulation-5).
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.6 In the instances where the City allows new cul-de-sacs, pedestrian
                        and bicycle access through cul-de-sacs is required, with appropriate
                        facilities and lighting installed to ensure safety and security.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.7 New developments shall accommodate safe and convenient transit,
                        pedestrian, and bicycle connections to and from new employment
                        areas, such as Agricultural Industrial designated lands in the
                        Planned Growth Area
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.8 The City will explore the feasibility of expanding culverts under
                        the railroad in the Planned Growth Area to provide safe pedestrian
                        under crossings.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 5.9 The City will proactively communicate with BCAG and the City of
                        Biggs in planning and funding of an overcrossing of the Union
                        Pacific railroad line between the two cities, if feasible.
 CIRCULATION POLICY     Gridley will consult with BCAG, nearby cities, Butte County, and
 5.10                   Caltrans to develop alternative north-south routes in southern Butte
                        County to address existing and anticipated future congestion along
                        Highway 99.
                                 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                             29

                                                                              CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                          2030 General Plan
 Internal private 
 streets – sometimes 
 called “paseos” – 
 should be used to 
 break up larger block 
 sizes in areas 
 designated for 
 commercial 
 development. 
Exhibit Circulation-5                                   Commercial Block Size and Paseos
 CIRCULATION POLICY     The City supports regional planning and funding of a Highway 99
 5.11                   bypass in the Mead Avenue corridor. The City will not allow urban
                        development or installation of infrastructure in this area that would
                        preclude construction of the bypass.
 CIRCULATION POLICY     The City will communicate with BCAG and Caltrans to ensure that
 5.12                   the design of Highway 99 north of Standish Lane is consistent with
                        the guidelines presented in this Circulation Element.
 CIRCULATION POLICY     The City will consult with the Butte County Association of
 5.13                   Governments and the California Department of Transportation to
                        ensure continued consistency between transportation plans and
                        programs and the 2030 General Plan.
 Circulation            The City will continue to communicate with Caltrans (and the
                        California Transportation Commission), the Butte County
 Implementation         Association Governments (BCAG), Butte County, and nearby
 Strategy 5.1           cities to plan and fund a bypass for Highway 99 using lands held
                        currently by the Caltrans and intended for this purpose. The City
                        will consult with BCAG to ensure this regional route is a part of
                        future regional transportation plans. The City will consult with
                        Caltrans and BCAG to prepare a Project Study Report or other
                        preliminary documentation that analyzes the best options for the
                        future alignment and design of this facility, as well as the
                        appropriate regional funding sources.
 Circulation            The City will revise its Public Works Construction Standards, as
 Implementation         necessary, to ensure connectivity within and between
                        neighborhoods. The City will revise its Public Works Construction
 Strategy 5.2           Standards consistent with policy in the Circulation Element, such
                        as that related to block size. The City will consider deleting any
                        language that would require or encourage “T” intersections for
                        Local Streets, as opposed to more connected full intersections,
                        which are preferred.
                                 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                            30

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
MOBILITY FOR ALL AGES
Transportation planning that places too much emphasis on the private automobile can
adversely affect those without access to a car, or those that choose not to drive. In many
communities, auto-oriented land use and transportation would especially affect children
and seniors. Although access to multiple travel modes is addressed throughout this
Circulation Element, specific policies are provided in this section to highlight the City’s
commitment to safe, healthy, and convenient transportation for all ages.
Land use and transportation planning that encourages non-vehicular travel has important
public health benefits. Gridley can provide opportunities for healthy lifestyles if land use
patterns and transportation routes provide opportunities for children and adults to walk
and bike for daily needs and recreation. Air pollution can cause a variety of health
problems, including asthma, heart disease, lung disease, and cancer. In Butte County and
throughout California, mobile sources (such as vehicles) are the largest contributor to air
quality problems.12 Gridley can improve local air quality and reduce its contribution to
areawide air quality problems by providing land use patterns and travel routes that allow
more trips to occur on bike, by walking, or by public transit. Previous sections of this
Circulation Element, in tandem with the Land Use and Community Character and Design
elements are structured to ensure multiple methods of travel within Gridley.
By reducing barriers to travel and ensuring safe routes to school, parents in Gridley can
feel comfortable allowing their children to walk or bike to school. This will not only
reduce potential traffic congestion (by reducing school-related vehicle trips) but also
provide more opportunity for daily physical activity for Gridley’s children. This General
Plan identifies potential locations for new schools in the Planned Growth Area that are
central to the neighborhoods they could serve. These school sites are in Neighborhood
Centers, area that will be well-served by bicycle and pedestrian facilities. Although the
City has provided for school sites within the Planned Growth Area, the Gridley Unified
School District is charged with developing new school sites. It is important that City land
use planning and School District facilities planning is coordinated so that new school
sites are central to the neighborhoods they serve and have safe routes to and from the
surrounding neighborhood.
Gridley has a substantial senior population. It is important that this General Plan be
implemented with the full range of travel needs in mind, including senior travel needs.
Although most people have access to a private automobile, seniors, in particular, are in
need of other options, such as fixed-route transit service or paratransit service.
12
    California Air Resources Board. 2008 California Almanac of Emissions and Air Quality.
                                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                               31

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to safe, healthy, and
convenient transportation choices for all ages include:
    9  A livable community is one with parks, schools, shops, and other destinations
       that are oriented to our neighborhoods and designed for people, rather than
       oriented toward busy roadways and designed exclusively for auto access.
    9  All of our neighborhoods should be connected to downtown Gridley with safe
       and convenient pedestrian and bicycle routes.
    9  We will design our community so that people can walk, bicycle, or use public
       transit if they cannot, or choose not to drive.
    9  Many of our seniors cannot drive, or simply prefer not driving. We will design
       our community so that our seniors can access shopping and health care without
       reliance on cars.
    9  Children in Gridley should be able to safely and conveniently walk to school.
    9  For safe and convenient travel, we need short blocks, connectivity, frequent
       through streets, extension of the historic grid, and ample on- and off-street
       pedestrian and bicycle pathways.
    9  For safe and convenient travel, we need destinations, like schools, parks, and
       shops, to be oriented to, and blended in with our neighborhoods.
    9  Our community should grow without having traffic, air quality, and noise
       problems that would sacrifice our small-town character. In the long run, this
       requires pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit to be considered in land use and
       transportation planning on an equal footing with vehicular travel.
 CIRCULATION GOAL 6:       To provide healthy, safe, and convenient transportation choices
                           for our entire population, including our youth and seniors.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 6.1    The City will consult with Caltrans to ensure frequent, safe, and
                           convenient multi-modal crossing of Highway 99 in areas with
                           existing schools.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 6.2    The City will consult with the School District to improve safety
                           and pedestrian/bicycle access to and from existing school sites.
                           This could involve the installation of traffic calming devices, bike
                           lanes, sidewalk improvements, pedestrian crossing improvements
                           at intersections, and other improvements.
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                               32

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
  CIRCULATION POLICY 6.3     New developments will be required to accommodate new school
                             sites in the Planned Growth Area, per School District requirements,
                             that ensure safe routes for new school sites to and from the
                             surrounding neighborhood.
  CIRCULATION POLICY 6.4     The City will consider the transportation needs of seniors in
                             implementing transportation improvements. Areas of the City with
                             existing or proposed senior housing should be in proximity to,
                             and/or have non-vehicular transportation options to health care and
                             other needed services.
  Circulation                The City will continue to proactively identify regional, State, and
  Implementation             federal sources of funding to identify, plan, and develop
  Strategy 6.1               transportation improvements to ensure safe routes to school from
                             Gridley neighborhoods. The City has identified gaps in sidewalks
                             within the City, including areas serving local schools and
                             neighborhoods. As funding is available, the City will address gaps
                             in the pedestrian network between neighborhoods and local schools
                             in the existing City. As funding is available, the City will also
                             improve the safety of intersections with Highway 99 to provide
                             safer routes to schools east of the highway.
  Circulation                The City will continue to support the Gridley Golden Feather Flyer
  Implementation             and will consider expanding this service to meet future demand,
  Strategy 6.2               based surveys of Gridley’s local senior population as to specific
                             transportation needs. The City will consider a marketing campaign
                             to increase awareness and use of the Golden Feather Flyer.
PARKING
Gridley’s goals and policies for transportation will not be achievable without supportive
development patterns. Whether people choose to drive, walk, bicycle, or take transit
depends as much or more on the overall community design as it does the quality of
transportation facilities. For example, where land uses are segregated, densities are low,
and the distance between homes and daily destinations is great, people tend to drive more
and walk, bike, and use public transit less often. Please refer to the Land Use and
Community Character and Design elements of this General Plan for policies addressing
Gridley’s land use mix, development density, and design. This section provides polices
addressing parking-related aspects of community design.
Parking can add to distances between homes and destinations if too much parking is
proposed, or if the parking is not properly designed. Instead of placing large amounts of
surface parking in front of stores, for example, buildings can be constructed near the
street and sidewalk, with parking located behind or alongside buildings (Exhibit
Circulation-6).
                                      CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                33

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                       2030 General Plan
                                                            Left: Examples of acceptable 
                                                            parking arrangements. 
                                                            Parking should be provided on 
                                                            the street, behind proposed 
                                                            buildings, or on the side of 
                                                            proposed buildings. 
Exhibit Circulation-6                                                  Parking Placement
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to parking placement
include:
    9    A livable community is one with parks, schools, shops, and other destinations
         that are oriented to our neighborhoods and designed for people, rather than
         oriented toward busy roadways and designed exclusively for auto access.
    9    We will design our community so that people can walk, bicycle, or use public
         transit if they cannot, or choose not to drive.
                                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                              34

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
    9   Many of our seniors cannot drive, or simply prefer not driving. We will design
        our community so that our seniors can access shopping and health care without
        reliance on cars.
    9   For safe and convenient travel, we need destinations, like schools, parks, and
        shops, to be oriented to, and blended in with our neighborhoods.
 CIRCULATION GOAL 7:       To plan and design parking for safe and convenient bicycling,
                           walking, transit use, and vehicular access.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 7.1    Projects located in Neighborhood Centers and Downtown will have
                           reduced or eliminated off-street parking requirements, as
                           appropriate.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 7.2    New development should use shared parking to meet the City’s off-
                           street parking requirements, where appropriate.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 7.3    New development will provide on-street parking to meet parking
                           needs, reducing or avoiding the need for off-street parking, where
                           feasible.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 7.4    The City will discourage large, single-use surface parking lots,
                           particularly in Neighborhood Centers and Downtown.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 7.5    Where surface parking is proposed, it should be broken up and
                           distributed around different sides of the project site. Any surface
                           parking should be behind, or on the side of any proposed buildings.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 7.6    Shade trees shall be provided in any proposed surface parking lot
                           that, at maturity, will provide a minimum of 50% canopy coverage.
                           A ratio of at least one tree for every six parking spaces is
                           recommended, although 50% canopy coverage will require more of
                           some tree species and fewer of other species.
 Circulation               The City will revise the Off-Street Parking requirements in the
 Implementation            Zoning Ordinance consistent with Circulation Element policy. The
 Strategy 7.1              City will consider implementing maximum off-street parking
                           standards (in addition to minimum requirements, which are already
                           provided). The City will consider increasing flexibility in parking
                           requirements to increase shared use of parking between properties
                           with different parking demand peaking periods, use of on-street
                           parking spaces (instead of off-street) to meet parking requirements,
                           and other methods for reducing the need for construction of surface
                           parking. The City will consider additional parking reductions or
                           eliminating off-street parking requirements for projects located in
                           Neighborhood Centers. Downtown properties are already exempt
                           from parking requirements. Following this General Plan update, the
                           City will examine whether the area of Downtown exempt from off-
                           street parking should be expanded or whether the City should
                           require some amount of off-street parking or in-lieu fee for very
                           large projects Downtown.
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                               35

                                                                            CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
LOCAL ECONOMY
A well-designed circulation system that meets all travel needs is important to the local
economy. For example, Gridley residents can save on travel costs if the community is
designed to provide meaningful pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit options. Another
important transportation issue related to the local economy is goods movement. Existing
and future local businesses benefit from efficient materials and product delivery. This
includes both the receipt of materials and products for processing or sales in Gridley, as
well as shipping products from Gridley businesses for sales elsewhere.
The highest priority area for access improvements to facilitate goods movement is the
area between the Gridley Industrial Park and Highway 99. The California Public Utilities
Commission denied Gridley’s request for an additional at-grade crossing of the railroad
that would have provided one direct access point to the entire Gridley Industrial Park
area. Since the cost of an overcrossing is prohibitive, the City is exploring more feasible
alternatives, such as improvements to West Liberty Road and the intersection with
Highway 99 that would both improve access to the Gridley Industrial Park and ensure
traffic flow along the highway.
Most goods movement for Gridley businesses uses trucks. In the future, the City and
local industries might benefit from a rail spur for materials delivery and/or goods
shipment. Developing new rail shipping opportunities would require investment in
infrastructure and coordination with outside agencies. Local economic benefits should be
balanced with infrastructure costs and other factors.
Whether by rail or truck, adequate shipping routes should be provided in Gridley, while
avoiding residential areas, schools, and other noise-sensitive land uses.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles related to transportation
policy for local economic benefits include:
     9    The community should continue to invest in streetscape, infrastructure
          improvements, and other programs downtown that will encourage property
          owners to invest and re-invest in the area.
     9    We should invest in, and support improvements along Highway 99 that draw
          visitors downtown.
     9    We will design our community so that people can walk, bicycle, or use public
          transit if they cannot, or choose not to drive.
                                      CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                               36

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
    9   We believe that the entire community will benefit from improving the Highway
        99 corridor to create an active, pedestrian-friendly area where trees, well-
        designed buildings, and street furniture are the dominant visual features.
 CIRCULATION GOAL 8:      To provide efficient and effective freight systems that serve
                          Gridley’s businesses, while avoiding negative impacts to
                          residents.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 8.1   The City will consult with Caltrans, Butte County, the California
                          Highway Patrol, the California Public Utilities Commission, and the
                          Union Pacific Railroad to appropriately regulate the safe movement
                          of truck traffic and hazardous materials throughout the City.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 8.2   The City will restrict truck traffic to Highway 99, Magnolia
                          Avenue, West Biggs-Gridley Road, Ord Ranch Road, South
                          Avenue, East Gridley Road, West Liberty Road, and streets in
                          areas designated for Industrial and Agricultural Industrial
                          development (see Exhibit Circulation-7). Trucks may go by direct
                          route to and from restricted streets, where required for the purpose
                          of making pickups and deliveries of goods, but are otherwise
                          restricted to truck routes.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 8.3   The City will consult with the Public Utilities Commission and
                          Union Pacific Railroad regarding local rail spurs and the use of rail
                          for materials delivery and/or product shipping for Gridley industries.
 CIRCULATION POLICY 8.4   The City will work to improve access between Highway 99 and the
                          Gridley Industrial Park.
 Circulation              The City will communicate with Caltrans and Butte County
 Implementation           Association Governments (BCAG) on funding and planning of
                          access improvements to and from the Gridley Industrial Park.
 Strategy 8.1
                          Signalization, re-alignment of roadways, lane re-configurations,
                          and other improvements may be required. These improvements will
                          focus on the segment of West Liberty Road west of Highway 99
                          and the intersection of West Liberty Road and Highway 99.
                          Hollis Lane is currently offset from West Liberty Road, which
                          presents some challenges for intersection improvements.
                          Realignment of West Liberty Road to match Hollis Lane, or
                          providing alternative access to the Hollis Lane properties from
                          Highway 99 are options to be considered. The City will coordinate
                          with Caltrans and BCAG to prepare a Project Study Report or other
                          preliminary documentation that analyzes the best options for access
                          improvements and identifies appropriate funding sources. The City
                          will consider development of impact fees for benefitting parties to
                          offset the cost of access improvements.
 Circulation              The City shall consult with UPRR and PUC to monitor existing at
 Implementation           grade crossings and identify applicable strategies and funding for
                          improved at-grade crossings. The City shall work with Butte
 Strategy 8.2
                          County and the City of Biggs to identify funding for a new grade
                          separation on a South Avenue alignment.
                                   CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                              37

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
              38
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                      Exhibit Circulation-7
                                         Truck Routes
                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                           39
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                    I

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                 Page
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
CONTEXT ......................................................................................................................... 2 
   Form and Setting ......................................................................................................... 2 
   Parks ............................................................................................................................. 4 
   Agricultural Industries ................................................................................................ 5 
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS................................................................. 5 
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................ 5 
   Historic Gridley ........................................................................................................... 6 
   Neighborhoods ............................................................................................................. 9 
   Downtown ................................................................................................................... 18 
   Urban Landscapes and Streetscapes ........................................................................ 26 
   Highway 99 ................................................................................................................. 31 
   Commercial and Industrial Development ........................................................ 36 
   Gateways................................................................................................................... 43 
   Design Goal 1: Historic Gridley (Policies 1.1 through 1.5) ...................................... 6
   Design Goal 2: Neighborhoods (Policies 2.1 through 2.16) .................................... 11
   Design Goal 3: Neighborhoods (Policies 3.1 through 3.6) ...................................... 15
   Design Goal 4: Neighborhoods (Policies 4.1 through 4.5) ...................................... 17
   Design Goal 5: Downtown (Policies 5.1 through 5.12) ............................................ 19
   Design Goal 6: Downtown (Policies 6.1 through 6.3) .............................................. 24
   Design Goal 7: Urban Landscapes and Streetscapes (Policies 7.1 through 7.6)... 26
   Design Goal 8: Urban Landscapes and Streetscapes (Policies 8.1 through 8.8)... 27
   Design Goal 9: Urban Landscapes and Streetscapes (Policies 9.1 through 9.6)... 29
   Design Goal 10: Highway 99 (Policies 10.1 through 10.13) .................................... 33
   Design Goal 11: Highway 99 (Policies 11.1 through 11.9) ...................................... 37
   Design Goal 12: Large-Scale Development (Policies 12.1 through 12.15) ............ 40
   Design Goal 13: Large-Scale Development (Policies 13.1 through 13.4) .............. 42
                             COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                                I

                                                                                                     CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                               2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                       Page
EXHIBITS
  Design-1.  Orchards Surrounding Gridley ............................................................. 2 
  Design-2.  Community Design Context ................................................................... 3
  Design-3.  Agricultural Drainage Channel ............................................................. 4
  Design-4.  Manuel Vierra Park ............................................................................... 4
  Design-5.  Historic Hazel Hotel ............................................................................... 6
  Design-6.  Historic Residence along Hazel Street near Downtown ...................... 6
  Design-7.  New Home (left) Uses Historic Style, and Incorporates Materials
             and Scale of Surrounding Historic Homes. .......................................... 7
  Design-8.  Variety of Architectural Style, Size, and Floor Plans in Housing .... 11
  Design-9.  Home Design and Placement Allows Casual Surveillance of
             Street ...................................................................................................... 12
  Design-10. Residence on a Corner Lot Addresses both Street Frontages .......... 12
  Design-11. Fencing Color and Material Complements the Residential
             Structure. ............................................................................................... 12
  Design-12. Discouraged: Street Frontage Where Garage Dominates ................. 13
  Design-13. Preferred: Residential Frontage with Recessed Garage ................... 13
  Design-14. Small Front Yard Setback ................................................................... 13
  Design-15. Alley-Loaded Project ............................................................................ 13
  Design-16. Examples of Compact Single-Family Home Designs ......................... 14
  Design-17. Front Porches, Stoops, Windows, and Entrances are Visually
             Prominent from the Street ................................................................... 14
  Design-18. Outdoor Seating/Dining Area .............................................................. 16
  Design-19. Outdoor Public Gathering Places ........................................................ 16
  Design-20. Neighborhood Center with 360-degree Access from the
             Surrounding Neighborhood ................................................................. 17
  Design-21. Buildings Front onto Parks .................................................................. 18
  Design-22. Historic and Walkable Downtown Gridley ........................................ 19
  Design-23. Maintaining Setbacks, Facades, and Scale Downtown ...................... 21
  Design-24. Preferred Examples: Downtown Storefront Design and
             Streetscape ............................................................................................. 22
  Design-25. Outdoor Dining and Seating Areas ..................................................... 22
  Design-26. Angled Parking, Wide Sidewalks, and Shade Trees .......................... 23
  Design-27. Hanging, Wall, and Projecting Signs .................................................. 25
  Design-28. Shady Residential Street in Gridley .................................................... 26
  Design-29. Attractive Commercial Streetscape .................................................... 26
  Design-30. Residential Landscaping ...................................................................... 27
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                      II

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                         Page
   Design-31. Groundcover and Ornamental Plants as an Alternative to Turf
                Grass ...................................................................................................... 28
   Design-32. Preferred: Narrow Residential Street and Smaller Setbacks ........... 28
   Design-33. Discouraged: Excessively Wide Local Street and Larger Setback ... 28
   Design-34. Attractive and Low-maintenance Landscaping for Industrial
                Streetscapes ........................................................................................... 29
   Design-35. Attractive Streetscape Improvements – Benches, Trash
                Receptacles, Lighting Standards, Brick Sidewalk ............................. 29
   Design-36. Regularly Spaced Street Trees that Provide a Continuous
                Canopy ................................................................................................... 30
   Design-37. Urban Design Concepts for the Main Entrance to Downtown:
                Hazel Street ........................................................................................... 31
   Design-38. Trees, Separated Sidewalk ................................................................... 32
   Design-39. Multi-Story Buildings along Street Frontages Create a
                Pedestrian-friendly Streetscape ........................................................... 33
   Design-40. Buildings Close to the Front Property Line Enhance the
                Aesthetic Environment along Highway 99 ......................................... 34
   Design-41. Screening of Parking Areas from Highway 99 ................................... 35
   Design-42. Parking and Loading Area Provided in Back of Building. ............... 38
   Design-43. Parking Lot Shade Structure ............................................................... 38
   Design-44. Shaded Pedestrian Walkway ............................................................... 39
   Design-45. Shaded Street Furniture for Public Use.............................................. 39
   Design-46. Secure Bicycle Storage.......................................................................... 39
   Design-47. Windows, Wall Recesses, Mix of Color and Materials Break Up
                Wall Massing ......................................................................................... 40
   Design-48. Doors, Windows, and Awnings at Pedestrian Level .......................... 40
   Design-49. Varied Roofline ..................................................................................... 40
   Design-50. Identifiable, Pedestrian Scaled Entry ................................................. 41
   Design-51. High-Quality Building Materials ......................................................... 41
   Design-52. Attractive Lighting Standard that Directs Light Downward to
                Avoid Glare ........................................................................................... 41
   Design-53. Gateways ................................................................................................ 43
   Design-54. Gateway Sign ......................................................................................... 44
                      COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                       III

                                          CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                       2030 General Plan
     This page intentionally blank.
COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                   IV
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
INTRODUCTION
The Community Character and Design Element is intended to preserve and enhance
historic and other qualities of Gridley that contribute to its character and guide
development to establish those qualities in new neighborhoods. These qualities include
the layout, streets, and architecture of Gridley’s historic downtown and older
neighborhoods; the City’s compact, small-town character and sense of connection among
residents; the predominance of local businesses; the walkability of many neighborhoods
with short blocks; neighborhoods anchored by schools and parks; a diversity of housing,
tree-lined streets; and opportunities to enhance Highway 99 so that it looks and feels
more like a community street.
Under State Law (Planning and Zoning Law, Government Code §65000 et seq.)
community design is not a mandatory element of a General Plan. However, each
community may decide the importance of including policies for community character and
design in its general plan and the need for a separate, optional element to do so. Optional
general plan elements may be prepared to address issues of particular local importance.
During the 2030 General Plan update, Gridley citizens and decision makers have
determined that community design and character is essential to the local quality of life.
Gridley citizens expressed a strong desire for policies that will maintain and improve
physical appearance of their community.
City staff conducted special public outreach to specifically address character and design
issues. The results of this outreach showed strong community consensus for the goals and
policies contained in this Element. One of the overarching themes from the public
outreach was maintaining Gridley’s small-town character, even as the community grows.
While small-town character means different things to different people, there is consensus
on some basic elements. Extending the tree-lined, highly connected street network into
the Planned Growth Area is a major component. Preserving the distinct urban-rural edge
is also important. Consensus ideas related to Gridley’s character are presented as policy
in this Element.
The goals and policies in this Element provide guidance in the review of development
proposals and the investment of City funds for improvements to Downtown, Highway 99,
and older neighborhoods. The illustrations within this Element provide guidance for
urban design and site planning of projects proposed within the City of Gridley. The City
will use this Element to review development proposals for consistency with the General
Plan.
                        COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                             1

                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                          2030 General Plan
CONTEXT
There are several fundamental and important aspects of the City’s character that provide
context for the goals, policies, and implementation strategies in this Element. Following
is a summary of the City’s existing character, including the overall form
FORM AND SETTING
Gridley is one of several small agricultural towns located along railroad lines in the
Sacramento Valley. Gridley was first linked to other communities by the Sacramento
River, then later by the Central Pacific railroad when tracks were laid between Oregon
and California. It was at this time, during the 1870s, that Gridley’s community form
began to take shape. Gridley’s founder, George Gridley, was attracted to the area by its
open spaces and suitability for raising cattle, which he did on his 960-acre ranch west of
the City’s present day location. As gold mining opportunities faded at the turn of the 20th
century, the area became more important for its agriculture.
L.C. Stone, Gridley’s first postmaster, built his home and store in 1874. The
“Stoneblock” building was located on the southwest corner of Hazel and Virginia streets,
and was a landmark downtown for over 100 years. Subsequent businesses, such as Wells
Fargo & Company, were soon open for business and Downtown Gridley began to thrive.
Residential areas, such as the quaint “Silk Stocking Row” located along the eastern
entrance to Downtown, shaped the form and design of Gridley.
                                                The layout and character of Gridley today is
                                                defined by its small town setting within an
                                                agricultural region. Surrounded by orchards
                                                and field crops, Gridley has distinct edges as
                                                its urban area meets the neighboring
                                                agricultural lands and open spaces (Exhibit
                                                Design-1).
                                                The City is organized on a grid street pattern
                                                with large trees shading the homes that line
Exhibit Design‐1. Orchards Surrounding Gridley 
                                                street frontages. Commercial buildings were
                                                constructed with locally-made bricks that
formed a traditional downtown setting: two-story buildings located at the street frontages
with large store windows that allow pedestrians to see into the shops. Gridley’s
Downtown is surrounded on the east and west by historic residential areas. Newer
commercial development is located along Highway 99 (Exhibit Design-2).
                           COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                2

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Design‐2. Community Design Context  
In the early part of the 20th Century, following the passage of the first state highway
bond (1910), Route 3 (later named California State Highway Route 99) was constructed
from Sacramento north to the Oregon state line. Over time, with the favored
transportation mode changing from rail to the private automobile, businesses began to
locate adjacent to the new highway. This change in the dominant transportation mode
affected not only the spatial layout of the town, but also its design, with surface parking
lots becoming visually prominent, for example.
Through the decades and changes, Gridley has remained true to its historical roots and
retains its quaint and charming ambience. Concerned about increasing rural residential
development surrounding Gridley, community leaders worked with the County of Butte
in the 1980s to address the subdividing of surrounding farmland into one-acre and larger
lots intended primarily as residences. Although there are areas of smaller, county parcels
just outside the city limits, the town still remains distinct with well-defined edges.
Gridley has chosen to grow in a compact form to allow efficiency of essential services,
protect the city’s fiscal health, and protect viable agricultural lands surrounding the City.
Areas of new growth have been chosen as logical extensions of current development pattern.
                         COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                3

                                                                                CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                            2030 General Plan
The grid street pattern characteristic of Gridley (streets intersecting at right angles and
relatively small blocks) was used in most U.S. cities through the 1950s. Curvilinear street
patterns and cul-de-sacs became popular since the 1950s as more communities focused
on accommodating automobiles In recent years, the grid street pattern has been
reintroduced as a more pedestrian-friendly and traffic-calming design with many cities
encouraging, and in some cases, requiring a grid layout for new subdivisions. Gridley is
fortunate that the majority of the community is served by street system organized around
a grid. Short, walkable blocks with vertical curb and a parkway strip align many Gridley
streets and contribute to the small-town ambience
and overall character of the community.
Gridley is framed with linear corridors. In addition to
the railroad, other major corridors are State Highway
99, Spruce Street, West Biggs-Gridley Road,
Sycamore Street, Colusa Highway/East Gridley
Road, Hazel Street (as the entrance to Downtown),
and Little. Additionally, several irrigation and water
laterals traverse the community reinforcing the linear
pattern (Exhibit Design-3).                               Exhibit Design‐3. Agricultural Drainage 
                                                          Channel 
PARKS
                                            Gridley is proud of its local parks – Manuel
                                            Vierra Park (Exhibit Design-4) with its
                                            recreational hall, ballparks, picnic facilities and
                                            beautiful open spaces; the Nick Daddow Plaza
                                            adjacent to Downtown, the linear parks along
                                            the railroad tracks; and the Feather River Boat
                                            Ramp adjacent to the City sanitation plant.
                                            Also a new skateboard-water park is in the
                                            planning stages along the east side of the
                                            railroad tracks bordering Downtown.
Exhibit Design‐4. Manuel Vierra Park 
                                            As Gridley continues to grow, providing
additional parks and open space areas for public enjoyment is an important component of
the General Plan Update. Opportunities for open space and recreation use have been
identified within the new development area north of the current City boundary, adjacent
to the linear edges of the railroad right-of-way and along the irrigation and drainage
canals. These corridors can be designed for recreational use by pedestrians and bicyclists.
They also serve to link the community with green spaces rather than pavement. Parkland
is addressed in more detail in the Open Space Element.
                          COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                              4

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES
Agricultural industries are interwoven in the fabric of Gridley. As early as 1891,
surveying was conducted in the Gridley area to bring irrigation water to local farmers.
The Sutter-Butte Canal Company completed the irrigation project that allowed farmers to
irrigate pastures and diversify their crops. The growth of agriculture in Gridley was
accompanied by the development of agricultural industries that processed, packaged,
distributed, and marketed locally grown produce. The first fruit cannery was established
in Gridley in 1896. Fruit drying yards, additional cannery operations, and an expanded
range of crops characterized Gridley at the turn of the 20th century.
Agricultural industries, such as the Tri-Valley cannery and rice dryers, were conveniently
located along the railroad right-of-way. Some of these sites are now being used for
smaller-scale agricultural and related production and storage. Similar industrial uses
continue along the railroad from the cannery location north to Sycamore Street. In
addition to the railroad areas, agricultural-based industrial land is located on the north
edge of town, east of Highway 99.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER
ELEMENTS
The Community Character and Design Element works in tandem with the goals and
policies of the other elements of the General Plan, particularly Land Use and Circulation,
by providing a design framework to implement policies within those elements. This
Element describes preferred characteristics of development, and how buildings, streets,
and other improvements should be laid out, function, and relate to one another in the
broader neighborhood and community context.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION
Following are Gridley’s goals related to community character and design, policies that
will be implemented to achieve these goals, and implementation strategies.
                        COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                              5

                                                                               CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                           2030 General Plan
HISTORIC GRIDLEY
Unlike many cities that have lost much of their
historic character over time, Gridley has
maintained many architecturally and historically
important structures. Historic buildings contribute
to the small-town ambience and charm of the
community, and help establish community
identity. Many of the historic properties are
located along Hazel Street at the entrance to Exhibit Design‐5. Historic Hazel Hotel 
Downtown and also within Downtown. Some
structures, such as the Stone Block building, were
demolished in the latter half of the 20th century.
Examples of success stories include the
rehabilitation and reuse of the historic Hazel Hotel
(Exhibit Design-5). Several buildings with historic
value remain and provide an opportunity for reuse
and rehabilitation to reinforce the historic setting
of Downtown and surrounding residential districts
(Exhibit Design-6).                                   Exhibit Design‐6. Historic Residence along 
                                                      Hazel Street near Downtown 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to historic
preservation include:
    9    Gridley can grow without sacrificing the small-town character that we cherish.
    9    We believe that our long-term economic future greatly benefits from a unique,
         charming, small-town character.
    9    The City should take an active role in downtown revitalization, supporting
         existing business expansion, new business development, and housing, all
         consistent with downtown’s historic character.
    9    The City should continue to invest in, and improve existing neighborhoods, even
         as new neighborhoods are constructed.
                        COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                              6

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 DESIGN GOAL 1        To retain and improve Gridley’s historic buildings for ongoing
                      residential, retail, civic, and other uses and activities.
 DESIGN POLICY 1.1    The City will encourage the preservation, restoration, and
                      renovation of historic buildings.
 DESIGN POLICY 1.2    When historic buildings are rehabilitated, remodeled, and restored,
                      this work should be consistent with original proportions,
                      dimensions, and other architectural elements, as required, to
                      maintain historic registry status, as applicable.
 DESIGN POLICY 1.3    The City’s approach to historic preservation will combine financial
                      and other incentives, regulatory relief, and guidelines for historic
                      preservation.
 DESIGN POLICY 1.4    New buildings should
                      incorporate elements of
                      architectural styles, scale
                      and massing, and other
                      design features of adjacent
                      or nearby historic buildings
                      (Exhibit Design-7).
                                                    Exhibit Design‐7. New Home (left) Uses 
                                                    Historic Style, and Incorporates Materials 
                                                    and Scale of Surrounding Historic Homes 
 DESIGN POLICY 1.5    The City will promote awareness of Gridley’s history and an
                      understanding of the economic and cultural benefits of historic
                      preservation.
 Design               The City will adopt a historic preservation program designed to
 Implementation       maintain the physical reminder’s of Gridley’s rich history. This
 Strategy 1.1         program may involve changes to various regulatory documents,
                      zoning district designations, capital improvements planning,
                      financial assistance (to the extent of available State and federal
                      funding), education and awareness, and other actions. The City will
                      seek an appropriate balance of incentives and development
                      guidelines so that historic preservation makes economic sense for
                      property owners and developers. The emphasis of the City’s
                      program will be on voluntary participation and education to
                      encourage historic preservation rather than mandatory regulation.
                      The City will encourage the continued use of historic buildings and
                      properties in a manner consistent with their historic status. The City
                      will forge public/private partnerships to achieve mutual goals for
                      preservation and the continued viable use of properties.
                      This historic preservation program may include:
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                           7

                                                      CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                   2030 General Plan
   9  Development review. The City will use its permit review
      process to encourage the protection of important buildings and
      other properties. The City would prefer that such buildings and
      properties not be removed or substantially altered unless there
      are no feasible alternatives and available incentives to ensure
      their economic viability and use.
   9  An inventory of locally significant historic resources. The
      City, in collaboration with community organizations interested
      in historic preservation, will conduct this inventory. The
      inventory could include residential and commercial buildings,
      bridges, monuments, parks, and other features associated with
      important elements of the community’s past. Buildings
      associated with the agricultural history of Gridley such as rice
      dyers and processing plants could also be included on the local
      list. This inventory will serve as a record and
      acknowledgement of buildings and structures with historic
      significance to be considered in City actions or approvals
      involving these properties. The inventory work could also lead
      to the establishment of one or more historic districts within the
      City where features are especially concentrated.
   9  Historic district overlay. The City will coordinate with
      community         organizations,     locally     knowledgeable
      preservationists and historians, and property owners to identify
      one or more areas of the City that might qualify as a historic
      district according to state and/or federal guidelines. With the
      agreement of property owners in such areas, the City may
      establish one or more historic overlay districts. Areas covered
      by this overlay would be based on the results of the inventory
      and collaboration with property owners and interested
      community organizations. Such areas could include portions of
      Downtown and surrounding residential neighborhoods. If
      created, one or more overlay districts would be incorporated
      into the City’s Zoning Ordinance and include standards for
      proposals affecting potentially historic buildings that
      encourage preservation over changes to properties that may
      reduce their historic value.
   9  Guidelines and regulatory incentives. The City will evaluate
      a variety of other potential tools to encourage historic
      preservation. These tools include a landmark ordinance, a
      historic preservation commission, and use of the State
      Historical Building Code in place of the California Building
      Code. A City historic preservation commission could be
      permanently or temporarily established to review proposed
      demolition or exterior remodel work for consistency with City
      standards.
   9  Funding for financial assistance. The City will consider a
      variety of funding sources to provide financial assistance for
      historic preservation, including Redevelopment Agency
COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                      8

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                funding, nonprofit funding, and State and federal government
                                funding. The City will consider funding sources and tax relief
                                such as the Mills Act, Marks Historical Rehabilitation Act, the
                                Seismic Bond Act, and the Community Development Block
                                Grant Program.
                            9   Education and awareness. The City will promote awareness
                                of the cultural and economic benefits of historic preservation
                                by sponsoring or co-sponsoring workshops or similar public
                                meetings.
 Design                     The City will review and condition projects, as necessary, to
 Implementation             comply with Secretary of Interior standards for historic
 Strategy 1.2               preservation and State Historical Building Code (§18950 to 18961
                            of Division 13, Part 2.7 of Health and Safety Code), as applicable.
NEIGHBORHOODS
A focus of the 2030 General Plan update is planning for long-term growth within the
1,200-acre Planned Growth Area (see the Land Use Element for more information). The
Planned Growth Area will include new neighborhoods with residences integrated with
parks and other civic uses, small-scale commercial uses, and other appropriate land uses.
The character of neighborhoods comes from public and private elements:
    9   Public elements include streets, sidewalks, street trees, schools, and parks. A
        sense of place and community cohesion can be created within the public spaces.
    9   Private elements include homes, businesses, and other private property. In new
        neighborhoods, the overwhelming majority of properties will be residences. The
        quality of homes and the relationship they have to each other have a strong
        impact on the character of the community. The degree of diversity or monotony
        in neighborhoods is a defining characteristic. Many successful neighborhoods
        have a variety of housing types – including larger homes on larger lots, small
        homes and smaller lots, attached homes, and multi-family housing. Some
        neighborhoods have a variety of architectural types, colors, and building
        materials, creating visual interest. Other neighborhoods lack in architectural
        variety and in the range of housing types.
    9   The design of the transition zone between public and private elements is also
        very important. For example, the area between the sidewalk and the front of
        homes is an area of public/private transition and could include front porches or
        stoops. The design of the public/private transition areas is important to the
        feeling and function of the neighborhood. The safety of a neighborhood can be
                       COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                               9

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
         enhanced when its design provides opportunities for residents to watch over its
         public and semi-public spaces. Within the transition area, the relationship
         between building setbacks, building size, and the streetscape is also very
         important. The right balance between building size, setbacks, street width, and
         street trees can provide a comfortable feeling for pedestrians, particularly as
         street trees mature.
Gridley’s existing neighborhoods were built between the late 19th century and the present
day. The oldest residential areas are clustered around Downtown. Through the decades, a
variety of houses with different designs, styles, and types were constructed. The
characteristics of residential areas are very important in defining the overall character of
Gridley. The older neighborhoods have a welcoming charm with short, walkable blocks
and mature street trees that add to the pedestrian experience. New neighborhoods can
build on the existing historic character of Gridley by mirroring traditional design
concepts that are now embraced as “New Urbanism.” These concepts include
neighborhood centers anchored by schools, parks, local businesses, and/or other
gathering places; a diversity of housing types (single-family homes, duplexes, small
apartments, second units, etc.), sometimes intermixed on one block; relatively small
blocks, a grid or modified grid street pattern, narrower streets, and planting strips with
street trees between the curb and sidewalk; and houses and porches oriented to the street
with detached or set-back garages.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to neighborhoods
include:
    9    Gridley can grow without sacrificing the small-town character that we cherish.
    9    Growth will be according to our vision. Although Gridley is a small town, we
         insist on high-quality development, that meets our specific needs and
         preferences.
    9    Great small towns promote a feeling of connection among residents. New
         development should enhance this sense of connectivity. We should remove
         physical, economic, and social barriers that prevent us from being connected,
         whenever possible.
    9    We believe that our long-term economic future greatly benefits from a unique,
         charming, small-town character.
    9    A livable community is one with parks, schools, shops, and other destinations
         that are oriented to our neighborhoods and designed for people, rather than
         oriented toward busy roadways and designed exclusively for auto access.
                        COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                              10

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
    9   Our streets, neighborhoods, and civic spaces should provide many gathering
        places where we meet up with our friends and neighbors.
    9   We think that variety and cohesiveness in community design are important:
        cohesiveness through building styles that complement local architecture and
        timeless materials in new and old buildings; and, variety within each
        neighborhood with different sizes, types, styles, and colors.
    9   We believe that Gridley’s built environment should be distinct from new
        development in growing cities elsewhere in the Sacramento Valley.
    9   We need local housing options that accommodate our different households’
        needs and preferences.
    9   We do not want our young people to have move away from Gridley to find
        appropriate and affordable housing.
    9   Growth and change should benefit Gridley’s existing and future residents.
    9   The City should develop in a compact way that is more efficient and less costly
        to serve, compared to a development pattern that is more spread out.
 DESIGN GOAL 2             To ensure that Gridley’s neighborhoods are attractive and
                           desirable places to live and visit.
 DESIGN POLICY 2.1         New residential subdivision projects should include a diversity of
                           color, building materials, floor plans, sizes, and types.
 DESIGN POLICY 2.2         The architectural style,
                           building materials, roof
                           form, and other primary
                           design features of homes
                           should also be reflected in
                           any accessory buildings,
                           such as garages and
                           secondary units (Exhibit
                           Design-8).                     Exhibit Design‐8. Variety of Architectural 
                                                          Style, Size, and Floor Plans in Housing 
                      COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                              11

                                                                         CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                     2030 General Plan
DESIGN POLICY 2.3    New homes should be
                     designed so that porches,
                     stoops, windows, and
                     other architectural
                     elements provide "eyes on
                     the street," helping to
                     maintain community
                     surveillance of public
                     areas. Windows and
                     active rooms should view
                     onto yards, corridors,      Exhibit Design‐9. Home Design and 
                     entrances, streets, and     Placement Allows Casual Surveillance of 
                     other public and semi-      Street 
                     public places (Exhibit
                     Design-9).
DESIGN POLICY 2.4    New homes on corner lots
                     should address both street
                     frontages with windows,
                     porches, stoops,
                     entrances, active rooms,
                     and other appropriate
                     architectural elements
                     (Exhibit Design-10).
                                                 Exhibit Design‐10. Residence on a Corner 
                                                 Lot Addresses both Street Frontages 
DESIGN POLICY 2.5    Fences should be
                     designed to complement
                     building design, color,
                     and materials (Exhibit
                     Design-11).
                                                 Exhibit Design‐11. Fencing Color, Material 
                                                 Complements the Residential Structure 
DESIGN POLICY 2.6    New home façades should be designed so that porches, stoops, and
                     windows, are more visually prominent from the street than the
                     garage door.
                  COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                         12

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 DESIGN POLICY 2.7    New residential
                      development shall
                      minimize the visual
                      prominence of garages by
                      setting garages back from
                      the front façade of
                      buildings or rotating the
                      garage entrance (Exhibits   Exhibit Design‐12. Discouraged: Street 
                      Design-12, -13).            Frontage Where Garage Dominates 
                                                  Exhibit Design‐13. Preferred: Residential 
                                                  Frontage with Recessed Garage 
 DESIGN POLICY 2.8    The City will allow
                      smaller front yard
                      setbacks for new homes to
                      encourage efficient use of
                      land and improve
                      surveillance of public
                      areas from residences
                      (Exhibit Design-14).
                                                 Exhibit Design‐14. Small Front Yard Setback 
 DESIGN POLICY 2.9    The City will allow a
                      variety of lot
                      configurations, including
                      alley-loaded projects
                      (Exhibit Design-15).
                                                  Exhibit Design‐15. Alley‐Loaded Project 
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          13

                                                                               CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                           2030 General Plan
DESIGN POLICY 2.10    The City will encourage a
                      variety of single-family
                      housing types, such as
                      cottages, clustered homes,
                      and attached housing
                      (Exhibit Design-16).
                     Exhibit Design‐16. Examples 
                     of Compact Single‐Family 
                     Home Designs 
                                                     Clockwise (top left): cottage homes, 
                                                     attached single‐family homes, “6‐Pack” 
                                                     homes, and townhomes
DESIGN POLICY 2.11    Multi-family development
                      should be designed to
                      provide an inviting visual
                      environment, where
                      porches, balconies,
                      windows, entrances,
                      stoops, and other features
                      are prominent and visible
                      from the street and other
                      public areas (Exhibit
                      Design-17).                    Exhibit Design‐17. Porches, Stoops, 
                                                     Windows, and Entrances are Visually 
                                                     Prominent from the Street 
DESIGN POLICY 2.12    Multi-family development should be compatible with adjacent
                      development with similar front setbacks, similar building styles and
                      architectural features, building massing and articulation, and a
                      consistent landscaping approach.
DESIGN POLICY 2.13    Multi-family buildings adjacent to single-family homes should step
                      down in height or use other design techniques to ensure
                      compatibility.
DESIGN POLICY 2.14    Multi-family projects shall not be walled off from the surrounding
                      neighborhood, but rather shall be connected to the surrounding
                      neighborhood through multiple pedestrian and street connections.
DESIGN POLICY 2.15    The City will encourage parking placement behind or on the side of
                      proposed buildings and buildings built adjacent to the street.
DESIGN POLICY 2.16    New developments that propose surface parking adjacent to the
                      street frontage shall screen parking areas from public views with
                      street trees and other landscaping, and/or low fences or walls.
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          14

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 Design               Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will review
 Implementation       projects for consistency with the Community Character Design
 Strategy 2.1         Element. The City will also consider preparation of a Design
                      Manual or Design Guidelines to implement the Community
                      Character and Design Element. This document would provide more
                      detail for new development than policies in the Community
                      Character and Design Element. The City’s Design Guidelines
                      should have chapters illustrating the City’s design vision for single-
                      family residential development, multiple-family residential
                      projects, small- and large-scale commercial development, industrial
                      development, Downtown Gridley, and other important areas of the
                      City.
 Design               The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance and Public Works
 Implementation       Construction Standards, as necessary, to accommodate well-
 Strategy 2.2         designed, compact development projects, consistent with the
                      General Plan. For example, the City will consider amending the
                      Zoning Ordinance to reduce the front yard setback to 15 feet or
                      similar for the primary residence and 20 feet or similar for garages.
 Design               The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance following the General
 Implementation       Plan update. As a part of this revision, the City will provide new
 Strategy 2.3         and/or revised zoning district descriptions to implement the
                      Residential, High Density 1 and 2 land use designations and to
                      facilitate the provision of well-designed, higher-density housing.
                      The City will also encourage applicants to make use of the current
                      Planned Development District application process to take
                      advantage of the City’s flexible approach to land use mix, density,
                      and development standards for high-quality projects.
 Design               The City will continue to support neighborhood conservation and
 Implementation       housing rehabilitation through the City’s Community Development
 Strategy 2.4         Block Grant program.
 DESIGN GOAL 3:       To provide neighborhood centers that integrate with, and
                      contribute to well-designed neighborhoods.
 DESIGN POLICY 3.1    Building placement and design in Neighborhood Centers shall
                      prioritize pedestrian comfort and aesthetics.
 DESIGN POLICY 3.2    Buildings in Neighborhood Centers should be built close to the
                      front property line.
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          15

                                                                                     CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                 2030 General Plan
 DESIGN POLICY 3.3             Developments within
                               Neighborhood Centers
                               should be designed to
                               emphasize the public
                               realm. These centers
                               should contain one or
                               more of the following:
                               small parks; public
                               plazas; wide sidewalks;
                               spaces for entertainment,
                               displays, exhibitions, and    Exhibit Design‐18. Outdoor Seating/Dining 
                               other community events;       Area
                               outdoor seating and
                               gathering areas, retail and
                               services; and/or, similar
                               uses and activities
                               (Exhibits Design-18, -19).
Exhibit Design‐19. Outdoor Public Gathering Places 
 DESIGN POLICY 3.4             Buildings in Neighborhood Centers that front on sidewalks should
                               provide awnings or other overhangs for pedestrian shelter.
 DESIGN POLICY 3.5             The City will provide and/or preserve existing street trees and
                               constructed shade structures in parks, civic plazas, and other
                               outdoor publicly-owned gathering areas to provide shade from the
                               afternoon summer sun.
                          COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                    16

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 DESIGN POLICY 3.6    Neighborhood Centers and the supportive transportation network
                      shall provide multi-modal, 360-degree access to and from the
                      surrounding neighborhood (see also the Circulation Element)
                      (Exhibit Design-20).
                     Exhibit Design‐20. Neighborhood Center with 360‐degree Access from the 
                     Surrounding Neighborhood 
 Design               The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance following the General
 Implementation       Plan update and will revise the Public Works Construction
 Strategy 3.1         Standards, as needed, to implement the General Plan. Among the
                      revisions to provide consistency with the General Plan, the City
                      will ensure that parking standards for Neighborhood Centers are
                      minimized to encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment. The
                      City will create a new zoning district designation to implement the
                      Neighborhood Center Mixed Use land use designation, ensuring
                      that outdoor dining and seating is allowed. The City will consider
                      providing street design criteria that may be used in Neighborhood
                      Centers for angled parking provision in-lieu of surface parking lots.
                      The City will consider establishing standards requiring shorter
                      block lengths and development standards allowing shallower
                      setbacks within Neighborhood Centers to encourage a pedestrian-
                      friendly environment.
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          17

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
  DESIGN GOAL 4:          To ensure high quality, safe, and walkable parks and open
                          space design in the Planned Growth Area.
  DESIGN POLICY 4.1       Parks and open space corridors should be located and designed to
                          be conveniently and safely accessible to pedestrians and bicyclists
                          from residential neighborhoods (see also the Circulation Element
                          and the Open Space Element).
  DESIGN POLICY 4.2       Parks and open space in the Planned Growth Area should be within
                          and near Neighborhood Centers, where residential densities are
                          relatively high (see also the Land Use and Open Space Elements).
  DESIGN POLICY 4.4       Buildings should front
                          onto to parks and open
                          space, wherever possible.
                          The City will discourage
                          residential developments
                          that back up to parks or
                          other public open spaces.
                          Where it is necessary for
                          residences to back up to
                          parks or open spaces,          Exhibit Design‐21. Buildings Front onto 
                          public access at regular       Parks 
                          intervals should be
                          provided (Exhibit Design-21).
  DESIGN POLICY 4.5       Bicycle and pedestrian paths shall be well lit and will be located
                          and designed to provide casual surveillance and security.
  Design                  The City will review the location and design of parks in the context
  Implementation          of ongoing project review, in part, to ensure consistency with
  Strategy 4.1            policies in this Community Character and Design Element.
DOWNTOWN
Gridley’s Downtown provides a strong “sense of place” and is a pleasant place to spend
time with a pedestrian scale, tree-lined streets, a good stock of historic buildings, and
locally owned businesses. Downtown is adjacent to the railroad, which bisects the
community, and provides a central location to the surrounding historic neighborhoods.
Residential uses abut both the east and west entrances into Downtown, with a transition
to commercial uses signaling the entry into Downtown.
Downtown Gridley remains the “social and cultural heart” of the community. Downtown
provides a place for the community to meet and hold city-wide events, such as Red
Suspenders Days and the summer Farmer’s Market. The historic City Hall building
                      COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                             18

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
anchors Downtown, and this historic building, as well as other well-maintained historic
buildings throughout the area is a reflection and source of civic awareness and pride.
A pleasant pedestrian environment is provided along Hazel Street and other areas
Downtown. Buildings are located at front property lines along wide sidewalks.
Downtown has short, walkable blocks within a grid street pattern with several historic
buildings fronting its “main street” – Hazel Street. Storefronts provide a lively,
pedestrian-oriented streetscape (Exhibit Design-22). Street trees provide affective shade
for sidewalks and in other areas of pedestrian activity. Landscaped planters provide
additional greenery, enhancing the aesthetic environment. The traveled portion of the
roadway is relatively narrow, which calms traffic speeds. Parking is accommodated in
angled spaces along the streets instead of surface parking lots, which further enhances
pedestrian convenience and comfort.
           Exhibit Design‐22. Historic and Walkable Downtown Gridley 
           Source: City of Gridley. Streetscape Design Plan for Highway 99. 2002. 
As noted previously, there is a strong desire among residents, property owners, and
business owners to revitalize Downtown with more businesses, residents, and civic uses.
When considering how to encourage revitalization Downtown, the City could leverage
private investment with targeted public investments. Public investments in “catalyst”
projects can help reduce risk and encourage private investment. Many cities prioritize
certain vacant sites for redevelopment that could spur development nearby. (Please refer
to the Land Use Element for more detail on the City’s approach).
                         COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                   19

                                                                                CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
Buildings and streetscape elements are most important aesthetic components Downtown,
but signage also contributes to the visual experience. Signage can either enhance or
detract from the attractiveness of Downtown. Given the historic setting, Downtown
signage should be distinct from other commercial districts. Generally, monument signs
are not found in Downtown areas. Most properties Downtown cannot accommodate free-
standing signs. Wall, awning or canopy, and window signs would be more appropriate
with the overall historic aesthetic environment Downtown. Internally illuminated plastic
signs and portable, roof-mounted, and out-of-scale signs would detract from important
architectural features Downtown.
Informational signs such as the Downtown information kiosk planned for the corner of
Kentucky and Hazel Streets keep community members and visitors alike informed of
important events and nearby resources. The Visitor Development Action Plan (2007) has
good examples of Informational, Gateway and Directional Signage related to the Gridley
Downtown.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to Downtown include:
    9    Downtown should remain our pedestrian-scaled, commercial and civic center in
         which we all take pride.
    9    Downtown must grow and change with the rest of the City. Decisions about
         commercial growth elsewhere in the city should support our downtown.
    9    The City should take an active role in downtown revitalization, supporting
         existing business expansion, new business development, and housing, all
         consistent with downtown’s historic character.
    9    The community should continue to invest in streetscape, infrastructure
         improvements, and other programs downtown that will encourage property
         owners to invest and re-invest in the area.
    9    All of our neighborhoods should be connected to downtown Gridley with safe
         and convenient pedestrian and bicycle routes.
 DESIGN GOAL 5:             To maintain and improve Downtown as a vibrant, pedestrian-
                            scaled, memorable place that is the social and cultural heart of
                            the community and a visitor draw.
 DESIGN POLICY 5.1          Downtown development and redevelopment should reinforce the
                            historic fabric of the Downtown streetscape through building
                            placement and design:
                            9    New buildings should be built to the front property line.
                        COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                20

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                9    Remodeled and new façade improvements should be designed
                                     for compatibility with adjacent historic buildings.
                                9    New construction adjacent to older historical building should be
                                     constructed with similar or complementary materials; size, shape,
                                     and location of windows; building scale, and building height.
 DESIGN POLICY 5.2              The portions of new buildings and additions along street frontages
                                should be within 10% of the average height of structures on the
                                same block.
 DESIGN POLICY 5.3              New buildings and additions should be designed to maintain the
                                alignment of rooflines or building cornices of adjacent existing
                                buildings (Exhibit Design-23).
Exhibit Design‐23. Maintaining Setbacks, Facades, and Scale Downtown 
                          COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                    21

                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                               2030 General Plan
DESIGN POLICY 5.4            As funding is available, the City will increase the street tree canopy
                             Downtown and add landscaped planters to enhance aesthetics and
                             pedestrian comfort.
DESIGN POLICY 5.5            As users change and Downtown properties are redeveloped, the
                             City will maintain pedestrian-oriented streetscape characteristics,
                             such as large storefront windows and pedestrian-scaled signage
                             (Exhibit Design-24).
 Exhibit Design‐24. Preferred Examples: Downtown Storefront Design and Streetscape 
DESIGN POLICY 5.6            The City will encourage a lively streetscape Downtown by
                             encouraging outdoor dining to occur at the street level (Exhibit
                             Design-25)
                             Exhibit Design‐25. Outdoor Dining and Seating Areas 
DESIGN POLICY 5.7            In general, residential development and office space Downtown
                             should be located on upper stories of multi-story buildings.
                             Residential and office uses could be accommodated at the street
                             level so long as they maintain a storefront appearance. Large
                             windows at the pedestrian level oriented toward the street are
                             needed to ensure this appearance, and provide consistency with
                             other uses Downtown.
DESIGN POLICY 5.8            In transportation planning and capital improvements planning for
                             Downtown, the City will prioritize pedestrian and bicycle safety,
                             convenience, and comfort.
                        COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                 22

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 DESIGN POLICY 5.9     Parking Downtown should mostly be provided on-street, including
                       angled parking, and surface parking lots should be minimized
                       Downtown.
 DESIGN POLICY 5.10    Where surface parking is used Downtown, it should be public
                       parking or shared by adjacent developments.
 DESIGN POLICY 5.11    New surface parking should be located behind or on the side of
                       proposed structures and not in the front of proposed structures,
                       where possible.
 DESIGN POLICY 5.12    Through public investment or in coordination with private
                       redevelopment, the City will add angled street parking along the
                       street, with wide sidewalks and buildings fronting the street
                       (Exhibit Design-26).
                      Exhibit Design‐26. Angled Parking, Wide Sidewalks, and Shade Trees 
 Design                The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance following adoption of
 Implementation        the 2030 General Plan. As a part of these revisions, the City will
 Strategy 5.1          create a zoning district or districts to implement the Downtown
                       Mixed Use land use designation. The allowable land uses for the
                       Downtown Mixed Use land use designation are described in the
                       Land Use Element. Relevant design components are described in
                       the Community Character and Design Element and Circulation
                       Element. As a part of these revisions, the City will ensure that
                       residential uses are allowed by right on second stories and above
                       Downtown and on the ground floor when designed to appear as a
                       storefront.
                    COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          23

                                                                         CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                     2030 General Plan
Design            Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will consult
Implementation    with Downtown property owners and consider adding flexibility in
Strategy 5.2      the entitlement process, as necessary, to encourage Downtown
                  redevelopment. The City will consider eliminating unnecessary
                  restrictions on land use and other unnecessary limitations. This may
                  require revisions to the Zoning Ordinance, Public Works
                  Construction Standards, and the Subdivision Ordinance. For
                  example, the City will make revisions to the Zoning Ordinance
                  necessary to encourage an active public realm by encouraging
                  outdoor dining at the street level. The City may consider adopting a
                  Design Manual or Design Guidelines, if needed, to provide
                  additional illustrated examples of appropriate site planning and
                  building design Downtown.
Design            The Zoning Ordinance may need to be revised or supplemented
Implementation    with design guidelines to provide illustrated examples of allowable
Strategy 5.3      project design. The City’s development review approach for
                  Downtown should still include restrictions related to the specific
                  use of land, but positive examples of the City’s vision could also be
                  helpful to developers and property owners.
Design            The City will encourage or proactively participate in the
Implementation    redevelopment of the vacant site at the entrance to the Downtown
Strategy 5.4      on Hazel and Virginia Streets. Two-story construction and respect
                  for the architectural details of the adjacent historical building
                  including the window height and proportion should be encouraged
                  for a new building or buildings on this site.
               COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                      24

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 DESIGN GOAL 6:                To ensure that signs identify downtown attractions and add to
                               the historic setting
 DESIGN POLICY 6.1             The City will encourage signs Downtown that are consistent with
                               the historic character, including wall, awning or canopy, projecting,
                               and window signs (Exhibit Design-27).
Exhibit Design‐27. Hanging, Wall, and Projecting Signs 
 DESIGN POLICY 6.2             The City will discourage signs that are portable, roof-mounted, that
                               are not complementary to the architectural features of a building,
                               that are not pedestrian scaled and oriented, or that dominate the
                               building without regard to proportion.
 DESIGN POLICY 6.3             The use of internally illuminated, plastic cabinet/can signs is
                               discouraged.
 Design                        Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will revise the
 Implementation                City sign ordinance to include separate sign regulations for the
 Strategy 6.1                  Downtown. These regulations will be designed to reinforce the
                               qualities that distinguish the central business district from other
                               commercial areas within the community. The ordinance will be
                               revised to ensure that signage enhances, rather than detracts from
                               the attractiveness of Downtown.
 Design                        As funding is available, the City will construct pedestrian oriented
 Implementation                way-finding signage Downtown with a consistent theme. Themes
 Strategy 6.2                  in Downtown way-finding signage should relate to signage used
                               along Highway 99 to direct visitors Downtown.
                          COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                    25

                                                                                     CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                  2030 General Plan
URBAN LANDSCAPES AND STREETSCAPES
Much of a community’s identity is formed by its landscape and streets. Mature trees
adjoining a residential street frontage provide a shady ambience and a sense of history
and permanence (Exhibit Design-28). A well-designed streetscape can provide one of the
livelier and more memorable public spaces in the entire community.
                                                       Urban trees filter air, water and sunlight.
                                                       They also moderate local climate and help
                                                       shade homes and businesses which in turn
                                                       conserves energy. Trees also produce oxygen
                                                       and reduce carbon dioxide. The urban
                                                       landscape distinguishes the City from the
                                                       surrounding agricultural fields and orchards.
                                                       Landscaping can also provide visual
                                                       screening of parking areas to enhance the
                                                       appearance commercial, industrial and multi-
                                                       family developments.
Exhibit Design‐28. Shady Residential Street in 
Gridley 
                                                       Streets comprise the majority of the
                                                       accessible     public    spaces    in    most
                                                       communities. Streets and street corridors
                                                       connect neighborhoods, connect us with the
                                                       Downtown, and provide settings for planned
                                                       or happenstance meetings among neighbors.
                                                       The quality of the streetscape environment
                                                       substantially affects the visual quality and
                                                       function of neighborhoods. High-quality
                                                       streetscapes along Gridley’s commercial
                                                       corridors will give visitors an immediate
Exhibit Design‐29. Attractive Commercial               positive impression of the community and
Streetscape 
                                                       will encourage property owners to maintain
Source: City of Gridley, Streetscape Design Plan for  and improve storefronts and other parts of
Highway 99, 2002. 
                                                       their property (Exhibit Design-29).
The Circulation Element provides guidance for the circulation network itself. This
Element focuses on aesthetic and design-oriented aspects of streets and streetscapes.
Goals, policies, and design guidelines provided in this Element are aimed at balancing the
needs of vehicles with the community’s desire to create a sense of place.
                             COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                      26

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles related to landscapes and
streetscapes include:
    9    Trees shade us, clean our air, and are pleasing to the eye. A complete urban tree
         canopy that provides a pleasant and attractive streetscape is essential to our
         community’s character and quality of life.
    9    The community should continue to invest in streetscape, infrastructure
         improvements, and other programs downtown that will encourage property
         owners to invest and re-invest in the area.
    9    Streetscapes can be inviting, pleasant places to spend time, and these places
         should be designed with people in mind, not strictly to accommodate vehicles.
 DESIGN GOAL 7:             To provide attractive and functional landscaping in
                            neighborhoods
 DESIGN POLICY 7.1          Trees, shrubs,
                            groundcover, and grass
                            areas should be
                            incorporated within
                            neighborhoods to create
                            an attractive and
                            comfortable environment
                            for residents and those
                            viewing from public areas
                            (Exhibit Design-30)
                                                            Exhibit Design‐30. Residential Landscaping 
 DESIGN POLICY 7.2          Front yards should be landscaped in a way that is compatible with
                            the associated home or multi-family structure.
 DESIGN POLICY 7.3          Front yard landscaping should emphasize visual openness to
                            provide for visual surveillance of the street and sidewalks.
 DESIGN POLICY 7.4          To the extent feasible, existing mature trees and shrubs should be
                            preserved and incorporated into the landscaping scheme.
 DESIGN POLICY 7.5          The City encourages the planting of California native trees and plants
                            that are appropriate for the Gridley climate. The planting of non-native
                            plants and trees that could become invasive is strongly discouraged.
                       COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                27

                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                         2030 General Plan
DESIGN POLICY 7.6    Native, low-water use ornamental plants and groundcover are
                     encouraged as alternatives to turf grass (Exhibit Design-31).
                     Exhibit Design‐31.Groundcover and Ornamental Plants as an 
                     Alternative to Turf Grass 
Design               Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will review
Implementation       proposed projects for consistency in landscaping with policies in the
Strategy 7.1         Community Character and Design Element, conditioning projects,
                     where necessary. The City will consider adopting new landscaping
                     standards and/or street tree standards, as necessary, to ensure
                     consistency with the Community Character and Design Element. The
                     City will ensure flexibility in site design landscaping and open
                     space standards, where necessary, to accommodate well-designed
                     multi-family projects.
DESIGN GOAL 8:       To design streets that enhance the character and function of
                     Gridley’s neighborhoods and business districts.
DESIGN POLICY 8.1    Street width should be
                     proportional with building
                     setbacks and heights to
                     create the feeling of an
                     “outdoor room,”
                     emphasizing comfort of
                     pedestrians and bicyclists
                     (Exhibits Design-32, -33).
                                                    Exhibit 32. Preferred: Narrow Residential 
                                                    Street and Smaller Setbacks 
                                                    Exhibit 33. Discouraged: Excessively Wide 
                                                    Local Street and Larger Setback 
                  COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          28

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
  DESIGN POLICY 8.2    Streets should be located and oriented to define the edges of
                       neighborhoods and oriented so that major views terminate in parks,
                       natural landmarks (such as the Sutter Buttes), or civic landmarks, to
                       greatest extent feasible.
  DESIGN POLICY 8.3    Streets serving commercial districts will have well-marked travel
                       areas for pedestrians and bicyclists with frequent street crossings,
                       and a comfortable and a visually pleasing streetscape environment.
  DESIGN POLICY 8.4    Loading areas should be located in less visually prominent areas to
                       avoid being a dominant part of the streetscape environment.
  DESIGN POLICY 8.5    Commercial streetscapes should provide attractive entryways into
                       the City with street trees and other landscaping, street furniture, and
                       other improvements.
  DESIGN POLICY 8.6    Streets in industrial and commercial areas will provide for transit
                       stops with shade and comfortable spaces at transit stops and
                       between transit stops and employment locations.
  DESIGN POLICY 8.7    Streets in industrial areas will provide low-maintenance, attractive
                       landscaping (Exhibit Design-34).
                       Exhibit Design‐34. Attractive and Low‐maintenance Landscaping for 
                       Industrial Streetscapes 
  DESIGN POLICY 8.8    Benches, trash
                       receptacles, drinking
                       fountains, bus shelters,
                       signage, and other
                       improvements should be
                       located and designed to
                       enhance the visual
                       streetscape environment,
                       consistent with City
                       historic lighting and
                       directional signage
                                                          Exhibit Design‐35. Attractive Streetscape 
                       (Exhibit Design-35).
                                                          Improvements – Benches, Trash 
                                                          Receptacles, Lighting Standards, Brick 
                      Source: Source: City of Gridley, Streetscape Design Plan for Highway 99, 2002. 
 
                    COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                             29

                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                         2030 General Plan
DESIGN GOAL 9:        To provide a complete urban tree canopy
DESIGN POLICY 9.1     Existing trees, including orchard trees, should be preserved along
                      street rights of way.
DESIGN POLICY 9.2     In the Planned Growth Area, tree preservation along future street
                      rights-of-way will be combined with planting of new street trees to
                      provide both a short- and long-term tree canopy.
DESIGN POLICY 9.3     Street trees should be regularly spaced to provide a continuous
                      canopy at maturity and shade both the street and sidewalk (Exhibit
                      Design-36).
                     Exhibit Design‐36. Regularly Spaced Street Trees that Provide a Continuous
                     Canopy 
DESIGN POLICY 9.4     The City will add street trees in existing developed areas, as
                      feasible, with the goal of providing a complete tree canopy.
DESIGN POLICY 9.5     Street trees in commercial areas should complement building
                      facades and signage and shade sidewalks and most of the street.
DESIGN POLICY 9.6     New parking lots, whether in multiple-family, civic, commercial, or
                      industrial projects, shall be well-landscaped and shaded (see also
                      the Circulation Element).
Design                Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will adopt
Implementation        new landscaping standards and street tree standards and/or off
Strategy 9.1          street parking regulations (with landscaping standards), and will
                      revise the Subdivision Ordinance, as necessary, to ensure
                      consistency with tree planting and landscaping policies in the
                      Community Character and Design Element.
Design                Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will adopt a
Implementation        tree preservation ordinance. This ordinance can provide regulatory
Strategy 9.2          guidance on what types of trees can be removed and what permits
                      are required in order to remove different types of trees. The
                      ordinance will provide guidance on tree replacement requirements.
                      Tree replacement requirements will be proportional to the number
                      and/or size of trees removed. The ordinance can provide guidance
                      on several General Plan policy topics, including but not limited to
                      aesthetic benefits, biological benefits, and cultural/historic
                      significance of trees.
                  COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          30

  CITY OF GRIDLEY
  2030 General Plan
  HIGHWAY 99
  State Highway 99 bisects the Gridley community from south to north. It serves as a route
  for traffic moving through the State and as an arterial for local residents. Like many other
  communities bisected by a major highway, commercial uses and services have located
  along its frontage. Commercial signage and surface parking lots are two of the most
  dominant parts of the visual environment along Highway 99 today. To capture drive-by
  business from motorists, retail uses were provided in large shopping centers with
  expansive parking lots adjacent to the highway or in “strip commercial” developments.
  Vehicle sales of new and used cars and trucks chose to locate along the highway. Signage
  was designed at a large scale with primary colors to catch the attention of the motorist.
  Most of the buildings along SR 99 are not built to the front property line, but set back
  with off-street parking located at the highway frontage.
                                                     Highway 99 provides the main north and
                                                     south entrances into Gridley. The highway
                                                     frontage presents the initial visual impression
                                                     of the City (see the section on “Gateways” at
                                                     the end of this Element). Additionally, the
                                                     highway provides entrances from the west into
                                                     the Downtown (via Spruce and Hazel streets).
                                                     The City has been investigating design
                                                     solutions for the Highway 99 corridor for
Exhibit Design‐37. Urban Design Concepts for the  several years. In 2002, the City of Gridley
Main Entrance to Downtown: Hazel Street              received a combination of Caltrans planning
                                                     grant and Community Development Block
Source: City of Gridley. Visitor Development Action  Grant (CDBG) monies for public participation
Plan. 2007. 
                                                     and design charrettes to address contextually
                                                     sensitive street design for the Highway 99
  corridor through Gridley. The City’s 2002 Streetscape Design Plan for Highway 99
  describes a range of improvements to the highway corroder and adjacent buildings.
  Certain elements of the Streetscape Design Plan are reflected in the Circulation Element
  of this General Plan. The City’s 2007 Visitor Development Action Plan also addresses
  beautification of Highway 99 and entryways into Downtown (Exhibit Design-37). This
  Plan addresses building façade treatments, parking, landscaping and signage. The policies
  included below include some of the design and aesthetic components from both the
  Streetscape Design Plan for Highway 99 and the Visitor Development Action Plan.
  There are a few changes that could be made in the Highway 99 corridor over time that
  would better address local transportation, economic, aesthetic, and public safety needs.
  Some of these changes could occur as a part of new development along the highway.
                                COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                      31

                                                                                     CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                 2030 General Plan
Other changes could be pursued proactively by the City or other public agencies in
advance of development.
Additional landscaping along the highway corridor is essential for the aesthetic
environment. Adding street trees and other landscaping would provide a more inviting
environment for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, and drivers that patronize businesses
here (Exhibit Design-38). This would provide a much more comfortable environment for
people, and would encourage motorists to slow down.
                                                       There are costs and benefits associated with
                                                       improving the street tree canopy and other
                                                       landscaping. Costs include planting and
                                                       maintaining the landscaping. There are
                                                       safety and aesthetic benefits associated with
                                                       this landscaping plan, but also energy
                                                       savings, air quality improvement, stormwater
                                                       runoff reduction, and property value
                                                       increase. Beautification of the Highway 99
                                                       corridor would encourage property owners to
                                                       maintain or improve their properties, and
                                                       could      encourage      additional     infill
                                                       development.      Aesthetic    improvements,
Exhibit Design‐38. Trees, Separated Sidewalk 
                                                       therefore, are an important of the City’s
Source: City of Gridley, Streetscape Design Plan for 
                                                       economic development strategy for this
Highway 99, 2002. 
                                                       portion of the City.
The aesthetic environment along Highway 99 could also be improved through changes to
the built environment. Development along Highway 99 could be designed so that in the
future, building façades become more visually prominent over time compared to surface
parking lots and commercial signage.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to Highway 99
include:
    9     Gridley can grow without sacrificing the small-town character that we cherish.
    9     Growth will be according to our vision. Although Gridley is a small town, we
          insist on high-quality development, that meets our specific needs and
          preferences.
                             COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                      32

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
    9   Great small towns promote a feeling of connection among residents. New
        development should enhance this sense of connectivity. We should remove
        physical, economic, and social barriers that prevent us from being connected,
        whenever possible.
    9   Unique, locally-owned businesses are a critical part of small-town character. The
        City should encourage preservation, expansion, and establishment of local
        business.
    9   We believe that our long-term economic future greatly benefits from a unique,
        charming, small-town character.
    9   We believe that Gridley’s built environment should be distinct from new
        development in growing cities elsewhere in the Sacramento Valley.
    9   Trees shade us, clean our air, and are pleasing to the eye. A complete urban tree
        canopy that provides a pleasant and attractive streetscape is essential to our
        community’s character and quality of life.
    9   We should invest in, and support improvements along Highway 99 that draw
        visitors downtown.
    9   Streetscapes can be inviting, pleasant places to spend time, and these places
        should be designed with people in mind, not strictly to accommodate vehicles.
    9   We believe that the entire community will benefit from improving the Highway
        99 corridor to create an active, pedestrian-friendly area where trees, well-
        designed buildings, and street furniture are the dominant visual features.
    9   Growth and change should benefit Gridley’s existing and future residents.
 DESIGN GOAL 10:           To improve the visual environment along the existing
                           developed portion of Highway 99
 DESIGN POLICY 10.1        Development along Highway 99
                           in the area around Spruce Street
                           and Hazel Street should mostly
                           consist of multi-story buildings
                           built near the front property line,
                           to create an attractive and
                           pedestrian-friendly environment
                           (Exhibit Design-39).
                       Exhibit Design‐39. Multi‐Story Buildings 
                       along Street Frontages Create a 
                       Pedestrian‐friendly Streetscape 
                              Source: City of Gridley, Streetscape Design Plan for Highway 99, 2002. 
                      COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                33

                                                                                      CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                  2030 General Plan
DESIGN POLICY 10.2              Properties located at the main entrances to Downtown, Spruce and
                                Hazel Streets, should have generous landscaping and should use
                                signage that is complementary to Downtown entryway signage and
                                the Gridley archway.
DESIGN POLICY 10.3              New development and infill development north of West Liberty
                                Road and south of Ord Ranch Road should construct buildings
                                close to the front property line (Exhibit Design-40).
Exhibit Design‐40. Buildings Close to the Front Property Line Enhance the Aesthetic Environment along 
Highway 99 
Source: City of Gridley, Streetscape Design Plan for Highway 99, 2002. 
DESIGN POLICY 10.4              The Highway 99 corridor should be improved by adding street trees
                                and other landscaping and a separated sidewalk.
DESIGN POLICY 10.5              Street trees should be located and tree species selected to prioritize
                                shade for sidewalks, parking areas, bus stops, and any public
                                gathering places.
DESIGN POLICY 10.6              Street trees should also shade travel lanes to the greatest extent
                                feasible.
DESIGN POLICY 10.8              Surface parking for uses along Highway 99 should be distributed
                                around the subject site and not exclusively focused in front of
                                buildings along the Highway.
                           COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                    34

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 DESIGN POLICY 10.9     Surface parking should be screened with landscaping, low
                        attractive fencing, planters, and/or low brick or masonry and
                        wrought iron walls to improve views from Highway 99 (Exhibit
                        Design-41)
                        Exhibit 41. Screening of Parking Areas from Highway 99 
                        Source: City of Gridley, Streetscape Design Plan for Highway 99, 2002. 
 DESIGN POLICY 10.11    The City will provide incentives for property owners that enhance
                        building facades, as funding allows.
 DESIGN POLICY 10.12    Existing curb cuts along Highway 99 should be consolidated,
                        where possible, and new development should have access to and
                        from local streets or share existing access points to Highway 99
                        (see also the Circulation Element).
 DESIGN POLICY 10.13    The City will coordinate with BCAG and other relevant transit
                        providers to construct attractive, shaded transit stops along the
                        existing developed portion of Highway 99.
 Design                 Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will
 Implementation         consider implementation of recommendations from the 2002
 Strategy 10.1          Streetscape Design Plan for Highway that are consistent with the
                        General Plan. The City will consider implementation of these
                        documents through revisions to the Zoning Ordinance, adoption of
                        the documents by resolution, or through separate ordinances.
                        Streetscape improvements should be focused on the area north of
                        West Liberty Road and south of Ord Ranch Road (see also the
                        Circulation Element). The City will coordinate with the California
                        Department of Transportation (Caltrans) and the Butte County
                        Association of Governments (BCAG) to improve Highway 99
                        within the existing developed City into a more attractive and
                        pedestrian-friendly environment, consistent with the 2030 General
                        Plan. This could be accomplished by adding street trees, separated
                        sidewalks, improving pedestrian/bicycle crossings for safety and
                        aesthetics, and other measures.
                     COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                              35

                                                                                          CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                     2030 General Plan
  Design                         The City will proactively seek state and federal grant programs and
  Implementation                 other financing that could be used to encourage facade
  Strategy 10.2                  improvements along Highway 99.
  Design                         The City will consider formation of a Highway 99 Beautification
  Implementation                 Committee composed of City staff, business owners, Caltrans,
  Strategy 10.3                  BCAG (Butte County Association of Governments) and other key
                                 stakeholders to review and make recommendations for gateway and
                                 signage improvements along Highway 99.
  Design                         Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will
  Implementation                 consider preparation of a conceptual plan for the Highway 99
  Strategy 10.5                  corridor north of Ord Ranch Road and south of South Avenue. This
                                 conceptual plan should be crafted in coordination with California
                                 Department of Transportation (Caltrans) and the Butte County
                                 Association of Governments (BCAG), and should provide for the
                                 aesthetic environment entering Gridley from the north that is
                                 specified in the 2030 General Plan. This conceptual plan should
                                 guide context-sensitive improvements to Highway 99 and the
                                 Highway 99 corridor in the Planned Growth Area. The City will
                                 proactively seek grant funding to support this conceptual planning
                                 effort.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
Commercial and industrial projects can have a profound visual impact on small town
character.1 There are several vacant or underutilized sites planned with commercial and
industrial land use designations. The planning and design of these large commercial and
industrial sites can contribute positively to the community’s character, image, and
livability with implementation of the goals and policies that follow.
Industrial land use designations are less visually prominent in the core areas of the City.
Nonetheless, some industrial properties are located in areas that would be visible from a
number of public viewing locations (such as public rights-of-way), and therefore
industrial development is addressed in the material that follows.
There are many large properties designated for commercial development along Highway
99, the community’s main gateway. Commercial development is often specifically
located and designed to be visually prominent from public rights-of-way. Large
commercial projects often include standardized designs that may not serve Gridley’s
1
    For the purposes of this Element, large commercial and industrial projects would generally include
    buildings of 50,000 – 150,000 square feet and would generally involve properties of five acres or more in
    size.
                            COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                    36

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
specific needs, and would not necessarily be consistent with General Plan goals. For
example, commercial development often proposes a relatively tall one-story building
without prominent entryways, windows, and with little façade interest. Many commercial
developments are unattractive due to acres of parking located in visually prominent areas
along the street frontage. Retail developments often propose parking in excess of local
requirements, which can negatively affect aesthetics and pedestrian comfort. This
Element anticipates and addresses the most important design issues for commercial
development, including:
     9    The desired relationship with the surrounding built environment;
     9    Pedestrian safety and comfort;
     9    The appropriate amount and design of surface parking;
     9    Architectural design, color, and building materials; and,
     9    Landscaping.
Communications facilities may not take up as much acreage as other types of commercial
facilities, but because communications towers are tall, they can be seen from may public
viewing points within the community, and therefore could have a profound affect on
community aesthetics. These facilities are also addressed below.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to large-scale
development include:
     9    Gridley can grow without sacrificing the small-town character that we cherish.
     9    Growth will be according to our vision. Although Gridley is a small town, we
          insist on high-quality development, that meets our specific needs and
          preferences.
     9    A livable community is one with parks, schools, shops, and other destinations
          that are oriented to our neighborhoods and designed for people, rather than
          oriented toward busy roadways and designed exclusively for auto access.
     9    We believe that Gridley’s built environment should be distinct from new
          development in growing cities elsewhere in the Sacramento Valley.
     9    For safe and convenient travel, we need short blocks, connectivity, frequent
          through streets, extension of the historic grid, and ample on- and off-street
          pedestrian and bicycle pathways.
                         COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                              37

                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                         2030 General Plan
DESIGN GOAL 11:       To provide for pedestrian safety and comfort in large-scale
                      commercial projects
DESIGN POLICY 11.1    Commercial projects on properties of more than 10 acres in size
                      shall break up blocks with public streets or small private streets
                      (see also the Circulation Element).
DESIGN POLICY 11.2    Large-scale commercial projects should provide small-scale retail
                      shops with separate entrances along the perimeter of the site to
                      provide visual interest, easy access, and more diverse shopping
                      opportunities.
DESIGN POLICY 11.3    New development shall not concentrate more than 60 percent of the
                      total proposed parking spaces between the front building façade
                      and the primary abutting street (Exhibit Design-42).
                     Exhibit Design‐42. Parking and Loading Area Provided in Back of Building
DESIGN POLICY 11.4    New development
                      shall provide shade
                      trees or a
                      combination of shade
                      trees and constructed
                      shade structures in
                      surface parking lots
                      (see also the
                      Circulation Element)
                      (Exhibit Design-43).      Exhibit Design‐43. Parking Lot Shade Structure
DESIGN POLICY 11.5    The City will encourage new development to use constructed shade
                      structures in parking lots for active solar systems by not counting
                      these structures toward lot coverage maximums and by providing
                      flexibility in landscaping standards.
DESIGN POLICY 11.6    Surface parking lots shall provide defined pedestrian walkways that
                      directly connect parking areas with building entrances.
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          38

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 DESIGN POLICY 11.7    Pedestrian walkways
                       through parking lots
                       should be shaded by trees
                       or shade structures
                       (Exhibit Design-44).
                                                     Exhibit Design‐44. Shaded Pedestrian 
                                                     Walkway 
 DESIGN POLICY 11.8    New commercial
                       development shall provide
                       comfortable outdoor
                       seating areas available for
                       public use, as appropriate
                       (Exhibit Design-45).
                                                     Exhibit Design‐45. Shaded Street Furniture 
                                                     for Public Use
 DESIGN POLICY 11.9    New commercial
                       developments shall
                       provide secure locking of
                       bicycles in visually
                       prominent locations
                       (Exhibit Design-46).
                                                     Exhibit Design‐46. Secure Bicycle Storage 
 Design                Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will review
 Implementation        projects for consistency with the Community Character Design
 Strategy 11.1         Element, conditioning projects where necessary. The City will also
                       consider preparation of a Design Manual or Design Guidelines to
                       implement the Community Character and Design Element during
                       General Plan buildout.
                    COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                          39

                                                                            CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
DESIGN GOAL 12:       To ensure attractive site and building design in commercial
                      projects.
DESIGN POLICY 12.1    Large commercial
                      building walls that front
                      public rights-of-way shall
                      be articulated with wall
                      recesses and projections,
                      windows, balconies,
                      awnings, a mix of color
                      and materials, and other
                      techniques that visually
                      break up wall massing and
                      perceived building scale
                      (Exhibit Design-47).
                                                    Exhibit Design‐47. Windows, Wall 
                                                    Recesses, Mix of Color and Materials 
                                                    Break Up Wall Massing 
DESIGN POLICY 12.3    Doors, windows, signage,
                      and awnings should be
                      scaled and located for
                      pedestrians (Exhibit
                      Design-48).
                                                    Exhibit Design‐48. Doors, Windows, and 
                                                    Awnings at Pedestrian Level 
DESIGN POLICY 12.4    Rooflines should be varied to add architecture interest to the
                      building.
DESIGN POLICY 12.5    Rooflines shall be
                      designed to screen rooftop
                      mechanical equipment
                      from view (Exhibit
                      Design-49).
                                                    Exhibit Design‐49. Varied Roofline 
DESIGN POLICY 12.6    The use of parapets to hide flat roofs and equipment and the use of
                      sloped roofs and entry roofs or canopies is encouraged.
                   COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                         40

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 DESIGN POLICY 12.7     New developments shall
                        provide easily identifiable
                        pedestrian-scaled building
                        entrances (Exhibit
                        Design-50).
                                                    Exhibit Design‐50. Identifiable, Pedestrian 
                                                    Scaled Entry 
 DESIGN POLICY 12.8     New development should
                        use subtle colors with low
                        reflective value and high
                        quality exterior materials
                        such as brick, wood,
                        native stone and
                        tinted/textured concrete
                        masonry units for sides of
                        proposed buildings that
                        font onto a public street
                                                     Exhibit Design‐51. High‐Quality Building 
                        (Exhibit Design-51).
                                                     Materials 
 DESIGN POLICY 12.9     Trash and recycling receptacles used for new commercial
                        development operations shall be screened from public view by
                        landscaping, decorative walls, or fencing.
 DESIGN POLICY 12.10    Site lighting shall be
                        attractive and
                        complementary to the
                        building and designed to
                        prevent glare. Lighting
                        adjacent to Highway 99
                        shall be compatible with
                        Gridley’s historic lights
                        (Exhibit Design-52).
                                                      Exhibit Design‐52. Attractive Lighting 
                                                      Standard that Directs Light Downward to 
                                                      Avoid Glare 
                     COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                            41

                                                                            CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
DESIGN POLICY 12.13    Commercial projects located adjacent to existing residential
                       development should step down building height, where necessary, to
                       reduce perceived scale.
DESIGN POLICY 12.14    Surface parking areas shall be screened from public street view
                       with landscaping, low fencing, and/or low walls.
DESIGN POLICY 12.15    Pedestrian walkways connecting parking areas to building
                       entrances should use special pavers, scored concrete or other
                       decorative surfaces.
Design                 Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will review new
Implementation         large-scale commercial projects for consistency with the
Strategy 12.1          Community Character Design Element, conditioning projects
                       where necessary. The City will also consider preparation of a
                       Design Manual or Design Guidelines to implement the Community
                       Character and Design Element during General Plan buildout.
DESIGN GOAL 13:        To provide attractive industrial sites that are compatible with
                       surrounding uses.
DESIGN POLICY 13.1     The arrangement or design of buildings to respect the scale of
                       neighboring non-industrial buildings, including “stepping down” of
                       proposed building heights in areas adjacent to existing smaller
                       buildings.
DESIGN POLICY 13.2     New large industrial building walls that face public streets shall be
                       articulated with wall recesses and projections, windows, a mix of
                       color, murals, and/or the use of landscaped screening to visually
                       break up wall massing and perceived building scale.
DESIGN POLICY 13.3     New industrial developments should distribute proposed parking
                       around the project site and not concentrate a large amount of
                       parking exclusively between the front building façade and the
                       primary abutting street.
DESIGN POLICY 13.4     Signage for new industrial developments should be integrated with
                       signage for nearby industrial uses, where feasible, and shall be
                       designed to be compatible with the surrounding environment.
Design                 Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will review new
Implementation         industrial projects for consistency with the Community Character
Strategy 13.1          Design Element, conditioning projects where necessary. The City
                       will also consider preparation of a Design Manual or Design
                       Guidelines to implement the Community Character and Design
                       Element during General Plan buildout.
                    COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                           42

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
  DESIGN GOAL 14:           To ensure that new communications facilities are sensitive to
                            the local visual environment
  DESIGN POLICY 14.1        Whenever possible, telecommunications facilities should be located
                            in areas that are not prominently visible from public rights-of-way.
  DESIGN POLICY 14.2        Telecommunications facilities should not be located in areas where
                            prominent views of the Sutter Buttes would be interrupted.
  DESIGN POLICY 14.3        Telecommunications facilities should be consolidated and co-
                            located in order to reduce the visual impact to the community.
  DESIGN POLICY 14.4        Telecommunications facilities should be designed to blend with the
                            visual environment and disguised as trees, similar in type and
                            height to surrounding trees, where feasible.
GATEWAYS
Gateways are key announcements of arrival into a city. These entrances can create a
sense of civic pride and identity. Gateway corridors can be emphasized with landscaping,
lighting, signs, public art, banners and/or gate markers. The placement and design of
buildings can also contribute to the sense of arrival and departure.
There are a number of entrances into Gridley. Approaching the City from the south and
north, Highway 99 serves as a gateway. From Interstate 5 and Colusa County, the Colusa
Highway/Sycamore Street linkage provides entrance into Gridley from the west. West
Biggs-Gridley Road with its connection to several Gridley streets including Spruce,
Hazel and Sycamore allows residents to move between Biggs and Gridley. East Gridley
Road connects Highway 70 to Highway 99 and Gridley.
Gateways can also be located within a
city to highlight an important area of a
community. The Visitor Development
Action Plan identified Hazel Street at
Highway 99 as a “gateway intersection”
into Downtown. The City is currently
implementing this recommendation for a
Downtown        gateway.       Additionally,
“wayfinding” signage along the highway
is an important aspect for directing
motorists to the interior portions of the
City for public services and uses (City
Hall, Post Office, Hospital, and
Fairgrounds), Downtown retail businesses Exhibit Design‐53. Gateways
and destinations west of the City limits,
such as Gray Lodge Wildlife Area.
                       COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                43

                                                                                CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                            2030 General Plan
Along the western and eastern edges of the town, agricultural uses give way to large
parcel ranchettes and finally more dense residential development as one enters the City.
These approaches signal an arrival into an urbanized area and may not require further
delineation.
There are existing gateway signs into
Gridley along Highway 99 from both north
and south approaches. Both these signs and
locations would be benefited with more
graphically–pleasing design and enhanced
landscaping as recommended in the Visitor
Development Action Plan. A Highway
Beautification Committee could initially
work on basic design guidelines for these
signs and wayfinding signage along the
highway frontage as recommended in the
action plan.
                                               Exhibit Design‐54. Gateway Sign 
Travelers along Highway 99 experience a rural visual environment entering Gridley from
the north. From the north, the large trees at the Gridley-Biggs Cemetery announce your
arrival in the community. From the south, the rural transition is less apparent. Here,
scattered orchard trees transition to billboards and commercial developments. While the
City wishes to improve the stretch of Highway 99 between West Liberty Road and Ord
Ranch Road to enhance the aesthetic environment, policies for the Highway 99 corridor
outside the existing developed City seek to preserve the rural aesthetic environment on
the north side of Gridley. The City wishes to beautify the appearance of the City from the
south, as well.
This General Plan anticipates land use change north of the existing City in the Planned
Growth Area (see the Land Use Element). As described in the Land Use Element, Open
Space Element, Circulation Element, and in this Element, land use change north of the
City will occur while preserving the visual transition from rural to urban along Highway
99. Orchard trees will be preserved, where possible. West of Highway 99, new trees will
be planted along with earthen berms to visually screen new neighborhoods from the
corridor. The aesthetic relationship with the agricultural landscape will also be preserved
through new agricultural industrial development east of Highway 99 (see the Land Use
Element). Compared to the aesthetic improvements anticipated along the existing
developed portion of Highway 99, a more rural aesthetic will be perpetuated in the
Planned Growth Area, even as new development occurs.
                       COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                             44

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
One statement from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles is relevant to gateways:
    9   We believe that the entire community will benefit from improving the Highway
        99 corridor to create an active, pedestrian-friendly area where trees, well-
        designed buildings, and street furniture are the dominant visual features.
 DESIGN GOAL 15:          To ensure that community gateways provide an immediate
                          positive visual impression
 DESIGN POLICY 15.1       Commercial signage in community gateway areas should be
                          attractive and should not obscure community wayfinding signage.
 DESIGN POLICY 15.2       Community gateways should have preserved vegetation and new
                          and landscaping to enhance the aesthetic environment.
 DESIGN POLICY 15.3       For developed properties in community gateway areas, attractive
                          building façades, rather than surface parking or signage, should be
                          the visually prominent features.
 Design                   The City will consider formation of a Highway 99 Beautification
 Implementation           Committee composed of City staff, business owners, Caltrans,
 Strategy 15.1            BCAG (Butte County Association of Governments) and other key
                          stakeholders to review and make recommendations for gateway and
                          signage improvements along Highway 99 (see also Design
                          Implementation Strategy 10.3).
 DESIGN GOAL 16:          To maintain the rural aesthetic transition into Gridley from the
                          north and improve the visual entry to the City from the south
                          along Highway 99
 DESIGN POLICY 16.1       Developments in the Planned Growth Area shall preserve trees,
                          including orchard trees, and provide additional landscaping and
                          earthen berms west of the Highway for visual screening, where
                          feasible.
 DESIGN POLICY 16.2       The City will allow signage, consistent with the City’s directional
                          and way finding sign program, along Highway 99 in the Planned
                          Growth Area advertising businesses located in Neighborhood
                          Centers in order to promote the viability of commercial operations
                          in these areas.
 Design                   Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will
 Implementation           examine opportunities to fund drainage, earthen berms, bicycle
 Strategy 16.1            trails, landscaping, and related improvements on a fair-share basis
                          by development in the Planned Growth Area along Highway 99
                          north of the City. Please refer to the Open Space Element for more
                          detail.
                      COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                                             45

                                          CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                       2030 General Plan
     This page intentionally blank.
COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND DESIGN ELEMENT
                   46
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                           I

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                Page
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
   Relationship to Other Elements.................................................................................. 1 
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES ............................. 2 
   Agriculture ................................................................................................................... 2 
   Water Supply and Quality .......................................................................................... 5 
   Cultural Resources .................................................................................................... 10 
   Wildlife and Habitats ................................................................................................ 13 
   Energy ......................................................................................................................... 18 
   Aesthetic Resources ................................................................................................... 25 
   Conservation Goal 1: Agriculture (Policies 1.1 through 1.7) ................................... 4
   Conservation Goal 2: Water Supply and Quality (Policies 2.1 through 2.6) .......... 7
   Conservation Goal 3: Water Supply and Quality (Policies 3.1 through 3.9) .......... 8
   Conservation Goal 4: Cultural Resources (Policies 4.1 through 4.7) .................... 12
   Conservation Goal 5: Wildlife and Habitats (Policies 5.1 through 5.9) ................ 17
   Conservation Goal 6: Energy (Policies 6.1 through 6.8) ........................................ 21
   Conservation Goal 7: Energy (Policies 7.1 through 7.10) ...................................... 23
   Conservation Goal 8: Energy (Policies 8.1 through 8.5) ........................................ 25
EXHIBITS
   Conservation-1. Swale Used for Filtering and Conveying Stormwater Runoff .... 8
   Conservation-2. Pervious, Vegetated Areas within Parking Lot (Left) and
                          Street (Right) to Filter and Infiltrate Stormwater ....................... 9
   Conservation-3. Natural Communities in the Gridley Area ................................. 15 
                                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                               I

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
  CONSERVATION ELEMENT
              II
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
INTRODUCTION
A General Plan Conservation Element broadly addresses the management, development,
and use of natural resources, including water, soils, wildlife, minerals, and other relevant
natural resource topics.1 Its requirements overlap those of the open-space, land use,
safety, and circulation elements. The conservation element is distinguished by being
primarily oriented toward natural resource management and conservation. This Element
covers the following natural resource topics that are relevant to the General Plan Study
Area:
     9   Agricultural resources;
     9   Water supply and quality;
     9   Prehistoric and historic resources;
     9   Wildlife and habitats; and,
     9   Energy.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS
The required topics to be addressed for open space and conservation elements as outlined
in the Government Code and the State General Plan Guidelines are closely related to one
another. For this reason, many jurisdictions combine open space and conservation issues
in a single element. Gridley has decided to include separate elements in this General Plan,
each with a somewhat different focus. The focus in the Conservation Element is on the
description of the natural resources present in the General Plan Study Area and methods
for conserving those resources. The focus of the Open Space Element is on identifying
lands that should remain mostly undeveloped, some for resource conservation and some
for other purposes (such as recreation). Examples of General Plan topics covered in the
Conservation and other elements are provided below.
     9   Water conservation and quality are addressed in this Element, while water supply
         and delivery are covered in the Public Facilities Element.
     9   The preservation of land suitable for agriculture and agricultural viability are
         addressed in this Element, but agricultural buffers are discussed in the Land Use
         Element.
1
    There are no significant mineral resources in the Gridley area, and therefore this topic is not
    discussed in this Element. Please refer to the General Plan Environmental Impact Report for
    more information.
                                     CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                   1
                                                                         CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                      2030 General Plan
    9    The preservation of historic resources is addressed in this Element while the
         Community Character and Design Element focuses on compatibility of infill
         development, and new development with the character of historic properties.
    9    Energy conservation, in general, is addressed in this Element, while methods of
         conserving energy through land use patterns, transportation, and design are
         addressed in the Circulation, Land Use, and Community Character and Design
         Elements.
    9    Although air quality is often viewed as a conservation issue, this is addressed
         specifically in the Safety Element.
    9    Some conservation elements identify areas, such as rivers, creeks, streams, and
         adjacent lands that should be preserved to accommodate floodwater for
         groundwater recharge and stormwater management, but these land areas are
         addressed in Gridley’s Open Space Element.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES
Following are Gridley’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies related to
conservation.
AGRICULTURE
High-quality agricultural lands surround the City of Gridley. Agriculture is an extremely
important industry in Gridley, Butte County, and the Sacramento Valley in general.
Agricultural production in the Gridley area includes orchards and field crops, livestock,
and agriculture-related production. In addition to its economic importance, agriculture is
also a fundamental part of Gridley’s history and culture.
Gridley’s vision is to reduce the impact of growth on the viability of agriculture in the
region and to preserve as much productive agricultural land as possible. These goals can
be accomplished by accommodating compact growth and by and requiring new
development to avoid incompatibilities with agricultural operations by providing
appropriate buffering (see the Land Use Element). Through these measures, Gridley will
reduce the amount of land otherwise converted from agricultural to urban use.
                                   CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                             2

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The City will require buffers between residential areas and farmland to avoid complaints
and other compatibility issues (See the Land Use Element for polices on agricultural
buffers). In addition, the City will maintain physical connections to the agricultural
landscape through trails, and bike lanes along a connected transportation network (see the
Circulation Element).
Butte County provides policy and regulatory guidance related to agricultural buffers, as
well. In the past, the County’s agricultural buffer requirements have been applied within
City spheres of influence. The intent of the County’s agricultural buffers are to,
“conserve and stabilize agricultural land from encroachment and conversion to urban
uses, providing land use transitions, setbacks, and buffers between urban development
and agricultural uses.”2 As noted, the City has provided for agricultural buffers in the
Land Use Element that are also intended to prevent against adverse effects on agricultural
operations in the vicinity.
The City will also maintain and promote the local agricultural economy by encouraging
renewable energy development from agricultural waste and other value-added processes
(see also the Energy section of this Element).
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Three of the Guiding Principles of the General Plan relate to the City’s agricultural
setting and history:
     9   The rural, agricultural setting of Gridley is a community asset that should be
         protected, preserved, and celebrated in the built environment as the community
         grows.
     9   We believe agriculture should continue to be viable near the City. Gridley should
         preserve agricultural and other open space around the edges of the community.
     9   It is important to recognize the high quality of farmland that surrounds the
         community by developing in a land-efficient manner that does not unnecessarily
         or prematurely convert agricultural lands to urban use.
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies on conservation of
agriculture. Please refer also to the Land Use Element, which identifies the City’s
approach to agricultural buffers.
2
    Butte County Planning Commission Agenda Report, November 13, 2008.
                                  CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                              3

                                                                          CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                       2030 General Plan
CONSERVATION        To minimize the impacts of growth on agriculture in the Gridley
GOAL 1:             area.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will encourage ongoing agricultural uses on properties
1.1                 within the Sphere of Influence until such properties are annexed to
                    the City.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will discourage detachment from irrigation and
1.2                 agricultural drainage districts until such time as nonagricultural use
                    is imminent.
CONSERVATION POLICY New development within the Planned Growth Area shall mitigate
1.3                 for the conversion of agricultural land to urban use. Mitigation
                    shall include in-lieu fees to acquire agricultural conservation
                    easements or direct placement of agricultural conservation
                    easements on a similar quality and amount of land.
CONSERVATION POLICY New developments that propose subdivision of property in areas
1.4                 adjacent to ongoing agricultural operations shall notify buyers of
                    the potential use of agricultural chemicals, noise, and dust through
                    notes on subdivision or parcel maps or by placing a note on a
                    separate document that is recorded concurrently with the map.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will not consider agricultural operations to be a nuisance
1.5                 when new residential development has become established adjacent
                    to ongoing agricultural operations.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will support research and development of agriculture-
1.6                 related economic activities in the Gridley area, such as renewable
                    energy research and production, agricultural education, and
                    marketing and sales of locally produced agricultural products.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will support small, niche farming on larger properties
1.7                 provided these operations are compatible with surrounding uses.
Conservation        The City will adopt a "right to farm" ordinance (or adopt the Butte
Implementation      County Right to Farm ordinance, as appropriate) that informs
Strategy 1.1        residents of ongoing agricultural practices at the edges of Gridley
                    and protects farmers and other agriculture interests from dumping,
                    nuisance complaints, and other problems typically associated with
                    new residents on the City fringe. The notice should advise new
                    residents of potential mosquito abatement programs by the Butte
                    County Mosquito and Vector Control District in the surrounding
                    area. The City will communicate with Butte County regarding the
                    contents of the County’s Right to Farm Ordinance to develop
                    consistency, where appropriate.
Conservation        The City will communicate with the County, nearby cities, the
Implementation      Department of Conservation, and other interested agencies to
Strategy 1.2        establish a regional agricultural land mitigation fee and
                    conservation program. Such a program should support farmers and
                    agriculture property owners alike in identifying areas of the County
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                        4

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                             with rich soils and where long-term agricultural operations will be
                             preserved.
                             For development requiring annexation, the applicant should either
                             directly preserve, through a conservation easement, or pay on a
                             fair-share basis into a program to preserve permanently a similar
                             amount and quality of farmland. The mitigation program should
                             consider lower preservation ratios for agricultural land preservation
                             within Butte County and higher ratios for preservation outside
                             Butte County, in order to provide substantial incentives for local
                             agricultural preservation. In addition, some portion of the impact
                             fees should support agricultural extension, research, value-added
                             programs, direct marketing of local agricultural products, and other
                             efforts that would support local agricultural productivity.
                             Agricultural mitigation fees could be applied toward research and
                             development of agriculture-related renewable and sustainable
                             energy sources.
                             The City will tie its agricultural land mitigation fee and
                             conservation program to the regional approach, once developed. In-
                             lieu fees for use in this agricultural mitigation program should be
                             based on a City-approved Nexus Study. The City will consider
                             formalizing the agricultural mitigation program in an ordinance, if
                             appropriate.
  Conservation               The City will implement an economic development strategy
  Implementation             consistent with the adopted 2030 General Plan on an ongoing basis.
  Strategy 1.3               One important focus of this economic development strategy will be
                             research and development and consultation with other agencies for
                             renewable energy development using local agricultural products or
                             waste. See the Land Use Element for more detail on the City’s
                             economic development strategy.
WATER SUPPLY AND QUALITY
Rainfall in the Gridley and surrounding areas and snowmelt from the Sierra Nevada
provides substantial surface water and groundwater recharge in Butte County. The City
currently relies exclusively on groundwater for municipal use. Approximately 90 percent
of the County’s average annual precipitation occurs between October and May, although
the amount of precipitation varies greatly.3 Valley portions of the County average
roughly 18 inches of rainfall annually, while mountainous portions of the eastern County
can have more than 75 inches of precipitation per year. The State Department of Water
Resources (DWR) monitors groundwater levels in the valley portion of Butte County,
3
    Butte County. Groundwater Management Plan. September 2004. Available online at:
    http://www.buttecounty.net/waterandresource/GWmgmtPlan/Section_2__1-6-05_%20_2_.pdf
    (accessed January 2, 2009).
                                    CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                  5

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
where Gridley is located. This monitoring shows seasonal changes in groundwater levels
in some portions of the County, but no significant historic change in overall groundwater
levels. However, this monitoring has shown substantially lower groundwater levels
during times of drought.4 Agriculture is the primary user of water in Butte County,
although municipal use is anticipated to increase in the future.5
Gridley is located in an area of irrigated agricultural fields and orchards. Throughout the
northern Sacramento Valley, channels for irrigation and drainage connect fields with
upstream water sources and downstream water bodies which accept runoff and drainage.
The City’s stormwater system connects with facilities used for agricultural drainage.
Although the City maintains its own stormwater drainage system, the City’s system
connects with facilities managed by Reclamation District 833 (RD 833) and Reclamation
District 2056 (RD 2056). These two special districts provide agricultural drainage
services in areas surrounding Gridley.
Ditches that convey agricultural runoff are located throughout the Gridley area. With
outward growth and annexation to Gridley, the City assumes responsibility for drainage
services. The City requires detention along with new development to ensure that the
stormwater rate conveyed into reclamation district facilities does not change. After
stormwater leaves the City, it goes back into reclamation district channels and ultimately
to the Butte Sink and Sacramento River, to the west.
These natural drainages and engineered ditches are an important part of the aesthetic and
natural resource environment. The hydrologic corridors, including natural drainages and
former agriculture ditches, are important for several reasons:
     9    They provide pollutant filtration and erosion and flood control;
     9    They provide natural, open space corridors that serve to link otherwise separate
          areas of the community;
     9    They are a reflection of the community’s rich agricultural heritage and the
          continued importance of agriculture throughout the region; and,
     9    They provide habitat for a variety of resident and migratory wildlife species.
4
    Butte County. Groundwater Management Plan. September 2004. Available online at:
    http://www.buttecounty.net/waterandresource/GWmgmtPlan/Section_2__1-6-05_%20_2_.pdf.
    (accessed January 2, 2009).
5
    Butte County Department of Water and Resource Conservation. Integrated Water Resources
    Plan. May 2005. Available online at: http://www.buttecounty.net/waterandresource/
    int_water_res_plan.htm.
                                    CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                  6

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
As described elsewhere in this General Plan, the City envisions preservation and
restoration of existing drainages along with General Plan buildout to meet not only water
quality goals, but also goals for recreation, aesthetics, community design, and biological
habitat.
 CONSERVATION               To ensure efficient local use of water.
 GOAL 2:
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will encourage the use of recycled water for appropriate
 2.1                        use, including, but not limited to, outdoor irrigation, toilet flushing,
                            fire hydrants, and commercial and industrial processes.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        Native, drought tolerant landscaping will be used, to the maximum
 2.2                        extent feasible, in new City parks and open space and for
                            landscaping within new rights of way as well as within new
                            developments, including commercial, industrial, and residential
                            projects.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will explore opportunities in existing City-owned parks,
 2.3                        open space, rights-of-way, and other City properties to replace
                            landscaping with native, drought tolerant landscaping.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will require the use of water conservation technologies
 2.4                        such as low-flow toilets, efficient clothes washers, and efficient
                            water-using industrial equipment in all new construction, in
                            accordance with State law.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will provide voluntary water audits to identify
 2.5                        conservation opportunities and will explore provide financial
                            incentives for adopting identified efficiency measures.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will comprehensively assess water supply and demand
 2.6                        and identify a range of local conservation measures to be
                            implemented through an Urban Water Management Plan.
 Conservation               When Gridley approaches 3,000 water customers or 3,000 acre-feet
 Implementation             of water supplied annually, the City will prepare an Urban Water
 Strategy 2.1               Management Plan (pursuant to the California Urban Water
                            Management Planning Act). The Urban Water Management Plan
                            (UWMP will describe and evaluate sources of water, will estimate
                            future water needs, and include conservation measures, and
                            implementation strategy, and schedule for implementation. The
                            City will update the Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP), as
                            necessary and as required by State law.
                                   CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                 7
                                                                            CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                       2030 General Plan
Conservation        The City will prepare a Nexus Fee Study following the 2030
Implementation      General Plan update and update fees. As a part of this update, the
Strategy 2.2        City will evaluate its fee structure to align more closely the fees it
                    charges with the actual cost of providing public services. In
                    particular, City will analyze the cost of installing wells, water
                    treatment, and water delivery and reduce water hook-up fees for
                    more compact residential development (with smaller lawns and
                    other areas that would need to be irrigated). The City will also
                    evaluate whether incentives for water efficiency can be built into
                    water rates.
Conservation        The City will analyze the feasibility of installation of recycled
Implementation      waters systems in new development. The City will consider
Strategy 2.3        whether up-front fees or ongoing rates can be reduced for
                    properties that install and use recycled water. The City will
                    consider revisions to the Public Works Construction Standards, as
                    necessary, to allow installation of recycled water systems in new
                    developments.
CONSERVATION        To maintain and improve groundwater and surface water
GOAL 3:             quality.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will consult with appropriate regional, state, and federal
3.1                 agencies to monitor water quality and address local sources of
                    groundwater and soil contamination, including underground
                    storage tanks, septic tanks, agriculture, and industrial uses, as
                    necessary, to achieve state and federal water quality standards.
CONSERVATION POLICY New development shall incorporate erosion control measures in
3.2                 grading and other construction activities designed to prevent
                    erosion and discharge of silt and soil materials to streams.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will require that waterways and floodplains are
3.3                 maintained in their natural condition, wherever possible.
CONSERVATION POLICY Existing swales and
3.4                 sloughs shall be
                    preserved, restored, and
                    used for naturalized
                    stormwater drainage in
                    the context of new
                    development to the
                    maximum extent
                    feasible (Exhibit
                    Conservation-1).
                                                  Exhibit Conservation‐1. Swale Used for 
                                                  Filtering and Conveying Stormwater Runoff 
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                        8

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
  CONSERVATION POLICY           New development shall incorporate natural drainage system design
  3.5                           that includes infiltration and decentralized treatment to the greatest
                                extent feasible.
  CONSERVATION POLICY           New development should incorporate low impact development
  3.6                           (LID) strategies to the greatest extent feasible to reduce stormwater
                                runoff levels, improve infiltration to replenish groundwater
                                sources, and reduce pollutants close to their source.
  CONSERVATION POLICY           New development should minimize the amount of impervious
  3.7                           surfaces such as driveways, streets, and parking lots in order to
                                reduce stormwater, reduce pollutants in urban runoff, recharge
                                groundwater, and reduce flooding.
  CONSERVATION POLICY           In new developments, impervious surfaces such as driveways,
  3.8                           streets, and parking lots should be interspersed with vegetated areas
                                that allow for filtering and infiltration of stormwater (Exhibit
                                Conservation-2).
  Exhibit Conservation‐2. Pervious, Vegetated Areas within Parking Lot (Left) and Street (Right) to Filter 
  and Infiltrate Stormwater 
  CONSERVATION POLICY           New development should use permeable surfaces for hardscape,
  3.9                           wherever feasible.
  Conservation                  The City will update or adopt a new drainage master plan following
  Implementation                adoption of the 2030 General Plan to implement drainage policies
  Strategy 3.1                  within the Planned Growth Area. The City will develop a fair-share
                                approach to funding drainage improvements in the Planned Growth
                                Area, but will also proactively identify state and federal grant
                                programs that could be used to implement the City’s natural
                                drainage/low impact development approach.6 The City will engage
                                with the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the State Water
                                Resources Control Board to ensure that the appropriate regional
                                and state water quality objectives are incorporated into the City’s
                                natural drainage approach. The City will consult with regional,
6
    See the State Water Resources Control Board web site for some examples of LID projects
    funded recently: http://www.swrcb.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/grants_loans/
    low_impact_development/index.shtml
                                        CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                     9

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
                            state, and federal resource agencies to ensure ease of permitting for
                            the City’s natural drainage and low impact development approach
                            for the Planned Growth Area. The City will consult with relevant
                            agencies to develop a streamlined permit process that ensures the
                            feasibility of the City’s stormwater best management practices. In
                            addition to proactive consultation with the relevant resource
                            agencies, the City will also work with the Mosquito Abatement
                            District to ensure community health interests and vector control
                            measures are considered in the design of storm drainage systems.
                            See also Conservation Implementation Strategy 5.3.
  Conservation              The City will revise the Public Works Construction Standards, as
  Implementation            necessary, to encourage use of natural drainage systems and low
  Strategy 3.2              impact development principles. The City will establish standards
                            and fee programs to require and/or provide incentives for methods
                            to slow down and filter stormwater. The City will make revisions
                            required to emphasize slowing down and dispersing stormwater,
                            using existing and constructing new landscaped swales to convey
                            stormwater runoff, encourage sheet flow to filter stormwater
                            runoff, encourage use of landscaped infiltration basins in planter
                            strips along roadways and in parking lots, and other best
                            management practices, as appropriate. The City will revise its
                            parking design standards, as necessary, to encourage consistency
                            with the 2030 General Plan.
  Conservation              Following adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will adopt
  Implementation            new landscaping standards, as necessary, to ensure consistency
  Strategy 3.3              with policies in the Conservation Element. Among these revisions,
                            the City will revise landscaping requirements to include drought-
                            tolerant, low-maintenance plants.
CULTURAL RESOURCES
Cultural resources are important reminders and remnants of Gridley’s history. These
resources offer physical evidence of the prehistoric and historic occupation and
exploitation of the area. Cultural resources include both prehistoric Native American
sites, and historic roads, buildings, and other physical remnants. A brief overview of the
prehistoric and historic context associated with potential cultural resources follows.
In prehistoric times, large portions of the Sacramento Valley were inhabited primarily by
the Maidu Native Americans. Their territory included sections of the Sacramento Valley
floor and portions of the Sierra foothills east of the present-day cities of Chico and
                                    CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                10

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Oroville.7 The earliest documented European entry into the area around Gridley occurred
in 1808. That year, Gabriel Moraga led an expedition up the Feather River Sacramento
River, possibly to the current location of Butte City to find locations for new missions
and establish Spanish rule in the face of increasing pressure from the Russians.8 Hudson
Bay trappers were in the Gridley area during the early decades of the 19th century.
Jedediah Strong Smith trapped the “golden beaver” along the Feather River and crossed
the river at the fork with Honcutt Creek approximately 5 miles northeast of Biggs in
March of 1827.9 Other expeditions occurred in the region through the mid 19th Century.
George W. Gridley, after whom the City of Gridley was named, was born in New York,
but moved to Galena, Illinois as a teenager. In 1850, he set out to drive a herd of
livestock to California. Although he lost the entire herd, he settled on land that would
become the town of Gridley, and became involved in livestock. He expanded his
livestock operations to more than 30,000 acres and at one time was the largest tax payer
in Butte County, with land holdings that included large portions of southern Butte
County.10 A post office was established in 1862 at the Gridley Ranch, but the area did not
expand until 1870 when the California and Oregon Railroad established a station at
Biggs. George Gridley was successful in getting the railroad to construct a station at his
ranch, adjacent to which the railroad established a park, which remains to this day. In
1870, the California and Oregon Railroad was purchased by the Central Pacific Railroad.
Soon after several additional buildings were added and formed the earliest buildings of
the town. These included a home and store built by L.C. Stone, a Wells Fargo office, and
the Gridley Hotel.11
While dry farming and the raising of livestock, primarily sheep, were the main
agricultural activities throughout the 19th century, agriculture became diversified in the
early 20th century with the construction of a system of canals that provided irrigation
water from the lower Feather River beginning in 1905. In the 1920s prunes, almonds and
olives led the new plantings in Butte County, and in 1921, farmers were planting
pumpkins among orchard trees in the Gridley area, from where they were first shipped to
canneries in the Gridley area. In the 1930s, aided by aerial application of seed, rice also
became a major crop in the Gridley area.
7
    White, Gregory G. 2003a. Final Report of Testing and Mitigation at Four Sites on the Level
    (3) Long Haul Fiber Optic Alignment, Colusa County, California. Archaeological Research
    Program Report No. 42. Archaeological Research Program, California State University, Chico.
8
    Beck, Warren, Ynez Haas.1974. Historical Atlas of California. University of Oklahoma Press.
    Norman and London.
9
    McGie, Joseph F. 1982.History of Butte County. Butte County Board of Education.
10
    Walker, Vicky. 2007. History of Butte County, Cal, by George C. Mansfield. Transcribed by
    Vicky Walker. http://freepages.geneaology.rootsweb.com/npmelton/btgrid.htm. Accessed
    February 2-2008.
11
    McGie, Joseph F. 1982.History of Butte County. Butte County Board of Education.
                                    CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                               11

                                                                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                              2030 General Plan
With the prehistoric and historic context in mind, the City collected information from a
large variety of resources to support this General Plan update, including a records search
was at the Northeast Information Center (NEIC) at California State University Chico. For
this General Plan update, the City, in accordance with SB18, contacted Native American
representatives recommended by the Native American Heritage Commission to gather
input. The Enterprise Rancheria of Oroville responded to this request, expressing their
ability to provide assistance to the City in the form of providing monitors for construction
project, provide input into the cultural significance of inadvertent finds, ensure
compliance with State laws, and insure the Native American human remains and
associated grave items are treated with appropriate dignity. A review of the Sacred Land
Files by the NAHC did not reveal the presence of sensitive resources within areas that
may be affected by implementation of this General Plan.
Please refer to the Community Character and Design Element, which discusses the
design-related aspects of historic architectural preservation.
 CONSERVATION               To minimize negative impacts to prehistoric and historic
 GOAL 4:                    resources.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        Archaeological and paleontological resources shall be protected
 4.1                        permanently from urban development, wherever possible.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        New developments shall analyze potential impacts, and shall be
 4.2                        designed to avoid adverse impacts to any known archaeological
                            and paleontological resources, wherever possible.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will use cultural resource databases to determine the
 4.3                        likely presence of resources and the appropriate level of cultural
                            resources analysis required for new developments.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will require presence of a professional archaeologist to
 4.4                        monitor all ground-disturbing activities for improvements to the
                            City’s wastewater treatment plant and other City-sanctioned earth
                            disturbing activities within 150 meters of the Feather River.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City shall restrict the circulation of information concerning the
 4.5                        location of cultural resources, in order to prevent potential site theft
                            or vandalism.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will encourage private property owners to preserve,
 4.6                        maintain, adapt and reuse historic structures, while maintaining as
                            much of the historic character as possible.
                                   CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                12

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
  CONSERVATION POLICY      Buildings and other resources that have historical or architectural
  4.7                      value should be preserved, wherever feasible. Where this is not
                           feasible, the resource shall be documented and the information
                           retained in a secure, but publicly accessible location. The resource
                           proposed for removal should be described and incorporated into
                           historic and/or interpretive signage. The reuse and display of
                           historic materials and artifacts from the resource is encouraged.
  Conservation             As new development projects are proposed that are subject to the
  Implementation           California Environmental Quality Act, the City will require cultural
  Strategy 4.1             resource analysis, as appropriate, based in part on information
                           available from the Northeast Information Center of the California
                           Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS) and, if
                           necessary, consulting with a qualified professional archaeologist or
                           architectural historian, as appropriate. The City will require
                           analysis and mitigation, as appropriate, consistent with Section
                           15064.5 of the State CEQA guidelines. In the event of the
                           inadvertent discovery of previously unknown archaeological sites
                           during excavation or construction, all construction affecting the site
                           shall cease and the contractor shall contact the City. If Native
                           American human remains are discovered, the City will work with
                           local Native American representatives to ensure that the remains
                           and associated artifacts are treated in a respectful and dignified
                           manner, in accordance with State law.
  Conservation             The City will require a paleontological resources impact
  Implementation           assessment for projects proposed within the Modesto Formation,
  Strategy 4.2             where a CEQA environmental document is required and where
                           substantial excavation is anticipated. The Modesto Formation is an
                           area that is sensitive for paleontological resources and underlies
                           many parts of the central valley. Impacts to paleontological
                           resources would be evaluated on a site-specific basis, pursuant to
                           the State CEQA Guidelines. Where such impacts are found to be
                           potentially significant, the City will require feasible mitigation
                           measures to reduce impacts, such as construction worker personnel
                           education, consultation with a qualified paleontologist should
                           resources be encountered, and recovery and curation of specimens,
                           as appropriate. Infill projects that do not involve substantial
                           excavation would be exempt from this requirement.
WILDLIFE AND HABITATS
Agricultural practices have disturbed the natural setting in most of the Gridley area,
limiting somewhat the biological habitat value. However, pastures, orchards, and other
croplands do provide some habitat value for a variety of bird species and deer. For
example, flood irrigation provides feeding and roosting sites for wetland-associated birds.
Habitats can become established over time along agricultural drainage ditches and
                                  CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                               13
                                                                               CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                            2030 General Plan
irrigation canals located around the Gridley area, which could support an extensive
variety of plant and animal species (see Exhibit Conservation-3).
Few special-status (rare) plant species have potential to occur in the Gridley area. A list
of special-status plant species was developed in 2008, using data from the California
Native Plant Society (CNPS) Inventory, California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB)
and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) species lists. This list included woolly rose-
mallow (Hibiscus lasiocarpus) and Sanford’s arrowhead (Sagittaria sanfordii). Woolly
rose-mallow is found in freshwater marshes and swamps at elevations from 0 to 400 feet.
Sanford’s arrowhead is found in shallow, standing, fresh water and sluggish waterways
including marshes, swamps, ponds, vernal pools, lakes, reservoirs, sloughs, ditches,
canals, streams and rivers at elevations from 10 to 2000 feet.
Few special-status wildlife species have potential to occur in the Gridley area. A list of
special-status animal species was developed in 2008, using data from the USFWS and
CNDDB. This list included Swainson’s hawk, valley elderberry longhorn beetle, and
giant garter snake. Swainson’s hawk nest in isolated trees, small groves, or large
woodlands, next to open grasslands or agricultural fields. Nest locations are usually in
close proximity to suitable foraging habitats, which include fallow fields, irrigated
pastures, alfalfa and other hay crops, and low-growing row crops. The valley elderberry
longhorn beetle is distributed primarily within riparian habitats and is dependent solely
on blue elderberry shrubs or red elderberry shrubs to complete its lifecycle. Giant garter
snake inhabits agricultural wetlands and other waterways such as irrigation and drainage
canals, sloughs, ponds, small lakes, low gradient streams, and adjacent uplands.12
The City is a participant in the Butte Regional Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural
Community Conservation Plan (HCP/NCCP) which, as of the writing of this document, is
being drafted by the Butte County Association of Governments (BCAG). The
HCP/NCCP is a comprehensive and broad-based approach to biological resource
preservation. These efforts identify the most important areas to preserve for protection of
plants, animals, and habitats, but also allow for compatible land development, urban
growth, and other economic activities. The HCP/NCCP is a voluntary plan that provides
comprehensive species, wetlands and ecosystem conservation, contributes to recovery of
endangered species, and a more streamlined process for biological resource-related
permitting. The Butte HCP will equitable distribute the costs and benefits of habitat
conservation planning within the region.13
12
    United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Sacramento Office, Sacramento, CA. Conservation
    Guidelines for the Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle. 1999.
13
    Butte County Association of Governments. http://www.buttehcp.com/
                                    CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                14

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Source: Butte County HCP/NCCP, 2005. 
Exhibit Conservation‐3. Natural Communities in the Gridley Area  
                                                                  CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                                          15

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The plan area covers approximately two-thirds of the county (564,270 acres) and is
evaluating coverage of 36 species, including the following state-listed species:
Swainson’s hawk, Western yellow-billed cuckoo, bank swallow, and giant garter snake.
The natural communities to be addressed by the plan include oak woodland and savanna,
grassland, riparian, wetland, and aquatic.14
CONSERVATION               To protect wildlife habitats, including those that could support
GOAL 5:                    sensitive species, as the City grows.
CONSERVATION POLICY        New developments shall use techniques, such as buffers, setbacks,
5.1                        and clustering of development to protect wetlands, riparian
                           corridors, vernal pools, and sensitive species.
CONSERVATION POLICY        New development shall preserve open space corridors alongside
5.2                        agricultural drainage ditches.
CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will have former agricultural drainage ditches improved
5.3                        or restored in a way that avoids or improves habitat value and
                           maintains or improves wetland function.
CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will condition new development, as necessary, to reduce
5.4                        erosion, siltation, and mitigate impacts to wetland, riverine, and
                           riparian habitats.
CONSERVATION POLICY        New developments shall preserve and plant native or naturalized
5.5                        vegetation and avoid the introduction of invasive exotic species.
CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will require compliance with state and federal laws
5.6                        concerning special status species.
CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will ensure consistency of new development with
5.7                        applicable portions of the Butte County Habitat Conservation Plan
                           and Natural Communities Conservation Plan.
CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will explore opportunities to use mitigation fees from
5.8                        regional habitat preservation programs to restore agricultural ditches.
CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will continue to collaborate with the California
5.9                        Department of Fish and Game and the United States Fish and
                           Wildlife Service, as appropriate, to ensure the protection and
                           preservation of special-status species and their habitats within the
                           Gridley Planning Area.
Conservation               The City will require plant and animal surveys and mitigation prior
Implementation             to new development, as necessary, for projects subject to CEQA
Strategy 5.1               compliance. The City will consult with state and federal resource
                           agencies and BCAG to identify priority habitats and special status
                           species locations, identify survey requirements, and establish
14
    California Department of Fish and Game.
    http://www.dfg.ca.gov/habcon/nccp/status/ButteCounty.html
                                    CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                 17

                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                               2030 General Plan
                           mitigation ratios. In particular, the City will focus on valley
                           elderberry shrub locations, raptor- and migratory bird nests,
                           Swainson’s hawk nesting areas and foraging habitat, potential giant
                           garter snake habitat, and potential wetlands, riverine, and riparian
                           habitats. The City’s survey and mitigation requirements will be
                           consistent with guidance from the California Department of Fish
                           and Game, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the California
                           Native Plant Society, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
                           the Butte County Habitat Conservation Plan and Natural
                           Communities Conservation Plan (HCP/NCCP), as appropriate.
Conservation               The City will communicate with BCAG and other participants in
Implementation             the HCP/NCCP process to encourage use of regional mitigation
Strategy 5.2               fees for restoration of agricultural ditches in the Gridley area.
Conservation               The City will update or adopt a new drainage master plan following
Implementation             adoption of the 2030 General Plan to implement drainage policies
Strategy 5.3               within the Planned Growth Area. In coordination with this effort,
                           the City of Gridley will engage with the California Department of
                           Fish and Game, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, the
                           Army Corps of Engineers, and the US Fish and Wildlife Service to
                           ensure that the appropriate biological and wetland related
                           objectives are incorporated into the City’s natural drainage
                           approach. The City will communicate with regional, state, and
                           federal resource agencies to ensure ease of permitting for the City’s
                           natural drainage and low impact development approach for the
                           Planned Growth Area. The City will consult with relevant agencies
                           to develop a streamlined permit process that ensures the feasibility
                           of the City’s stormwater best management practices. See also
                           Conservation Implementation Strategy 3.1.
ENERGY
Transportation accounts for 39% of all energy consumption in California, which makes it
the largest energy-consuming sector.15 Transportation accounts for more energy
consumption than heating, cooling, and powering of buildings, powering industry, or any
other use. For Gridley, like California, transportation and land use planning techniques
provide a huge opportunity to decrease energy use (along with reducing household
transportation costs). The City has, therefore prepared an array of land use, circulation,
and community design policies that are the primary means for achieving Gridley’s energy
conservation goals during buildout of this General Plan. There is a broad range of
feasible and commonly used land use and transportation planning strategies that reduce
15
    U.S. Department of Energy. California Energy Summary. Online.
    http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/states/energy_summary.cfm/state=CA. Accessed
    February 6, 2009.
                                    CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                18

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
vehicular travel demand and therefore increase energy efficiency. These strategies are
incorporated into Gridley’s Land Use, Circulation, and Community Character and Design
Elements of this General Plan, including:
    9    More compact development patterns and mixing of land uses that place
         residences and destinations closer to one another;
    9    High-quality pedestrian and bicycle connections between destinations;
    9    Development patterns and transportation infrastructure that together provide
         citizens and businesses with provide more energy efficient travel choices;
    9    New neighborhoods with a variety of higher-activity land uses in accessible
         neighborhood centers;
    9    A bicycle and pedestrian network that connects neighborhood centers to each
         other and to other destinations around town; and,
    9    Encouraging infill and redevelopment as an overall strategy to place homes
         and destinations closer to one another.
Please refer to the Land Use, Circulation, and Community Character and Design elements
of this General Plan for more information on energy-conserving policies related to land
use, transportation, and community design.
SITE AND BUILDING DESIGN
Building orientation, tree planting, and other strategies to provide shade from the summer
afternoon sun are important for energy conservation considering Gridley’s sunny climate.
In addition to site planning, there are many strategies for energy conservation through the
selection of building materials, construction methods, appliances, and other building
components. Energy efficiency measures in buildings would provide residents and
businesses cost-saving opportunities. Energy efficiency retrofits could substantially
improve the energy performance of the existing building stock. Encouraging well-
designed, smaller residential units (with smaller spaces to heat and cool) is also a
fundamental way to reduce energy demand.
California building regulations have increasingly recognized available energy
conservation methods over time. Additional energy conservation and “green building”
standards will be required by the State during build out of this General Plan. The 2007
California Green Building Standards Code (CCR, Title 24, Part 11) will become
mandatory in 2010 (Department of General Services, 2008). The amended code is
expected to reduce building energy consumption by 15 percent, water consumption by
                                   CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                             19

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                       2030 General Plan
20% and landscape water consumption by 50%. New residential buildings will be
required to use zero net energy by 2020 and commercial buildings will need to achieve
this target by 2030. In addition to buildings, there are a variety of strategies for design
and construction of infrastructure and public facilities that can provide energy
conservation benefits.
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Production and purchasing of renewable energy is another effective way for the
community to reduce energy demand (and provide local cost savings). Recent advances
in technology provide the City with a variety of feasible options for renewable energy
production. Use of solar power for hot water, and electricity needs is common. Wind
power is being developed on a large scale throughout the state. Fuels created in part or
entirely from vegetative material are increasingly commonplace. The increased local
generation and use of renewable energy can substantially contribute to the City's energy
conservation goals.
The City is in the unusual position of being both the land entitlement authority and the
electrical provider within corporate limits. Therefore, the City can strategically
coordinate a wide variety of planning, public investment, financing, and regulatory
initiatives to achieve energy conservation goals. The City’s land use and transportation
policy, CEQA lead agency review, and energy facilities planning will be coordinated in
order to take advantage of best practices in energy conservation.
LOCAL ECONOMY
The City’s energy conservation goals are closely related to local economic goals in a
variety of ways. The City’s local economic goals focus on targeting, attracting, and
retaining businesses whose products are related to renewable energy (see also the Land
Use Element). For example, the City could plan and market “green” and “eco-industrial”
design approaches in the City’s industrial sites, establishing Gridley as a leader in
environmental sustainability (see the Land Use Element). City residents and businesses
can reduce their energy costs through implementation of City energy conservation
policies (including cost savings through use of non-vehicular methods of transportation),
contributing toward long-term economic sustainability.
Since the City is an electrical provider, there are unique opportunities to structure
electrical facilities financing and maintenance to pass along energy savings to our
customers – both residents and businesses. Gridley could use reduced electrical rates as
one incentive to attract future employers. Gridley can be more competitive in the future
as a community by minimizing our residents and businesses’ long-term energy costs.
                                  CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                             20

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The City can build on its base of agriculture-related production by encouraging the local
production and use of renewable energy from agricultural products or waste. The City
will continue development and use of renewable energy in consultation with other
members of the Northern California Power Association, including not only hydroelectric
power, but also solar and fuel derived from local agricultural products.
Ongoing and forthcoming climate change regulations will require and/or provide
incentives for energy and greenhouse-gas-efficient development practices, such as those
described in this General Plan. With implementation of policies included in this General
Plan, Gridley has provided a model for energy and greenhouse gas efficient development
policy. In doing so, the City is well positioned to take advantage of cap-and-trade
programs, market incentives for energy conservation and greenhouse gas reductions, and
changes in land development practices related to climate change regulations.
 CONSERVATION              To encourage local generation and use of renewable energy.
 GOAL 6:
 CONSERVATION POLICY       The City’s Electrical Utility will expand local generation and use of
 6.1                       renewable energy sources for electricity in Gridley and the share of
                           renewable energy in the City’s overall portfolio.
 CONSERVATION POLICY       The City will promote development and use of renewable energy,
 6.2                       including not only hydroelectric power, but also solar and fuel
                           derived from local agricultural products or agricultural waste.
 CONSERVATION POLICY       The City will explore opportunities to install shade structures and
 6.3                       combined shade structures/active solar systems at public transit
                           stops, public parking lots, parks, on public buildings, and elsewhere
                           on public property.
 CONSERVATION POLICY       The City will allow flexibility in development standards, where
 6.4                       necessary, to encourage construction of active solar systems or
                           combination shade structures/active solar systems on private
                           property.
 CONSERVATION POLICY       Developers and occupying residents and businesses that install and
 6.5                       use active solar systems should have reduced electricity hook up
                           fees and reduced electricity rates.
 CONSERVATION POLICY       The City will encourage property owners to connect active solar
 6.6                       systems on-site to other buildings in the development and to the
                           City’s power grid.
 CONSERVATION POLICY       The City will encourage formation of financing districts in new and
 6.7                       existing development, where feasible, to finance the installation of
                           renewable energy infrastructure and energy efficiency
                           improvements.
                                  CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                              21

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                       2030 General Plan
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will proactively pursue collaborative projects with
6.8                 regional, State, and federal agencies to produce renewable energy
                    in Gridley.
Conservation        The City will take advantage of current grant, loan, and financing
Implementation      programs offered through the State of California Energy
Strategy 6.1        Commission and Federal Department of Energy to encourage
                    installation of active solar systems in new and existing
                    development. The City will actively pursue future federal, state,
                    and regional funding programs to encourage installation of shade
                    structures that also have active solar systems. The City will explore
                    opportunities to install active solar systems on the roof of public
                    buildings and accessory buildings. The City will also encourage
                    property owners’ use of financing districts to fund construction of
                    active solar facilities and repayment over time as a part of property
                    tax.
Conservation        The City will explore infrastructure improvements and financing
Implementation      programs necessary to allow properties to connect solar or other
Strategy 6.2        renewable electricity generation facilities to other structures nearby
                    or to the City’s electricity grid. The City will explore opportunities
                    to allow property owners to sell excess electricity to the City or the
                    Northern California Power Agency. Excess electricity generated on
                    public and private properties should be transmitted to Gridley’s
                    electricity system. Private properties should be able to sell excess
                    electricity to pay down bonds used to construct active solar systems
                    on-site.
Conservation        The City will prepare a Nexus Fee Study and update impact fees
Implementation      following adoption of the General Plan. The City also may need to
Strategy 6.3        prepare or revise a master plan that addresses electrical
                    infrastructure for the Planned Growth Area. The City’s Nexus Fee
                    Study and update to impact fees should include analyze energy
                    procurement and distribution costs. For newly developing
                    properties that include energy conservation techniques beyond
                    those required by building codes, the City should examine whether
                    reduced impact fees would be appropriate. The Nexus Fee Study
                    will need to be coordinated with electrical facilities master
                    planning.
Conservation        The City will consult with other members of the Northern
Implementation      California Power Association to ensure that state legislation on
Strategy 6.4        renewable energy appropriately considers renewable hydroelectric
                    power and supports Gridley’s energy procurement and distribution
                    practices.
                            CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                         22

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 Conservation        The City will identify grant programs and other state, regional, and
 Implementation      federal funding that may be available to expand the generation and
 Strategy 6.5        use of renewable energy within Gridley. The City will take
                     advantage of opportunities to benefit from future greenhouse gas
                     and energy related regulation and markets, such as a cap-and-trade
                     program. The City will focus on opportunities to generate and use
                     renewable energy produced by local agriculture.
 CONSERVATION        To encourage energy efficient site planning and building
 GOAL 7:             construction.
 CONSERVATION POLICY Existing trees should be preserved along future streetscapes and
 7.1                 planned development areas to provide immediate shade. Unhealthy
                     trees and those that present a hazard can be removed.
 CONSERVATION POLICY New developments should include deciduous trees and shrubs on
 7.2                 the western and southern sides of buildings, to the maximum extent
                     feasible, to reduce solar heat gain in the summer and allow for solar
                     heat gain in the winter.
 CONSERVATION POLICY Trees should be strategically planted to shade pavement areas and
 7.3                 air conditioners.
 CONSERVATION POLICY Proposed projects, plans, and property subdivisions should orient
 7.4                 proposed detached single-family homes to provide access to
                     warming winter sunlight and shade from the summer afternoon sun.
                     The long axis of single-family homes should, in general, be
                     oriented from east to west.
 CONSERVATION POLICY Building plans should enhance natural ventilation through natural
 7.5                 convection, push-pull ventilators, and other techniques, and should
                     include effective use of daylight through high-performance glazing
                     systems, skylights, light ducts, light shelves and other strategies.
 CONSERVATION POLICY The City will encourage new homes and major residential
 7.6                 renovations to comply with the guidelines for the California Energy
                     Star Homes Program.
 CONSERVATION POLICY The City will encourage certification of new residential,
 7.7                 commercial, and industrial buildings through a green building
                     standards program.
 CONSERVATION POLICY New commercial, institutional, and industrial development should
 7.8                 use light-colored paving materials for internal roads and parking.
 CONSERVATION POLICY The City will continue to provide free energy efficiency audits of
 7.9                 existing buildings and help facilitate the implementation of
                     identified efficiency improvements.
                            CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                        23
                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                       2030 General Plan
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will encourage the retrofitting of existing buildings with
7.10                energy efficient systems, energy-efficient appliances, insulation,
                    energy-efficient doors and windows, and other elements that
                    conserve resources.
Conservation        Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will consider
Implementation      adopting green building standards, designed to promote energy
Strategy 7.1        efficiency and other environmentally sustainable practices in new
                    construction. The City will consider the Build-it-Green program,
                    LEED, or other similar programs for single-family residential
                    construction. The City will consider LEED certification or similar
                    programs for multi-family, commercial, and industrial construction.
                    As a part of the building standards, City will consider requiring
                    larger projects involving buildings of over 5,000 square feet to be
                    LEED certified or to achieve some other specific green building
                    standard. In addition to the building standards, the City will
                    consider incentives or requirements for construction that complies
                    with the guidelines for the California Energy Star Homes Program
                    and residential developments that participate in California Energy
                    Commission’s New Solar Homes Partnership. The City will
                    consider whether large projects should be required to use U.S.
                    EPA–Energy Star rated roofing materials and light colored paint.
                    The City will broadly consider what incentives could be made
                    available that would encourage construction according to the City’s
                    goals for energy conservation, including reducing fees, expedited
                    permitting, density bonuses, and other incentives.
Conservation        The City will explore the provision of low-interest financing,
Implementation      grants, and other programs that could be used for energy efficiency
Strategy 7.2        retrofits and alternative energy projects in existing residential,
                    commercial, and industrial buildings. The City will identify
                    methods to encourage the retrofitting of existing buildings with
                    energy efficient systems, energy-efficient appliances, insulation,
                    energy-efficient doors and windows, and other elements that
                    conserve resources, as well as installation of renewable energy
                    facilities. The City will explore potential State grants and other
                    funding mechanisms to assist with energy efficiency retrofits and
                    alternative energy projects for civic, residential and commercial
                    buildings.
Conservation        The City will revise landscaping requirements consistent with
Implementation      Conservation Goal 7 and policies 7.2 and 7.3.
Strategy 7.3
                            CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                        24

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 CONSERVATION               To increase energy efficiency in City operations.
 GOAL 8:
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will conduct energy efficiency audits of all City-owned
 8.1                        buildings to identify efficiency improvements.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        All new City-owned buildings and major remodels and additions
 8.2                        should achieve a United States Green Building Council - LEED
                            Certification or a similar rating program, as funding allows.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will consider the installation of renewable energy systems
 8.3                        on City buildings and properties and transition the City’s fleet to
                            hybrid vehicles.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will explore the viability of LED streetlights to reduce
 8.4                        energy consumption and provide more reliable and constant
                            illumination.
 CONSERVATION POLICY        The City will provide City staff training and public outreach on
 8.5                        methods to reduce energy consumption and available incentives for
                            energy efficiency measures.
 Conservation               The City will conduct an energy efficient audit of City buildings
 Implementation             and major operations to identify improvements that could be made
 Strategy 8.1               to increase energy efficiency. Up-front improvement costs will be
                            compared with long-term energy savings. Improvements will be
                            prioritized based on cost and benefit and included and implemented
                            as funding is available.
AESTHETIC RESOURCES
Gridley is located in an area of the Sacramento Valley characterized by agricultural uses,
with expansive views of the nearby Sutter Buttes and Sierra Nevada foothills. As the City
grows, it will maintain this visual character and connections to nearby scenic resources.
Please refer to the Land Use Element, which describes the City’s intent to encourage
compact development that preserves agricultural land, as well as the City’s intent for
agricultural buffers.
Light pollution is a growing problem in California as urban areas of the state expand.
Poorly designed lighting, especially outdoor lighting, can create “skyglow” which affects
the nighttime views for many miles. Street lights and other outdoor lights in the City of
Gridley should be designed to direct light downward, where it is used, and avoid the
outward and upward escape of light. The Municipal Code addresses light spillage (see
Section 17.38.090 of the Municipal Code), prohibiting light spillage of any subject
property onto adjacent properties.
                                    CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                                25

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                      2030 General Plan
CONSERVATION        To maintain views of the Sutter Buttes.
GOAL 9:
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will consider views of the Sutter Buttes in the orientation
9.1                 of new roadways and trails, and maintain visual connections, where
                    feasible.
CONSERVATION        To reduce impacts from nighttime lighting and glare in the City
GOAL 10:            of Gridley.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will support and encourage practices that reduce light
10.1                pollution and glare, and preserve views of the night sky.
CONSERVATION POLICY The City will require the use of fixtures that direct light toward
10.2                target areas and shield it from spillage in new development and as
                    existing fixtures are upgraded or replaced.
Conservation        Amend the Municipal Code to reduce glare associated with new
Implementation      development through such measures as:
Strategy 10.1            9    Exterior building materials on nonresidential structures
                              shall be composed of a minimum 50% low-reflectance,
                              non-polished finishes.
                         9    Bare metallic surfaces (e.g., pipes, vents, light fixtures)
                              shall be painted to minimize reflectance.
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                                        26
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
HOUSING PLAN
This chapter presents the City of Gridley's housing plan. Gridley has oriented its goals,
policies, and implementation strategies to achieve local objectives for housing. This plan
also implements state housing law and regional housing targets.
The purpose and intent of Gridley’s housing plan is to:
    9    Promote the preservation, improvement, and development of housing appropriate
         to meet the needs of the full range of household types and incomes.
    9    Encourage neighborhood stability and reinvestment in order to accommodate a
         variety of housing types and densities, as compatible with non-residential uses
         throughout the City.
    9    Ensure that new growth areas will accommodate a variety of housing that is
         planned and developed in coordination with nearby commercial and public
         services in the Planned Growth Area.
    9    Accommodate housing in both existing and new neighborhoods to serve for all
         socio-economic groups, a balance between homeownership and rental, multi-
         modal travel options, access to jobs, schools, and parks, and other civic and
         commercial services.
The City’s housing strategies are important to achieving the City’s overall economic,
environmental, and social objectives, as described throughout the 2030 General Plan. The
City’s housing goal, policies, and implementation strategies are specifically drawn to
compliment goals and policies in other elements of the new General Plan.
Please refer to the Land Use, Circulation, Open Space, Community Character and
Design, and Public Facilities elements of the 2030 General Plan for other housing-related
goals and policies.
                                           PLAN-1

                                                                                CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                            2030 General Plan
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION
STRATEGIES
The housing plan is organized around the following key issues:
    1. Housing Quality
    2. Housing Quantity
    3. Remove Constraints to Housing
    4. Affordable Housing
    5. Equal Housing Opportunity
    6. Natural Resources and Energy Conservation
The above key issues build on some of the policies in the 2004-2009 Housing Element,
but have been substantially modified to reflect current state law, the effectiveness and
appropriateness of existing programs, current and projected housing needs, and existing
and potential constraints and opportunities.
HOUSING QUALITY
HOUSING GOAL 1:            To promote the development of a variety of housing types
                           throughout the City that is safe and complements the
                           surrounding neighborhood.
HOUSING POLICY 1.1         The City will maintain and enforce development standards and
                           building standards that provide housing and safe neighborhoods for
                           housing all income levels.
HOUSING POLICY 1.2         The City will encourage the development and redevelopment of
                           neighborhoods that include a variety of housing types and sizes.
HOUSING POLICY 1. 3        The City will encourage the maintenance of existing housing to
                           prevent deterioration and promote dwelling lifespan.
                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
                                            PLAN-2
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Housing           On a request basis, the Building Department will continue to inspect
Implementation    buildings for Health and Safety Standards and Building Code
Strategy 1.1      violations. Buildings found in violation of Health and Safety
                  Standards and/or Building Codes will be required to be rehabilitated
                  to current Codes and Standards. Informational brochures shall be
                  developed to inform residents of this service. The City will continue
                  its current program to maintain a code violations database and notice
                  property owners of code violations. The City will research options
                  for addressing code violation problems with absentee property
                  owners, including surveying other cities’ approaches. The Planning
                  Department will bring a recommendation and/or options for
                  addressing this situation to the City Council for consideration and
                  action, including, but not limited to revisions to the City’s nuisance
                  abatement procedures.
                  Timing: Ongoing
                  Responsible Agency/Department: Building Department
                  Funding Sources: City General Fund, as well as potentially
                  assessments on properties with code violations
                  Objective: Resolve code violations.
Housing           The Community Development Department will conduct a housing
Implementation    condition survey in order to determine the housing in the City in
Strategy 1.2      need of rehabilitation as an update to the 2006 Housing Conditions
                  Survey conducted by the City. The City will analyze the results of
                  the Housing Conditions Survey to help prioritize and apply the
                  City’s efforts and application of funding for housing rehabilitation.
                  Timing: Following General Plan adoption; Target 2011
                  Responsible Agency/Department: Community Development
                  Department.
                  Funding Sources: CDBG Planning / Technical Assistance Grant
                  Objective: Update City’s knowledge of local housing conditions.
Housing           In coordination with the Consolidated Area Housing Authority of
Implementation    Sutter County, the City will continue the Gridley Housing
Strategy 1.3      Rehabilitation Program to provide financial assistance to owner and
                  renter lower-income households for housing rehabilitation during
                  this planning cycle. The Housing Rehabilitation Program will be
                  publicized in brochures made available at City Hall, the library, and
                  electronically on the City’s website.
                  Timing: Ongoing
                  Responsible Agency/Department: Community Development
                  Department
                  Funding Sources: CDBG, HOME Funds, USDA Rural Development
                  Services
                  Quantified Objective: Provide financial assistance to 30 owner and
                  renter lower-income households for housing rehabilitation during
                                    PLAN-3

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                      2030 General Plan
                   this planning cycle.
HOUSING QUANTITY
HOUSING GOAL 2:    To facilitate the preservation and construction of housing to
                   meet the needs of Gridley residents, including all household
                   types and incomes.
HOUSING POLICY 2.1 The City will encourage infill development, through reduced or
                   delayed payment of impact fees, priority in entitlement review, or
                   other methods.
HOUSING POLICY 2.2 The City will encourage the construction of second units within
                   existing and proposed residential lots.
HOUSING POLICY 2.3 The City will encourage compact development, the use of drainage
                   swales for stormwater conveyance, multi-use public facilities and
                   lands, and other planning and design strategies to reduce the cost of
                   infrastructure to serve new housing.
HOUSING POLICY 2.4 The City will encourage and incent infill development in meeting the
                   housing needs required by expanding populations.
HOUSING POLICY 2.5 The City’s infill and new growth housing incentives should be
                   designed to achieve not only the City’s housing goals, but also
                   economic, social, and environmental goals of the City through
                   programs identified in the 2030 General Plan.
HOUSING POLICY 2.6 The City will support planning and zoning changes to improve land
                   use compatibility, safe multi-modal connections, location, and
                   quality of housing in the southeastern portion of the City near
                   Highway 99.
HOUSING POLICY 2.7 The City will maintain adequate sites with appropriate zoning,
                   development standards, access to public infrastructure and facilities
                   needed to facilitate a variety of types of housing for the needs of all
                   income levels and special needs groups, including rental housing,
                   factory-built or manufactured housing, mobile homes, emergency
                   shelters, and transitional housing.
                               HOUSING ELEMENT
                                      PLAN-4

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Housing           The Planning Department will prepare and maintain information on
Implementation    vacant infill properties designated by the City for urban
Strategy 2.1      development. The objective of this program is to make readily
                  available data that is helpful to builders and land developers in
                  preliminary research that could lead to redevelopment and infill
                  development that forwards the City’s planning goals. The City will
                  survey builders, developers, and experts in real estate to determine
                  the types of information that would be most helpful in making
                  property investment decisions, and the City’s property database
                  should report on the same information, as feasible. The information
                  on vacant available properties could take the form of an online
                  database or it could take other formats.
                  Timing: Following General Plan adoption; Target 2011
                  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department.
                  Funding Sources: General Fund
                  Objective: Facilitate infill development.
Housing           The City will identify a range of incentives that could encourage
Implementation    development of vacant and underutilized properties in and near
Strategy 2.2      downtown Gridley. The City will specifically consider incentives that
                  would encourage housing development, including affordable housing
                  development. City staff will contact housing developers and builders
                  to determine which incentives would be most effective in inducing
                  infill housing development. In surveying developers and builders, the
                  City will make a specific effort to gather input from local developers
                  and builders and those with experience developing affordable housing,
                  multi-family housing, small lot single-family housing, and infill
                  development of all types. City staff will also collect and analyze
                  relevant programs from other cities and counties that have had success
                  with infill development. Staff will present City Council with options
                  for incentives, which could include, but is not limited to reduction of
                  fees, delay in payment of impact fees, reduced processing times for
                  infill development consistent with the General Plan. Based on this
                  information and staff recommendations, the City Council will consider
                  approval of changes to the Municipal Code or other necessary actions
                  to create incentives for infill development, including infill housing
                  development.
                  Timing: Following General Plan adoption; Report to Council in
                  2010 on options for changes to plans, policies, and procedures to
                  induce infill development; implement changes to City documents
                  and codes, as appropriate through 2014.
                  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department, Building
                  Department and City Council.
                  Funding Sources: General Fund
                  Objective: Facilitate infill development.
                                    PLAN-5

                                                                      CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                  2030 General Plan
Housing        The City will encourage the construction of second units housing to
Implementation meet future housing needs in Gridley The City will provide
Strategy 2.3   educational materials regarding second units to those seeking
               building permits for housing and those wishing to subdivide land for
               housing. The City will reduce development impact fees for second
               units, as necessary, to encourage their development. The City will
               follow adoption of a comprehensive General Plan Update with a
               Nexus Fee Study and Impact Fee Update. The City has described the
               intent for this program throughout the General Plan.
               The Fee Update will be tailored according to the City’s infill and
               compact development objectives and affordable housing objectives.
               Please refer to the 2030 General Plan, including Public Facilities
               Implementation Strategy 1.2, Land Use Implementation Strategy
               2.3, and Circulation Implementation Strategy 1.2 for more
               information.
               As a part of the Fee Update, the City will analyze the costs and
               public services demand for second units, and align impact fees to
               better represent actual public costs. For second units, development
               impact fees would be expected to be substantially lower than the
               typical single-family detached home.
               Timing: Following General Plan adoption; Target 2010 for drafting of a
               Nexus Fee Study, update to development impact fees, and preparation
               and dissemination of educational materials on second units.
               Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department
               Funding Sources: General Fund
               Quantified Objective: Encourage production of at least 10 second
               units in this housing element planning horizon.
Housing        The City will consider a range of incentives to induce the
Implementation rehabilitation of existing multi-family housing, adding bedrooms to
Strategy 2.4   existing housing, and conversion of existing nonresidential buildings
               to serve the needs of Gridley’s larger families. The City will also
               encourage development of new rental housing that accommodates
               larger-household needs, providing more than 1- and 2-bedroom
               units.
               City staff will consult with local housing authorities on Gridley’s
               desire to rehabilitate building to provide multi-family housing with
               three or more bedrooms per unit.
               The City will consult with local housing authorities regarding
               applications for grant funding to rehabilitate housing, add a 3rd
               bedroom, and convert buildings for multi-family residential use.
               The City will consider collaborative development of a revolving
               loan program through a local housing authority, other public
               programs, or the City’s Redevelopment Agency
                            HOUSING ELEMENT
                                  PLAN-6

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  City staff will report to the City Council a recommended set of
                  actions to encourage rehabilitation of housing and conversion of
                  existing nonresidential building stock for larger, multi-family
                  housing. The City will revise the Municipal Code, fees, and
                  standards, as appropriate, to provide the selected combination of
                  incentives.
                  Timing: Report to Council within 18 months of Housing Element
                  adoption; actions considered within 20 months of Housing Element
                  adoption.
                  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department, Planning
                  Commission, City Council.
                  Funding Sources: General Fund
                  Objective: Facilitate production of 3 larger rental units per year
                  following the City Council’s approved program implementation.
Housing           With the conservative estimates provided in this Housing Element,
Implementation    the City is 290 units short of meeting its RHNA allocation. In order
Strategy 2.5      to meet this obligation, the City will identify areas adequate to
                  accommodate construction of 182 moderate-income units, 17 low-
                  income units, 31 very low-income units, and 60 extremely low-
                  income units by 2014.
                  As shown, the City has identified more than 135 acres as potential
                  sites for rezoning near infrastructure and without substantial
                  environmental constraints that could accommodate the City’s
                  remaining housing needs within this planning (see Table Plan-1 and
                  Figure Plan-1).
                  The property identified by the City previously had a development
                  application submitted to the City that included 9.8 acres for multi-
                  family housing at 20 units per acre (196 units). This previous
                  application also proposed 465 units of single-family residential with
                  varying lot sizes (661 dwelling units in total) and 10 acres of
                  commercial development. This application is currently inactive. A
                  draft environmental impact report (EIR) was prepared for this
                  project prior to it becoming inactive.
                  This parcel is located within the City’s current Sphere of Influence
                  but not within current City limits. As a part of the previous
                  application, pre-zoning to a “Planned Development” zoning district
                  was requested, in addition to annexation and approval of subdivision
                  of property. The City did not have approval of pre-zoning in the SOI
                  amendment for the subject parcel.
                  At the time the City started its recently completed comprehensive
                  General Plan Update, the status of this development application was
                  uncertain. Therefore, in order to analyze the “worst-reasonable case
                  scenario” (from an environmental impact perspective), the City
                  assumed development of the aforementioned 661 units and 10 acres
                                     PLAN-7

                                                        CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                    2030 General Plan
of commercial development for the subject parcel as a part of the
programmatic Environmental Impact Report that accompanied the
General Plan Update.
In order to accommodate the RHNA, as a part of the Sphere of
Influence amendment request to the Butte Local Agency Formation
Commission (LAFCO) that follows the General Plan Update, the
City will request a “Planned Development” district pre-zoning for
site. Conditions for the Planned Development pre-zoning district to
guide annexation, subdivision, development of this parcel will
include:
      9   A minimum of 5.4 acres in zoning districts that allow renter
          and owner-occupied multi-family development of a
          minimum of 20 units per acre or more by right (without the
          need for a conditional use permit, planned unit
          development, or other discretionary action) and that can
          accommodate the City’s remaining RHNA of 108 lower-
          income units (low income plus very low income plus
          extremely low income). Each parcel selected for rezoning
          in this category must be capable of allowing at least 16
          units based on parcel size, configuration, development
          standards, and other factors. At least 54 of the required 108
          dwelling units shall be developed using residential zoning
          districts.
      9   A minimum of 28 acres of land in zoning districts that
          would accommodate development of housing appropriate
          for moderate-income households allowing a density of at
          least 8 units per acre.
If annexation of the subject property is not approved by June 30th,
2012, the City will provide zoning and a General Plan land use
designation for at least 5.4 acres within existing City limits not
included in the City’s inventory of sites to accommodate a minimum
of 108 lower-income units. The City anticipates use of the
Residential High Density (RHD-2) land use designation, which
accommodates high-density development of 15 to 30 units per acre.
The subject lands will have zoning that accommodates a minimum
of 20 units per acre or more by right (without the need for a
conditional use permit, planned unit development, or other
discretionary action) and the site will be able to accommodate at
least 16 units.
There is a parcel of 10.21 acres within the existing City, without
substantial environmental constraints, and with access to
infrastructure. The front portion of the site is developed with a
nursery. The back part of the site is vacant.
Figure Plan-2 shows the City’s intent for this property if annexation
does not occur on the 135-acre property in terms of the appropriate
General Plan land use designation. This site currently has a split
             HOUSING ELEMENT
                    PLAN-8

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                          zoning of R-3 and C-2 (General Commercial) and therefore was not
                          included in the sites inventory in this Housing Element for that
                          reason. It is APN 021-110-039-000. The back portion of the site is
                          currently zoned R-3 (approximately 7.3 acres). If annexation
                          proceedings do not occur on the 135-acre site identified above, the
                          City will rezone the back portion of this property to accommodate
                          high-density housing, as noted.
                          The site previously identified for rezoning (the 135-acre site) above
                          is better suited to provide affordable housing since it is larger, in the
                          next primary growth area of the City, has attracted development
                          interested in the past, and has had draft environmental analysis
                          completed already. Since this site is better suited, the City would not
                          propose to add the above referenced 10.21-acre site to the City’s
                          sites inventory unless the site in the City’s sphere of influence is not
                          proposed for annexation.
                          Timing: Submit proposed pre-zoning and conditions to LAFCO
                          within 12 months of adoption of the Housing Element; accept
                          annexation and development application request within 18 months of
                          adoption of the Housing Element. Rezone at least 5.4 acres of
                          property within City limits if annexation proceedings do not begin
                          by June 30, 2012. Complete rezoning of at least 5.4 acres within the
                          existing City limits, if necessary, by December 30th, 2012.
                          Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department, Planning
                          Commission, City Council
                          Funding Sources: General Fund
                          Quantified Objective: Rezone properties that would accommodate
                          development of 182 moderate-income units, 17 low-income units, 31
                          very low-income units, and 60 extremely low-income units.
                                         Table Plan-1
                             Potential Sites for Rezoning
Assessor's Parcel                                             Existing GP LU
                  Existing Land Use      Existing Zoning                               Acreage
     Number                                                     Designation
022-210-078-000      Agriculture               R-S                  RS                  135.81
                                             PLAN-9


CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                          Figure Plan-1
                          Rezone Sites
                  PLAN-11
                Figure Plan-2
                Proposed Re-
                 designation
HOUSING ELEMENT
   PLAN-12
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
HOUSING GOAL 3:    To reduce and remove constraints to development and
                   redevelopment of housing.
HOUSING POLICY 3.1 The City shall maintain a zoning ordinance, Municipal Code, and
                   development review process that is free of constraints for
                   development of housing to achieve the City’s regional share of
                   estimated future housing needs for all housing types and incomes.
Housing            The City shall review the zoning ordinance on an ongoing basis to
Implementation     determine its effectiveness in achieving the goals of the General Plan
Strategy 3.1       and its compliance with State law.
                   Timing: Ongoing
                   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department, Planning
                   Commission, City Council
                   Funding Sources: General Fund
                   Objective: Ensure zoning achieves General Plan goals.
Housing            The City will review the Housing Element on an annual basis to
Implementation     determine the effectiveness in achieving goals and objectives.
Strategy 3.2       The City will provide annual reports as to the implementation of the
                   Housing Element to the Planning Commission, City Council, and the
                   Department of Housing and Community Development, as required
                   by Government Code Section 65400.
                   The City will consider revisions to Housing Element programs, if
                   necessary, to address issues of efficacy relative to goals and
                   objectives.
                   As a part of this annual reporting, the Community Development
                   Director will report on the City’s design review process, as
                   established by Design Implementation Strategy 2.3 in the
                   Community Character and Design Element and Land Use
                   Implementation Strategy 2.2 in the Land Use Element. The Director
                   will also report on the conditional use permit process as it relates to
                   multi-family housing development.
                   The Director will report on the processing time, required application
                   materials, and estimated costs for applicants attributable to the City’s
                   design review process and conditional use permits related to higher-
                   density housing. The City will consider revisions to the City’s
                   design review process and conditional use permit process, as
                   necessary, to avoid impediments to higher-density and mixed-use
                   housing developments.
                   The City will monitor its development and processing/review
                   procedures on an ongoing basis to minimize the time required for
                   review by the City. The City will consider measures to reduce the
                   plan review time needed by City staff by prioritizing review of
                   permit applications for affordable housing projects, when proposed.
                                     PLAN-13

                                                                      CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                  2030 General Plan
               Timing: Annually
               Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department, Building
               Department.
               Funding Sources: General Fund
               Objective: Ensure Housing Element is achieving goals and
               objectives. Ensure City’s design review and entitlement process does
               not impede higher-density housing and mixed-use development.
Housing        The City will amend the zoning ordinance to allow emergency
Implementation shelters in the PQP and M-l zone by right, without the need for a
Strategy 3.3   conditional use permit or other discretionary action. The City
               currently allows emergency shelters conditionally in the PQP zone.
               However, because there are a limited number of vacant sites with
               this zoning designation, emergency shelters will also be allowed by
               right in the M-1 zone, which has 17 acres of vacant land and
               additional land that would be considered underutilized.
               Timing: Within 12 months of Housing Element adoption
               Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department, City
               Council.
               Funding Sources: General Fund
               Objective: Facilitate development of emergency shelters. Comply
               with current state law requirements.
Housing        The City will amend the zoning ordinance to define and allow
Implementation transitional and supportive housing in all residential zones, subject to
Strategy 3.4   the same development standards as would apply to a residential
               structure of the same housing type. The City may require a
               reasonable design review process for housing proposed to provide 7
               or more units, or as required by the City’s zoning ordinance for other
               types of higher-density housing. The City may require that operators
               provide evidence of applicable state licensing, where appropriate.
               The City shall revise the zoning ordinance to specifically define and
               allow singleǦroom occupancy units (SROs), boarding houses,
               apartment hotels, community apartments, and stock cooperative
               apartments in the RǦ3 zone by right.
               Timing: Within 12 months of Housing Element adoption
               Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department, City
               Council.
               Funding Sources: General Fund
               Objective: Facilitate development of transitional and supportive
               housing. Comply with current state law requirements.
                                 PLAN-14

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Housing            The City will amend the zoning ordinance to define and allow
Implementation     agricultural employee housing as a permitted use within the
Strategy 3.5       Agricultural Residential District, as required by the California
                   Health and Safety Code (Sec. 17021.6) and according the
                   requirements of the Employee Housing Act (sections 17000 –
                   170652.5). The City will update the zoning ordinance to allow
                   farmworker housing in City agricultural zoning districts, in
                   compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6.
                   Timing: Within 12 months of Housing Element adoption.
                   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department
                   Funding Sources: General Fund
                   Objective: Facilitate development of farmworker housing. Comply
                   with current state law requirements.
Housing            The City will continue to use weekly Project Management Meetings
Implementation     to facilitate development proposals. These meetings are intended to
Strategy 3.6       promote development by addressing the development requirements
                   and concerns early in the process. Department heads and applicants
                   attend the meeting and it is free of charge.
                   Timing: Ongoing
                   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department
                   Funding Sources: General Fund, permit fees
                   Objective: Streamline approval of development proposals that are
                   consistent with the General Plan.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
HOUSING GOAL 4:    To promote development and redevelopment of affordable
                   housing.
HOUSING POLICY 4.1 The City will promote the preservation of subsidized affordable
                   housing developments.
HOUSING POLICY 4.2 The City and Redevelopment Agency will require replacement
                   housing per state law (or relocation of displaced residents) within the
                   Redevelopment Project Area for subsidized housing proposed for
                   demolition.
                                     PLAN-15

                                                                            CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
HOUSING POLICY 4.3 Seek and support housing needs of special groups such as seniors,
                   handicapped persons, farmworkers, those in need of temporary
                   shelter, single-parent families, and large families.
HOUSING POLICY 4.4 Assist in the development of housing affordable to extremely low,
                   very-low, and low-income households through financial and/or
                   technical assistance to affordable housing developers.
HOUSING POLICY 4.5 The City should proactively identify and apply for funding to expand
                   affordable local housing opportunities.
Housing            The City will coordinate with the Butte County Housing Authority,
Implementation     Community Housing Improvement Program (CHIP), Consolidated
Strategy 4.1       Area Housing Authority of Sutter County, and other nonprofit
                   affordable housing organizations, along with property owners of
                   privately-owned, government-subsidized affordable housing projects
                   to maintain the affordability status of affordable housing units in
                   Gridley.
                   The City will contact property owners of such affordable housing
                   projects at least one year in advance of the date where properties
                   could convert to market rate. The City will coordinate with area
                   agencies and nonprofits to examine options for maintaining
                   affordability status. The City will assist in identifying funds to
                   maintain the affordability of rental units. If the owner expresses an
                   interest in selling or converting their properties, the City will notify
                   potential operators of subsidized affordable housing to determine
                   interest in acquisition and operation of such properties, or will get
                   assistance in seeking another interested investor or nonprofit housing
                   corporation to acquire and continue operating the rental development
                   for low-income households.
                   Timing: Contact property owners of publicly assisted rental housing
                   at least one year prior to the expiration of the affordable housing
                   covenant for each property to determine future ownership plans;
                   implement preservation strategy if owners indicate desire to sell or
                   convert their properties; Ongoing through 2014.
                   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department
                   Funding: Multifamily Housing Program, California Housing Finance
                   Agency Preservation, Acquisition Financing Mortgage Insurance for
                   Purchase/Refinance (HUD)
                   Objective: Preservation of affordable rental housing units.
                                     PLAN-16
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Housing           Contact possible sources of self-help housing, such as Community
Implementation    Housing Improvement Program (CHIP), the area housing
Strategy 4.2      authorities, or Habitat for Humanity. Coordinate with these groups
                  to identify incentives or resources needed to facilitate self-help
                  housing development. The City will consider incentives, such as fee
                  reductions, delay in development impact fee payments and planning
                  or zoning permit fees until occupancy, and streamlining of the
                  entitlement review process to encourage development of self-help
                  housing. The City will help promote the self-help housing to the
                  public through information made available at City Hall and on the
                  City’s website.
                  Timing: Ongoing through 2014.
                  Responsible Agency/Department: Community Development
                  Department.
                  Funding Sources: General Fund
                  Quantified Objective: Facilitate 5 new self-help housing units within
                  the City by 2014.
Housing           The City will coordinate with the Consolidated Area Housing
Implementation    Authority of Sutter County to administer a First-Time Homebuyer
Strategy 4.3      Program.
                  Timing: Ongoing
                  Responsibility: Planning Department
                  Funding Sources: General Fund, CalHome program, State Small
                  Cities HOME Program, State CDBG Program, California Housing
                  Finance Agency (single-family direct loan programs), USDA Rural
                  Housing Services (direct loans, loan guarantees)
                  Objective: Support first-time homebuyers.
Housing           The City will consult with local housing authorities and non profits
Implementation    regarding opportunities for financing programs, such as mortgage
Strategy 4.4      credit and bond financing, as feasible, to provide assistance to lower-
                  and moderate-income homebuyers and first-time homebuyers.
                  The City will determine the feasibility of participating in a
                  consortium with other public agencies to take advantage of tax-
                  exempt bond financing for affordable housing and for assistance to
                  lower- and moderate-income households. Feasibility will be based
                  on the amount of funding that could be used within the City in
                  relation to the cost of participation and the attractiveness of these
                  certificates to first-time homebuyers. The City will also need to
                  consider administrative capacity for any management responsibility
                  for financing programs.
                  The availability of financing for affordable housing should be
                  advertised locally through brochures, quarterly newsletters, the
                                     PLAN-17

                                                                       CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                   2030 General Plan
               City’s website, local newspapers, civic buildings, and local finance
               agencies and real estate offices.
               Responsibility: Planning Department, Finance Department
               Timing: Report to City Council on discussions with other public
               agencies on the feasibility of consortiums for affordable housing
               bond financing within 12 months of the adoption of the Housing
               Element. Participation in financing programs, as feasible, ongoing
               through 2014.
               Funding: General Fund, CalHome program, CDBG, RDA, other
               Objective: Increase financing options for affordable housing
               projects.
Housing        The City will cooperatively pursue funding for affordable housing
Implementation projects with the Consolidated Area Housing Authority of Sutter
Strategy 4.5   County and the Butte County Housing Authority.
               A representative of the City will meet annually and additionally
               during the year as needed with representatives of each housing
               authority to determine their interest in, and plans for, constructing
               affordable housing in Gridley.
               The City will consult with the State Department of Housing and
               Community Development for assistance in identifying the most
               appropriate state and/or federal funding sources for the affordable
               housing most needed in Gridley and with the housing authorities to
               administer affordable housing development.
               Responsibility: Planning Department, Finance Department.
               Timing: Meet annually and more frequently, as appropriate, ongoing
               through 2014.
               Funding: Various state and federal sources, redevelopment funding,
               General Fund.
               Quantified Objective: Pursue at least one funding opportunity for
               affordable housing construction every other year.
Housing        The City will assist in the development of housing for farmworkers
Implementation by partnering with other agencies and nonprofits to maintain,
Strategy 4.6   improve, or construct new farmworker housing in the Gridley
               General Plan Study Area. The City will assist the housing authorities
               and CHIP with applications for funding for farmworker housing
               projects, as appropriate. City staff will contact area farmers,
               representatives of Butte County, and other agencies and stakeholders
               to identify strategies and locations for expanding farmworker
               housing in the Gridley area, as necessary, to meet housing needs.
               Responsibility: Planning Department.
                                 PLAN-18

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  Timing: Contact area nonprofits and agencies on farmworker
                  housing opportunities by 2010; assist with implementation of
                  programs as appropriate though 2014.
                  Funding: Joe Serna Jr. Farmworker Housing Grant Program; USDA
                  rural development assistance grants, Rural Community Assistance
                  funding programs
                  Objective: Facilitate farmworker housing improvement and
                  development in the Gridley area.
Housing           The City will adopt a density bonus ordinance in compliance with
Implementation    Government Code Section 65915, which requires up to three
Strategy 4.7      concessions, depending upon the percentage of affordable units in
                  the development.
                  Responsibility: Planning Department, Planning Commission, City
                  Council.
                  Timing: within 12 months of Housing Element adoption.
                  Funding: General Fund
                  Objective: Encourage development of housing for lower-income
                  households.
                                   PLAN-19
                                                                      CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                  2030 General Plan
Housing        The City will implement its housing policies and strategies in a way
Implementation that specifically considers the needs of extremely lowǦincome
Strategy 4.8   households. The needs of extremely low-income households are
               already included as a part of strategies discussed throughout the
               Housing Element that address production/preservation of residential
               care facilities, supportive housing, farmworker housing, and other
               types of housing that would be expected to serve extremely
               lowǦincome households. Examples of such programs in this Housing
               Element include Housing Implementation Strategies 1.3, 2.2, 2.4,
               2.5, 3.2, 3.4, 3.5, 4.1, 4.2, 4.5, 4.6, and 4.7.
               The City will coordinate with the Community Housing Improvement
               Program (CHIP), Butte County Housing Authority, Consolidated
               Area Housing Authority of Sutter County, and other operators of
               local subsidized housing projects to track the number of units
               provided to extremely lowǦincome households and maintain the
               affordability of existing housing units that provide housing to
               extremely low income households. To address the housing needs of
               extremely low-income households, the City will identity and meet
               with nonprofit builders who specialize in building housing for
               extremely low-income households and supportive housing. This
               effort is designed to:
                    9    build a long-term partnership in development;
                    9    gain access to specialized funding sources, including
                         applying for funding sources that are targeted to the needs
                         of extremely low-income households;
                    9    identify potential sites and streamlining strategies for ELI
                         housing developments;
                    9    identify the range of local resources and assistance needed
                         to facilitate the development of housing for extremely low-
                         income households; and
                    9    promote a variety of housing types, including higher
                         density, multifamily supportive, single room occupancy and
                         shared housing.
               The City will use the quantified objectives provided in Table Plan-2
               for extremely low-income households to measure success of the
               wide range of Implementation Strategies throughout the Housing
               Element that are designed, in part, to address the needs of extremely
               low-income households. Where opportunities exist to identify targets
               within the context of each Implementation Strategy, the City will
               ensure that the needs of extremely low-income households are
               considered. For example, the City’s ongoing efforts to apply for
               HOME funds to support affordable housing will consider units to be
               provided for extremely low-income households.
                                  PLAN-20

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                   Responsibility: Planning Department
                   Timing: Current and ongoing through 2014
                   Funding: General Fund; regional, state, and federal housing grants,
                   loans; and other available funding
                   Objective: Maintain and increase the supply of housing for
                   extremely lowǦincome households.
EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
HOUSING GOAL 5:    To ensure equal opportunity and access to housing for all
                   residents.
HOUSING POLICY 5.1 Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race,
                   religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or color.
HOUSING POLICY 5.2 The City will encourage universal design in new housing
                   construction, as well as integration of accessibility features in
                   existing housing structures.
HOUSING POLICY 5.3 The City will promote awareness of accessibility requirements and
                   opportunities for builders, developers, and residents.
HOUSING POLICY 5.4 The City will provide equal access to its development policies,
                   practices, and procedures to all residents of the City.
Housing            The City will refer interested persons to the appropriate agencies,
Implementation     such as the Community Legal Information Center, Mediation Center
Strategy 5.1       of the North Valley, Butte County Housing Authority, and Legal
                   Services of Northern California for assistance in fair housing
                   matters. The City will act as an independent third-party to
                   discrimination complaints, as they arise. The City will continue to
                   provide informational fair housing brochures in English and Spanish
                   available to the public at City Hall, the library, the U.S. Post Office,
                   Butte County Family Services, Gridley Family Health Center, and
                   on the City’s website.
                   Timing: Ongoing
                   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department
                   Funding Sources: General Fund
                   Objective: Assist in referral for fair housing matters.
                                     PLAN-21

                                                                       CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                    2030 General Plan
Housing        Amend the Municipal Code definition of “family” to comply with
Implementation the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 3601, et. seq.)
Strategy 5.2   provisions for persons with disabilities. Provide for unrelated
               persons who jointly occupy and have equal access to all areas of a
               dwelling unit and who function together as an integrated unit.
               Timing: Within 12 months of Housing Element adoption
               Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department
               Funding Sources: General Fund
               Objective: Accommodate a variety of household types.
Housing        The City will adopt a written reasonable accommodation ordinance
Implementation to provide exception in zoning and land-use for housing for persons
Strategy 5.3   with disabilities. This procedure will be a ministerial process, with
               minimal or no processing fee. Community Development Department
               staff will use the following or similar criteria in approving
               reasonable accommodations:
                    x    The request for reasonable accommodation will be used by
                         an individual with a disability protected under fair housing
                         laws.
                    x    The requested accommodation is necessary to make
                         housing available to an individual with a disability
                         protected under fair housing laws.
                    x    The requested accommodation would not impose an undue
                         financial or administrative burden on the City.
                    x    The requested accommodation would not require a
                         fundamental alteration in the nature of the City's land-use
                         and zoning program.
               The City will either revise the Municipal Code or adopt stand-alone
               rules, policies, and procedures for reasonable accommodations. The
               City’s procedures will specify exceptions to zoning and development
               standards and exceptions to building regulations needed to
               accommodate housing access for persons with disabilities. The
               City’s amended procedures shall specific targeted timeframes for
               approval of reasonable accommodations.
               Timing: Within 12 months of Housing Element adoption.
               Responsible Agency/Department: Planning Department
               Funding Sources: General Fund
               Objective: Provide reasonable accommodations for persons with
               disabilities. Reduce processing time for reasonable accommodation
               requests.
                                 PLAN-22

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY CONSERVATION
HOUSING GOAL 6:    To reduce household costs and conserve natural resources and
                   energy in housing production.
HOUSING POLICY 6.1 In order to reduce long-term household utility costs, the City will
                   promote new housing construction and retrofits designed to consume
                   less energy, produce and use renewable energy, consume less water.
HOUSING POLICY 6.2 In order to reduce household transportation costs, the City will
                   promote housing development in mixed-use settings near
                   commercial and public services and in areas served by public transit.
Housing            Project applicants for building permits must show compliance with
Implementation     the state’s energy conservation requirements at the time building
Strategy 6.1       plans are submitted.
                   The Building Department will continue to be responsible for
                   implementing the state’s energy conservation standards. This
                   includes checking of building plans and other written documentation
                   showing compliance and the inspection of construction to ensure
                   that the dwelling units are constructed according to those plans.
                   Timing: Ongoing
                   Responsible Agency/Department: Building Department
                   Funding Sources: General Fund
                   Objective: Ensure new development is designed to reduce ongoing
                   building energy costs to future residents.
Housing            Continue to provide rebates for the installation and use of energy-
Implementation     efficient appliances, insulation materials, windows, energy audits,
Strategy 6.2       weatherization, and other energy saving techniques.
                   Timing: Ongoing through 2014.
                   Responsible Agency/Department: Gridley Municipal Utilities,
                   Finance Department
                   Funding Sources: Public Benefit charge on utility bills, state or
                   federal grant funding, as available.
                   Objective: Facilitate installation of energy efficient appliances in 20
                   units; facilitate energy efficiency retrofits in 10 units.
Housing            The City will prepare a Nexus Fee Study and will update impact fees
Implementation     following adoption of the General Plan. The City’s Nexus Fee Study
Strategy 6.3       and update to impact fees should analyze energy procurement and
                   distribution costs. The City will examine whether reduced impact
                   fees would be appropriate and feasible for housing projects that
                   include energy conservation techniques beyond those required by
                                      PLAN-23

                                                                                      CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                  2030 General Plan
                             building codes.
                             Timing: Nexus Fee Study by 2010. Revise impact fees by 2011.
                             Responsible Agency/Department: Gridley Municipal Utilities,
                             Finance Department, Community Development Department.
                             Funding Sources: General Fund.
                             Objective: Induce energy efficiency investments in new housing
                             development.
                                          Table Plan-2
                  Summary of Quantified Objectives: 2009-2014
                                      Income Level
                   Extremely    Very                           Above
     Program         Low        Low        Low     Moderate Moderate         Total Overall Objective
 New Construction    129        129       133        182        495                  1,068
  Rehabilitation      10         10         10                                         30
   Conservation                              No net loss of affordable units
                                           Housing Quality
Housing           Provide financial                                    Financial Assistance to 30
Implementation assistance to 30 owner                                  households
Strategy 1.3      and renter lower-income
                  households for housing
                  rehabilitation during this
                  planning cycle.
                                          Housing Quantity
Housing                                                                Encourage production of at
Implementation                                                         least 10 second units in this
Strategy 2.3                                                           housing element planning
                                                                       horizon.
Housing               60         31         17       182               Rezone properties that
Implementation                                                         would facilitate development
Strategy 2.5                                                           of at least 182 moderate-
                                                                       income units, 17 low-income
                                                                       units, 31 very low-income
                                                                       units, and 60 extremely low-
                                                                       income units by 2014.
                                         Affordable Housing
Housing                                                                Facilitate 5 new self-help
Implementation                                                         housing units within the City
Strategy 4.2                                                           by 2014.
Housing                                                                Pursue at least one funding
Implementation                                                         opportunity for affordable
Strategy 4.5                                                           housing construction every
                                                                       other year.
                                               PLAN-24
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  Natural Resources and Energy Conservation
Housing                                                     Facilitate installation of
Implementation                                              energy efficient appliances
Strategy 6.2                                                in 20 units; facilitate energy
                                                            efficiency retrofits in 10
                                                            units.
                                  PLAN-25
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                          I

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                Page
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
   Relationship to Other Elements.................................................................................. 1 
   Areas Covered by the 2030 General Plan .................................................................. 2 
   Planned Growth Area.................................................................................................. 5 
BUILDOUT ESTIMATES ............................................................................................... 9 
   Buildout in the Planned Growth Area ..................................................................... 10 
   Buildout in the Existing City and SOI ..................................................................... 10 
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS ....................................................................................... 12 
   Allowable Land Uses, Density, and Intensity .................................................................. 17 
   Agricultural ................................................................................................................ 21 
   Agricultural Industrial .............................................................................................. 21 
   Industrial .................................................................................................................... 21 
   Commercial ................................................................................................................ 21 
   Neighborhood Center Mixed Use ............................................................................. 22 
   Downtown Mixed Use ................................................................................................ 24 
   Park ............................................................................................................................. 24 
   Open Space ................................................................................................................. 26 
   Public .......................................................................................................................... 26 
   Residential, Very Low Density ................................................................................. 27 
   Residential, Low Density ........................................................................................... 27 
   Residential, Medium Density .................................................................................... 27 
   Residential, High Density 1 ....................................................................................... 27 
   Residential, High Density 2 ....................................................................................... 28 
   Urban Reserve ............................................................................................................ 28 
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION ...................................................... 29
   Orderly Growth ......................................................................................................... 29 
   Compact Development .............................................................................................. 31 
   Mixing and Separating Land Uses ........................................................................... 34 
   Convenient Local Shopping ...................................................................................... 38 
   Diverse Local Economy ............................................................................................. 40 
   Land Use Goal-1: Orderly Growth (Policies 1.1 thorugh 1.7) ...................................... 27
   Land Use Goal-2: Compact Development (Policies 2.1 through 2.9). .......................... 29
   Land Use Goal-3: Mixing and Separating Land Uses (Policies 3.1 through 3.4) ....... 32
   Land Use Goal-4: Mixing and Separating Land Uses (Policies 4.1 through 4.4) ....... 33
   Land Use Goal-5: Mixing and Separating Land Uses (Policies 5.1 through 5.6) ....... 34
                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                 I

                                                                                                CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                          2030 General Plan
  Land Use Goal-6: Convenient Local Shopping (Policies 6.1 through 6.5)...................36
  Land Use Goal-7: Diverse Local Economy (Policies 7.1 through 7.5)..........................38
EXHIBITS
  Land Use-1 Area Map ................................................................................................. 3
  Land Use-2 Planned Growth Area ............................................................................. 7
  Land Use-3 Land Use Diagram ................................................................................ 13
  Land Use-4 Land Use Diagram (with outlying territory) ...................................... 15
  Land Use-5 Neighborhood Centers.......................................................................... 23
  Land Use-6 Preservation of Trees ............................................................................ 25 
TABLES
  Land Use-1 Total Land Use Change (Including Growth in Existing City and SOI
             + Planned Growth Area) ........................................................................ 9
  Land Use-2 Estimated Land Use Change in Planned Growth Area ..................... 10
  Land Use-3 Estimated Land Use Change in Existing City and SOI ..................... 11
  Land Use-4 Land Use Designations and Allowable Uses ....................................... 17
  Land Use-5 Allowable Density and Intensity .......................................................... 20
                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                 II

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
INTRODUCTION
This Element provides General Plan buildout assumptions, describes and illustrates the
location of allowable land uses in the City and parts of the General Plan Study area
expected to annex to the City, and contains goals, polices, and implementation measures
to achieve the General Plan Vision.
The goals and policies contained in this Element will aid the City in managing growth
and change in developing areas, the preservation of existing neighborhoods, and infill
development and re-use in developed areas of the city targeted for change. This Element
also provides the foundation for City regulations that will help implement the General
Plan, including the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, other parts of the City’s
Municipal Code, redevelopment plans, and other ordinances, plans, and guidelines the
City will use to implement the General Plan.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS
This Element establishes the land use pattern for the City and areas proposed for
development that will someday become part of the City. All elements of the 2030
General Plan touch upon land use to varying degrees. Perhaps the closest relationship
among General Plan elements is between Land Use and Circulation. The location,
density, and distribution of land uses depend on the ability of a complementary
circulation and transportation system to serve those uses. Relationships between the Land
Use Element and other elements of the 2030 General Plan are summarized below:
    9    The Land Use Element designates areas for parks, recreation, and open spaces,
         which are also addressed in the Open Space Element.
    9    The Housing Element describes the City’s ability to provide for a variety of
         housing needs and includes an inventory of land that allows residential uses as
         shown in the Land Use Element.
    9    The Public Facilities Element describes the availability of public facilities and
         services and future public facility and service needs based on uses proposed in
         the Land Use Element.
    9    Patterns of land use contribute to community character and design, as described
         in the Community Character and Design Element.
    9    The location of certain land use can expose people and property to excessive
         levels of noise or other hazards, as described in the Noise and Safety elements.
                                     LAND U S E ELEMENT
                                               1

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
AREAS COVERED BY THE 2030 GENERAL PLAN
City policy applies to areas within the current City limits and areas proposing to annex to
the City. In addition to the City limits, there are other boundaries relevant to the 2030
General Plan and this Element (see Exhibit Land Use-1). These other areas include:
    9   The General Plan Study Area, the broadest area of analysis for the 2030
        General Plan, which includes the current City limits and other areas described
        below. The Study Area represents lands that most affect, and are most affected
        by, the implementation of the General Plan.
    9   The City’s Sphere of Influence (SOI), which represents the future probable
        physical boundary and service area of the City. The SOI identifies future growth
        areas so that the City may plan for efficient and orderly extension of public
        services and infrastructure. The General Plan itself does not identify a future SOI
        boundary for the City. SOI expansion is a separate process that would normally
        follow a General Plan update. SOI expansion is not adopted by the City, but
        rather by a separate agency known as the Butte Local Agency Formation
        Commission (LAFCO). When LAFCO considers a SOI expansion, the General
        Plan and Environmental Impact Report for the General Plan are used to support
        the SOI expansion request. LAFCO also approves annexation requests (requests
        to become part of the City).
    9   The Area of Concern (AOC), located between the cities of Gridley and Biggs,
        which represents the primary future growth areas for both of these communities.
    9   The Planned Growth Area, representing the southern half of the AOC, which is
        the geographic focus of the 2030 General Plan update. The Planned Growth Area
        will be the location of Gridley’s new neighborhoods and is described in further
        detail following Exhibit Land Use-1.
AREA OF CONCERN
The 2,846-acre AOC was established by LAFCO between the cities of Gridley and Biggs
to coordinate future urban growth in the two communities. Such growth will be directed
to this area to provide for more compact growth and preservation of important
agricultural lands elsewhere in the County. The City will focus new development during
the General Plan time horizon within Gridley’s proposed portion of the AOC. Gridley’s
portion of the AOC includes approximately 1,200 acres, which is about 42% of the total
AOC area.
                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             2

Exhibit Land Use-1
    Area Map
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The AOC extends north of Gridley along West Biggs-Gridley Road, to the southern
boundary of Biggs and north of the City’s SOI along Highway 99 to the intersection of B
Street and Biggs East Highway, east of Biggs. The easterly border of the AOC extends
approximately one-half mile east of Highway 99. Gridley provided LAFCO with a
summary of planning and environmental objectives for the AOC that are reflected
throughout this General Plan. These goals and objectives include:
    9    Urban development in Gridley’s portion of the AOC will be designed and
         implemented to ensure the provision of efficient and fiscally responsible
         municipal services and utilities.
    9    Urban development within the AOC could provide opportunities for shared
         facilities between the two cities.
    9    The AOC could set the stage for coordinated multi-jurisdictional development
         impact fees and revenue sharing.
    9    Coordinated planning could establish consistent design standards along the
         Highway 99 corridor and lead to strategic preservation of open space between the
         cities that would maintain distinct identities, even as the cities grow toward one
         another.
PLANNED GROWTH AREA
As noted above, a special focus of the 2030 General Plan update is the 1,200-acre
Planned Growth Area (see Exhibit Land Use-2).1 The Planned Growth Area will include
new neighborhoods integrated with public services, parks, and small-scale commercial
uses. Compared to the existing City, the Planned Growth Area will have more compact
development. This allows Gridley to provide for future growth needs on a smaller
development footprint, therefore avoiding premature urbanization of agricultural lands.
A mix of housing types will be provided in each neighborhood in the Planned Growth
Area, with high-density housing located around neighborhood centers. Neighborhood
centers will have a mix of higher-activity land uses such as schools, parks, shops, and civic
uses. Medium-density housing will be located around neighborhood centers and high-
density housing areas. Low-density housing opportunities will generally be located at the
outskirts of neighborhoods, further from the neighborhood centers.
1
   For more detail on the identification of the Planned Growth Area, please refer to the Gridley
   Municipal Service Review, which is on file with the City of Gridley and Butte Local Agency
   Formation Commission, and is also available for review on Butte LAFCO’s web site at:
   http://www.buttelafco.org.
                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                  5

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
      LAND USE ELEMENT
              6
CITY OF GRIDLEY 2030 GENERAL PLAN
2030 General Plan
                                                    Exhibit Land Use-2
                                                   Planned Growth Area
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                                         7
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
BUILDOUT ESTIMATES
Buildout of the General Plan could result in:
    9    The construction of 3,850 to 4,700 housing units;
    9    The addition of 1 to 1.3 million square feet of commercial building space;
    9    The addition of 3.2 to 4 million square feet of building space for industrial, light
         industrial, and agricultural processing uses; and,
    9    Parks; schools; open space for conservation, buffering and drainage, and
         recreation; and other land uses.
Table Land Use-1 summarizes the buildout estimates. The buildout estimates include new
development that could occur within the existing City and SOI, as well as development of
the Planned Growth Area. Table Land Use-1 provides the buildout estimates for the
entire Gridley General Plan study area. Tables Land Use-2 and Land Use-3 and the
accompanying text show estimated buildout separately for:
    9    The existing City and SOI; and,
    9    The Planned Growth Area.
                                       Table Land Use-1
                                   Total Land Use Change
      (Including Growth in Existing City and SOI + Planned Growth Area)
                         Total Land Use Change,
                Existing City/SOI & Planned Growth Area                  Estimated Range
 New Dwelling Units                                                    3,850    –    4,700
 New Commercial Square Footage                                       1,000,000 – 1,325,000
 New Industrial Square Footage (Industrial, Agricultural Industrial) 3,200,000 – 4,000,000
The actual amount of development through 2030 may differ from the estimates presented
above, depending on market conditions, funding for infrastructure, environmental
conditions, regulatory constraints, and other factors. For these reasons, the buildout
assumptions are presented as likely ranges, as the City anticipates that actual
development will occur within these ranges. The City will monitor development trends
and progress in relation to buildout assumptions and will update the General Plan as
needed.
                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                 9

                                                                                     CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                 2030 General Plan
BUILDOUT IN THE PLANNED GROWTH AREA
Most future development will occur in the Planned Growth Area. Residential
development in this area could add between 2,400 and 2,900 dwelling units to the City.
The Planned Growth Area could also accommodate between 75,000 and 95,000 square
feet of smaller-scale retail, service, and office use; 1.5 to 1.8 million square feet of
employment uses; and other land uses (Table Land Use-2).2
                                        Table Land Use-2
                Estimated Land Use Change in Planned Growth Area
                                                         New Development               Units/Acres/
                    Land Use                             (Estimated Range)               Sq. Ft.
 Residential, Low Density (2-4 du/ac)                  250       –       325         Dwelling Units
 Residential, Medium Density (5-8 du/ac)              1,100      –      1,400        Dwelling Units
 Residential, High Density 1 (9-15 du/ac)              600       –       800         Dwelling Units
 Residential, High Density 2 (15-30 du/ac)             350       –       425         Dwelling Units
 Neighborhood Center Mixed Use                       75,000      –     95,000         Square Feet
 Industrial and Agricultural Industrial            1,500,000     –   1,770,000        Square Feet
 Public                                                 20       –        40              Acres
 Open Space                                             70       –        90              Acres
 Park                                                   30       –        50              Acres
 Urban Reserve                                         350       –       400              Acres
BUILDOUT IN THE EXISTING CITY AND SOI
While most new growth through 2030 is expected to occur in the Planned Growth Area,
the City has also identified the potential for development on vacant and underutilized
lands within existing City limits. Presently, there is a large amount of land available for
2
    Smaller-scale commercial development includes shops, offices, services, and other
    nonresidential uses that are compatible in scale with, and blended into, surrounding
    neighborhoods and located on properties of roughly 5 acres or less. Larger-scale employment
    uses are industrial and light industrial operations, office parks, business parks, and other
    commercial projects on larger properties and that normally are not as integrated into
    neighborhoods.
                                          LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                   10

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
retail, commercial service, industrial, and other nonresidential development.
Approximately 300 acres of land in the existing City and SOI is vacant, with much of this
acreage in the Gridley Industrial Park.3 In addition, approximately 100 acres of
agricultural land in the existing SOI is designated for commercial or industrial uses. The
City intends to direct large-scale commercial development to vacant and underutilized
sections of Highway 99 and will encourage both housing and commercial development
Downtown.4
Between 1,500 and 1,800 housing units could be constructed within the current City
limits and existing SOI on vacant land and agricultural properties designated for
residential development. Approximately 1 million square feet of commercial building
space could be developed in the existing City and SOI on properties with commercial
General Plan land use designations. In the City’s Industrial Park and other areas with
industrial land use designations, between 1.7 and 2.2 million square feet of building space
could be developed.5 This existing City/SOI growth is summarized below (Table Land
Use-3).
                                       Table Land Use-3
               Estimated Land Use Change in Existing City and SOI
  Land Use Change in Existing General Plan Area          New Development             Units/Sq. Ft.
                                                         (Estimated Range)
 New Dwelling Units                                   1,500      –      1,800       Dwelling Units
 New Commercial Square Footage                      1,000,000    –    1,230,000      Square Feet
 New Civic Buildings                                 300,000     –     370,000       Square Feet
 New Industrial Building Square Footage             1,700,000    –    2,200,000      Square Feet
3
    The Gridley Industrial Park Overlay District Zone includes properties designated Industrial
    south of Morrison Slough on both sides of Highway 99 in the southern portion of the City of
    Gridley. This area The Industrial Park Overlay District Zone is located just south of
    Downtown, along the Union Pacific railroad, just west of Highway 99, east of Losser Avenue,
    and north of West Liberty Road. For more information, see Section Chapter 17.34 of the Gridley
    Municipal Code, Industrial Park Overlay.
4
    Larger-scale commercial development includes retail and services on properties of roughly
    more than 5 acres in size and/or in buildings of roughly square feet or more.
5
    This buildout estimate is for planning purposes only, and is meant to represent a reasonable
    growth scenario.
                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                 11

                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                              2030 General Plan
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
The following is a description of land use designations in Gridley, the locations of which
are shown on the General Plan Land Use Diagram (Exhibit Land Use-3). The Land Use
Diagram shows where different land uses are permitted. Land use designations provide
general policy guidance and are distinct from zoning districts, which implement general
plan designations through more precise development standards and other requirements.6
The Land Use Diagram should be used and interpreted in conjunction with the text and
exhibits throughout this General Plan and, in particular, with the Circulation Diagram
(refer to the Circulation Element, Exhibit Circulation-1).
Development density and intensity standards are provided for each of the land use
designations in this Element.
Density is a residential land use measure that refers to the relationship between the
number of dwelling units and acreage (dwelling units per acre or du/ac).7 The amount of
development allowed on a nonresidential property is regulated not according to density,
but rather a combination of allowable lot coverage and maximum building height. Lot
coverage is a comparison of the square footage of the footprint of proposed buildings and
parking areas to the square footage of the site as a whole. For example, if a parcel is
100,000 square feet, its building footprint is 60,000 feet, and the parking area is 20,000
square feet, then the lot coverage of the parcel is 80 percent.
The actual achievable development density and intensity is also determined by the City’s
development standards, which establish minimum setbacks, minimum lot sizes,
maximum lot coverage, building height, and other requirements.
There are two non-contiguous areas east of the City that are also described by the Land
Use Diagram. These areas are illustrated in Exhibit Land Use-4).
6
     Other tools, such as combining zones, zoning overlays, and planned development districts are
    tools of the Zoning Ordinance, and not the General Plan. Please refer to Title 17 of the City’s
    Municipal Code, which is the Zoning Ordinance. The City’s Municipal Codes is available
    online at: http://www.amlegal.com/library/ca/gridley.shtml.
7
    Dwelling unit is defined by Chapter 17.04.072 of the City’s Municipal Code.
                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                12

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                   Exhibit Land Use-3
                                   Land Use Diagram
                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                         13
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                     Exhibit Land Use-4
                                     Land Use Diagram
                                   (with outlying territory)
                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                         15
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
ALLOWABLE LAND USES, DENSITY, AND INTENSITY
The Gridley General Plan accommodates a wide range of residential, commercial,
industrial, civic, and open space uses. The allowable land uses and maximum densities
and intensities are summarized in tables Land Use-4 and Land Use-5.
                                    Table Land Use-4
                    Land Use Designations and Allowable Uses
                                Agriculture
                                Provides for large- and small-scale orchards, row crops,
                                pasture, livestock, produce stands, and agricultural related
                                uses that are compatible with surrounding land uses. One
                                dwelling unit per parcel is allowed. No industrial or commercial
                                uses are allowed except as directly related to farm operation.
                                Agricultural Industrial
                                Provides for manufacturing, processing, wholesaling, storage,
                                warehousing, research and development, and similar uses
                                related to and supporting agriculture. Also provides for offices,
                                commercial services, and other compatible uses that support a
                                primarily agricultural industrial use, as well as compatible public
                                and quasi-public uses, educational, and research facilities.
                                Typically located away from residential uses and next to
                                Highway 99.
                                Industrial
                                Provides for light industrial and manufacturing, assembly,
                                wholesaling, storage, warehousing, research and development,
                                and similar uses. Also provides for offices, commercial
                                services, and other compatible uses. Typically located away
                                from residential uses and next to Highway 99 and/or the Union
                                Pacific railroad.
                                Commercial
                                Provides for regional, community-serving, and visitor-oriented
                                retail, restaurant, wholesale, office, service, commercial
                                service, entertainment, public/quasi-public, light industrial, and
                                other compatible uses. Typically located next to Highway 99.
                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                               17
                                                          CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                      2030 General Plan
             Table Land Use-4
Land Use Designations and Allowable Uses
         Neighborhood Center Mixed Use
         Provides for small-scale, neighborhood oriented, retail,
         commercial services, professional offices, public/quasi-public
         uses, residences (on upper floors only), and other compatible
         uses.
         Downtown Mixed Use
         Provides for retail, commercial services, professional offices,
         public/quasi-public, high- and medium-density residential, and
         other compatible uses.
         Park
         Provides for active and passive recreation, both developed
         parkland and recreational facilities, and plazas, other public
         spaces intended for recreation/leisure, and other compatible
         uses.
         Open Space
         Provides for passive recreation on undeveloped or semi-
         developed lands, habitat protection, drainage and watershed
         management, bicycle/pedestrian pathways, floodways and
         protection of other environmentally sensitive areas, landscaped
         buffers not for recreational use, community farms/gardens, and
         other compatible uses.
         Public
         Provides for public and quasi-public uses including schools,
         government buildings, health care facilities, cemeteries, child
         and adult day care, places of worship, transportation and other
         public facilities, community centers, assembly halls,
         fairgrounds, and other similar compatible uses. Lands
         designated for public use can be used for agricultural
         operations prior to development for public use.
              LAND USE ELEMENT
                         18
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                              Table Land Use-4
                 Land Use Designations and Allowable Uses
                          Residential, Very Low Density
                          Provides for single-family detached homes, second units, and
                          other compatible uses on relatively large lots.
                          Residential, Low Density
                          Provides for single-family detached homes, second units, and
                          other compatible uses on individual lots.
                          Residential, Medium Density
                          Provides for single-family detached and attached homes,
                          second units, duplexes and half-plexes, and other compatible
                          uses.
                          Residential, High Density 1
                          Provides for small-lot single-family attached or detached
                          homes, duplexes and half-plexes, multi-family dwellings (such
                          as apartments, condominiums, and townhomes), and other
                          compatible uses. This designation provides a transition from
                          lower density single-family areas and higher-density residential
                          uses and neighborhood centers.
                          Residential High Density 2
                          Provides for small-lot single-family attached or detached
                          homes, duplexes and half-plexes, multi-family dwellings (such
                          as apartments, condominiums, and townhomes), and other
                          compatible uses. This designation is intended for areas better
                          suited to higher-density housing near neighborhood centers,
                          commercial services, and employment.
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
                                        19
                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                2030 General Plan
                                       Table Land Use-4
                     Land Use Designations and Allowable Uses
                                   Urban Reserve
                                   Urban Reserve is not a land use designation, per say, but is a
                                   policy overlay that is shown on the City’s Land Use Diagram.
                                   This area provides for future development needs beyond 2030
                                   or development needs that could not be anticipated in the 2030
                                   General Plan.
                                       Table Land Use-5
                              Allowable Density and Intensity
        Land Use Designation               Maximum Lot       Maximum Building Maximum Density
                                            Coverage               Height              (DU/AC)
Agriculture                                     N/A                 N/A                  N/A
Agricultural Industrial*                       80%                   65’                 N/A
Industrial*                                    80%                   65’                 N/A
Commercial                                     90%                   50’                 N/A
Neighborhood Center Mixed Use                  90%                   40’                 N/A
Downtown Mixed Use**                          100%                   50’                10-30
Park                                           20%                   35’
Open Space                                      N/A                 N/A                  N/A
Public                                         60%                   45’
Residential, Very Low Density                  40%                   30’                0.5-2
Residential, Low Density                       40%                   30’                 2-4
Residential, Medium Density                    40%                   30’                 5-8
Residential, High Density 1                    50%                   30’                9–15
Residential High Density 2                     60%                   40’                15-30
* Allowable development intensity for Industrial and Agricultural Industrial uses is also contingent
   on the performance of proposed uses relative to water, wastewater, drainage, electricity, and
   other public infrastructure and service characteristics. Please refer to the goals and policies in
   this Element and the Public Facilities and Services Element for more information.
** Residential density standard applies only to stand-alone residential projects. There is no limit
   on residential density in mixed-use projects.
                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                 20

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The previous tables and Land Use Diagram define allowable land use and development
density and intensity in Gridley. Below are additional explanations of the land use
designations and considerations for their location and design.
AGRICULTURAL
The Agricultural designation is applied in limited portions of the City’s Planning Area.
Non-agricultural uses in areas with this designation must be designed to be compatible
with ongoing agricultural operations and agricultural processing.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIAL
The Agricultural Industrial designation occurs only east of Highway 99, in the Planned
Growth Area. Uses in the Agricultural Industrial area may be developed in coordination
with agricultural activities in the region for the mutual benefit of area farmers and
industrial processors. Areas with this designation near existing or future planned
residential and other sensitive land uses are subject to policies throughout this General
Plan to ensure compatibility with nearby uses relative to air pollution, noise, truck traffic,
safety, light pollution and glare, and other impacts.
INDUSTRIAL
Industrial areas are mostly focused in the southern portion of the City near Highway 99 and
the Union Pacific railroad line. Areas with this designation are subject to compliance with
policies described throughout this General Plan that are intended to address impacts from
noise, traffic, safety, and light pollution and glare on nearby existing or planned residential
and other sensitive land uses.
COMMERCIAL
Most properties with this designation are located along Highway 99. Some of these
properties are vacant or under-used and have infill and re-use development potential. A
large amount of undeveloped Commercial land also exists within the City’s existing SOI
that can be developed during this General Plan time horizon.
                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                21

                                                                            CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER MIXED USE
The Planned Growth Area includes three proposed neighborhood centers, two of which
contain the Neighborhood Center Mixed Use designation (see Exhibit Land Use-5).
These centers will be located internal to each new neighborhood and will provide
opportunities for higher-activity land uses such as small parks, churches, schools,
community buildings, and high-density residential development. In addition, the two
neighborhood centers that include the Neighborhood Center Mixed Use designation will
allow small shops, offices, and commercial and public services.
Two neighborhood centers are proposed between the railroad and Highway 99. These
centers contain the Neighborhood Center Mixed Use designation. The third neighborhood
center would be located west of the railroad where higher-activity land uses are focused.
Neighborhood centers will be designed to have safe and convenient bicycle and
pedestrian routes to and from the surrounding neighborhood. Bicycle and pedestrian
routes will also connect these neighborhood centers to the Downtown. Future transit
routes will provide stops in the neighborhoods centers in order to provide the most
efficient service. In order to be pedestrian-friendly environments, Neighborhood centers
will not include large areas of surface parking or other transportation-related features that
divide communities. Policies for circulation, access, transportation, and parking are
included in the Circulation Element.
                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             22
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                                           The City has
                                                           provided three
                                                           identifiable
                                                           Neighborhood
                                                           Centers in the
                                                           Planned Growth
                                                           Area. These areas
                                                           would have
                                                           higher-density
                                                           housing and
                                                           could
                                                           accommodate a
                                                           broad mix of
                                                           activities
                                                           compatible with
                                                           the surrounding
                                                           neighborhoods.
                                                         Shops, schools,
                                                         apartments, child
                                                         care facilities,
                                                         civic uses, and
                                                         public parks in
                                                         the Planned
                                                         Growth Area will
                                                         be focused in
                                                         Neighborhood
                                                         Centers.
Exhibit Land Use-5                  Neighborhood Centers
                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                          23
                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                               2030 General Plan
DOWNTOWN MIXED USE
Gridley has a charming and well-preserved Downtown that has great potential to be even
more of a regional attraction in 2030 than it is today. There is future development
potential Downtown on vacant and underutilized properties.8 Taking advantage of this
development potential Downtown will help meet the City’s cultural, environmental,
economic, land use, and transportation goals. The City does not want to divert potential
infill development or re-use that could occur Downtown (or along Highway 99). The City
elected, therefore, to limit the amount of newly designated commercial land outside the
Downtown area during the 2030 General Plan update.
A variety of public services, retail, commercial services, and employment opportunities
are located in a relatively small area Downtown. With the City’s focus on redevelopment,
it is anticipated that new businesses and civic uses will locate here in the future. The City
will encourage high-density residential development in and around Downtown, consistent
with the City’s design policies (please refer to the Community Character and Design
Element). The City will also encourage new mixed-use development Downtown with a
residential component. New residents of Downtown can enjoy easy access to retail,
services, schools, and parks, providing new patrons for Downtown businesses.
PARK
Active recreation areas (ball fields, for example) should be designed for compatibility
with surrounding neighborhoods, as these active areas typically create lighting, noise,
traffic, parking, and other impacts. Active areas could be located in less noise-sensitive
parts of a neighborhood. For example, the Community Park to be located in the Planned
Growth Area will focus playfields and other active areas near the railroad, while more
passive areas of the park would be located adjacent to residential areas to the east.
For parks planned in areas with existing trees (including orchard trees), the trees can be
preserved and incorporated into park design to provide shade and enhance aesthetics,
such as in picnic areas and along edges of the park (see Exhibit Land Use-6).
8
     Underutilized properties are those where the building value is unusually low compared to the
     property value (compared to similarly situated nearby properties). Underutilized properties
     might have very small or run-down buildings, for example.
                                         LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                  24

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The City and the Gridley Unified School District have a strong interest in mutually
beneficial joint-use arrangements. Neighborhood parks will be designed and constructed
in consultation with the School District, where joint-use by the community and school is
anticipated. These school/park facilities should be located in or very near neighborhood
centers, to ensure safe routes to and from school for the surrounding neighborhood
                                                                             Before:
                                                                             Existing orchard in the
                                                                             Planned Growth Area
                                                                             with a Park land use
                                                                             designation.
                                                                             After:
                                                                             Orchard trees are
                                                                             preserved and
                                                                             strategically integrated
                                                                             into the park design.
                                                                             Picnic areas and other
                                                                             passive spaces, for
                                                                             example, will benefit
                                                                             from instant shade
                                                                             rather than having to
                                                                             wait for years until
                                                                             planted trees mature.
Exhibit Land Use-6                                               Preservation of Trees
                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             25
                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                         2030 General Plan
OPEN SPACE
Open space corridors in the Planned Growth Area will provide for passive recreation,
drainage, a pedestrian and bicycle trail network, and landscaping for visual relief, and
earthen berms for noise attenuation along Highway 99 and the railroad (please refer to the
Open Space Element and the Public Facilities and Services Element for more information
about these corridors).
Open space buffers will be provided in the Planned Growth Area along Highway 99 and
the railroad. These buffers will be designed to reduce noise exposure, ensure public
safety, reduce harmful exposure to air pollutants, and provide a high-quality aesthetic
environment. Open Space areas along the northern portion of Highway 99 in the Planned
Growth area will be designed to provide an attractive, landscaped gateway into Gridley
from the north.
The Open Space land use designation occurs only in the Planned Growth Area, although
the City will encourage extension of multi-use open space design concepts into the
existing City, as feasible (drainage/bike/pedestrian).
PUBLIC
Public/quasi-public land uses should be designed for compatibility with the surrounding
neighborhood to reduce impacts related to lighting, noise, and the scale of development.
Civic uses that are activity centers or that serve the public should be located in areas with
high levels of pedestrian, bicycle, and transit access.
North of the existing Gridley-Biggs Cemetery, the City has applied the Public
designation to approximately 10 acres of land planed for cemetery expansion, based on
discussions with the Cemetery District. Trails and open space will provide connections
between new neighborhoods and the cemetery.
Although the City is not responsible for siting or developing schools, potential sites are
identified in this General Plan based in part, on general siting criteria provided by the
Gridley Unified School District. As the General Plan builds out, the amount of land
needed by the School District will depend on student generation rates, use of existing
School District lands, and other factors beyond the City’s control. Proposed locations of
new schools would have good pedestrian, bicycle, transit, and vehicular access to and
from the surrounding neighborhood, assuming that the enrollment boundaries for future
school sites generally consist of surrounding residential neighborhoods. Schools would
                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              26

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
be allowed in areas with other General Plan land use designations, in accordance with
School District needs.
RESIDENTIAL, VERY LOW DENSITY
This designation is intended for single-family homes on large lots of a half-acre or more
in area. Residential, Very Low Density areas are located further from commercial and
service centers, toward the outskirts of neighborhoods. This designation does not occur in
the Planned Growth Area.
RESIDENTIAL, LOW DENSITY
This designation provides an opportunity for households desiring single-family homes
with large yards. Low-density housing opportunities will generally occur around the
outskirts of the City and its neighborhoods.
RESIDENTIAL, MEDIUM DENSITY
This designation provides opportunities for households who desire single-family homes
on smaller lots requiring less upkeep, as well as alternatives to conventional single-family
detached homes (single-family attached homes, duplexes, and half-plexes).
In the Planned Growth Area, this designation is located near neighborhood centers,
generally between Residential, Low Density and Residential, High Density areas.
RESIDENTIAL, HIGH DENSITY 1
This designation provides for a wide range of housing types to meet the needs of a variety
of households, age groups, lifestyles, and incomes. Residential, High Density 1 areas are
located near commercial and public services, small parks, existing and future transit
routes, and pedestrian and bicycle routes (but not along Highway 99). Residential, High
Density 1 areas in the Planned Growth Area are located in neighborhood centers.
                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             27
                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
RESIDENTIAL, HIGH DENSITY 2
This designation provides for a wide range of housing for those who do not desire, or
cannot afford, single-family homes and those who prefer single-family homes on very
small lots with little land to maintain.
Residential, High Density 2 areas are located near commercial and public services, small
parks, existing and future transit routes, and high-quality pedestrian and bicycle
travelways (but not along Highway 99). Residential, High Density 2 areas in the Planned
Growth Area will be located in neighborhood centers.
URBAN RESERVE
The Urban Reserve designation applies to land directly adjacent to the Planned Growth
Area that will become part of the City of Gridley in future phases of urban development,
and through logical extensions of Gridley infrastructure and public services.
The City does not anticipate a need to develop the Urban Reserve before 2030. However,
the City could decide to annex and allow development of lands in the urban reserve area
before 2030 to accommodate an unanticipated need—for example, if development
proceeds more quickly than anticipated or if a project of exceptional community benefit
is proposed that can only be accommodated in the urban reserve area.
Areas with the Urban Reserve designation are large parcels with high-quality agricultural
land. These sites are viable for continued agricultural use until the Planned Growth Area
approaches buildout. The City will avoid premature conversion of this agricultural land
and any circumstances that would adversely affect ongoing agricultural operations.
The City has not yet planned for any particular land uses within the Urban Reserve area.
The City will comprehensively plan for development in the Urban Reserve before this
area is approved for development. Development of the Urban Reserve will require a
General Plan amendment to change the area to one or more other appropriate land use
designation(s). The City will make all of the following findings before amending the
General Plan to change the Urban Reserve to another designation:
                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             28

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
    9    Development of the Urban Reserve area can be planned and phased to ensure
         efficient delivery of public infrastructure and services; and,
    9    The Planned Growth Area is approaching buildout, and the Urban Reserve area
         will be needed to accommodate population and/or employment growth consistent
         with the goals throughout this General Plan; or,
    9    The Urban Reserve area is required to accommodate land uses with extraordinary
         public benefits, such as a local employment center, that cannot feasibly be
         developed on lands within the existing City limits, Sphere of Influence, or
         Planned Growth Area.
Please refer to the Public Facilities and Services Element, the Program Environmental
Impact Report prepared for this General Plan, and the 2007 Municipal Service Review
for the Gridley Sphere of Influence for more information about Gridley’s approach to
providing public services and infrastructure within the General Plan Area.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION
Following are Gridley’s goals related to land use, policies that will be implemented to
achieve these goals, and implementation strategies.
ORDERLY GROWTH
This General Plan envisions land use change within the existing City that would require
no annexation or Sphere of Influence changes. The Land Use Element also identifies
areas outside exiting City limits, but within the existing Sphere of Influence, that would
be annexed to Gridley before urban development is allowed. Finally, this General Plan
identifies areas outside the existing Sphere of Influence that represent longer-term growth
areas. The proper phasing, planning, and management of outward growth of the City is
vital to ensure efficient and effective public infrastructure and service provision.
                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                               29

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to Orderly Growth
include:
    9    Gridley can grow without sacrificing the small-town character that we cherish.
    9    Growth will be according to our vision. Although Gridley is a small town, we
         insist on high-quality development, that meets our specific needs and
         preferences.
    9    Growth and change should benefit Gridley’s existing and future residents.
    9    New development should compensate the City and other public service providers
         for the cost of providing public facilities, infrastructure, and services.
    9    The City should develop in a compact way that is more efficient and less costly
         to serve, compared to a development pattern that is more spread out.
    9    We believe that growth should be managed to promote the long-term economic
         health of our community.
    9    We believe agriculture should continue to be viable near the City. Gridley should
         preserve agricultural and other open space around the edges of the community.
    9    It is important to recognize the high quality of farmland that surrounds the
         community by developing in a land-efficient manner that does not unnecessarily
         or prematurely convert agricultural lands to urban use.
 LAND USE GOAL 1:            To achieve orderly, managed urban growth with a compact
                             development pattern with high quality and efficient public
                             infrastructure and services.
 LAND USE POLICY 1.1         The City will maintain a reasonable and logical expanded Sphere of
                             Influence that implements the General Plan.
 LAND USE POLICY 1.2         The City will consider Butte Local Agency Formation Commission
                             policies and procedures in seeking a Sphere of Influence that
                             allows for building of complete neighborhoods and efficient
                             infrastructure extension.
 LAND USE POLICY 1.3         The City will approve annexations only in areas adjacent to
                             developed portions of the City with urban services and a General
                             Plan land use designation.
                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                30

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 LAND USE POLICY 1.4        The City will give higher priority to development proposals within
                            the City and existing Sphere of Influence over development
                            proposals outside the City’s Sphere of Influence.
 LAND USE POLICY 1.5        During this General Plan time horizon (through 2030), the City will
                            focus new development in the existing City and Planned Growth
                            Area, and away from Urban Reserve areas.
 LAND USE POLICY 1.6        The City will encourage infill development by analyzing
                            infrastructure deficiencies, improving infrastructure in the existing
                            City, creating fee programs that provide incentives for infill, and
                            working with property owners to create equitable financing
                            mechanism for infrastructure improvements in infill areas.
 LAND USE POLICY 1.7        The City will require projects proposed in the Industrial and
                            Agricultural Industrial designations to provide an analysis of water,
                            wastewater, drainage, and electricity demand. These developments
                            may be conditioned to ensure the availability of existing and
                            planned infrastructure capacity.
 Land Use                   The City will submit an application to Butte Local Agency
 Implementation             Formation Commission to expand the Sphere of Influence to
 Strategy 1.1               implement the General Plan. The City will provide LAFCO with
                            environmental and infrastructure analysis and documentation
                            needed to expand Gridley’s Sphere of Influence to include the
                            Planned Growth Area.
 Land Use                   The Planning Department will pre-zone land within the expanded
 Implementation             Sphere of Influence consistent with the General Plan prior to
 Strategy 1.2               annexation.
 Land Use                   The City will work with property owners interested in infill
 Implementation             development to identify infrastructure deficiencies and needs and to
 Strategy 1.3               determine an equitable sharing of costs between the City and the
                            property owner for infrastructure improvements.
COMPACT DEVELOPMENT
Compact development accommodates population and employment growth using less
land. Compact development conserves agricultural land, places homes and destinations
within walking distance of one another, and provides for more cost efficient
infrastructure and services. Higher density residential development provides more
“rooftops” to support retail and services in Neighborhood Centers and businesses
elsewhere in the City. Areas with more compact residential development provide better
support for transit. The City’s approach to promoting more compact development will
allow greater effective yields for development, while also ensuring adequate open space.
                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                               31

                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                               2030 General Plan
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to Compact
Development include:
    9    The City should develop in a compact way that is more efficient and less costly
         to serve, compared to a development pattern that is more spread out.
    9    The rural, agricultural setting of Gridley is a community asset that should be
         protected, preserved, and celebrated in the built environment as the community
         grows.
    9    We believe agriculture should continue to be viable near the City. Gridley should
         preserve agricultural and other open space around the edges of the community.
    9    It is important to recognize the high quality of farmland that surrounds the
         community by developing in a land-efficient manner that does not unnecessarily
         or prematurely convert agricultural lands to urban use.
Many of the policies in this section are cross-referenced to or supported by policies in the
Community Design and Character Element, the Public Facilities and Services Element,
and the Circulation Element. Although touching on design policies and infrastructure
policies, the focus in this section is on the use of land.
 LAND USE GOAL 2:             To encourage compact development patterns that use land more
                              efficiently and place homes in closer proximity to shopping,
                              services, schools, employment, and other destinations.
 LAND USE POLICY 2.1          New developments should be designed to minimize the amount of
                              land required to meet parking, internal circulation, and
                              delivery/loading needs.
                              (See the Circulation Element for more policies.)
 LAND USE POLICY 2.2          Land uses with different parking needs at different times of day
                              should locate close to one another in Neighborhood Centers to
                              reduce land used for parking.
                              (See the Circulation Element for more policies.)
 LAND USE POLICY 2.3          New developments proposed in Residential, Medium Density and
                              Residential, High Density 1 and 2 areas will provide public or
                              private common, accessible recreation areas and open spaces in
                              exchange for smaller yards and individual private open spaces.
                              (See the Community Character and Design Element and the Public
                              Facilities and Services Element for more policies.)
                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                 32

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 LAND USE POLICY 2.4 The City will encourage the use of its Planned Development
                     process to achieve more creative and high-quality design of
                     higher-density residential and higher-intensity commercial projects
 LAND USE POLICY 2.5 The City will encourage the joint use of parks for school and City use.
                     (See the Public Facilities and Services Element for more policies.)
 LAND USE POLICY 2.6 The City will encourage two-story construction of public and
                     private buildings, including schools, where feasible and consistent
                     with state building code and Americans with Disabilities Act
                     requirements.
                     (See the Community Character and Design Element for more
                     policies.)
 LAND USE POLICY 2.7 Buildings in new developments should be built close to the
                     sidewalk and front property line.
                     (See the Community Character and Design Element for more
                     policies.)
 LAND USE POLICY 2.8 New development shall contribute toward areawide drainage needs
                     in public rights-of-way and neighborhood and community parks, to
                     reduce land used for on-site retention in each individual project.
                     (See the Public Facilities and Services Element for more policies.)
 LAND USE POLICY 2.9 New development (public and private) should use Low Impact
                     Development stormwater management methods, so that less land is
                     needed for drainage conveyance and detention.
                     (See the Public Facilities and Services Element for more policies.)
 Land Use            The City will adopt changes to the Zoning Ordinance and Public
 Implementation      Works Construction Standards to accommodate more compact
 Strategy 2.1        growth patterns, consistent with the General Plan, while still
                     ensuring public health and safety.
 Land Use            The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance following the General
 Implementation      Plan update. As a part of this revision, the City will provide new
 Strategy 2.2        and/or revised zoning district descriptions to implement the
                     Residential, High Density 1 and 2 land use designations and to
                     facilitate the provision of well-designed, higher-density housing.
                     The City will also encourage applicants to make use of the current
                     Planned Development District application process to take
                     advantage of the City’s flexible approach to land use mix, density,
                     and development standards for high-quality projects.
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
                                        33

                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                               2030 General Plan
 Land Use                    The City will update the Nexus Fee Study following the 2030
 Implementation              General Plan update. As a part of this update, the City will ensure
 Strategy 2.3                that compact development has lower fees where it is shown to have
                             lower costs. The City will evaluate its fee structure to align more
                             closely the fees it charges with the actual cost of providing public
                             services. The City will consider establishing fees on an equivalent
                             dwelling unit basis, a per-capita basis, or per-acre basis, depending
                             on the type of fee. The City will not use fees that are applied on a
                             per-dwelling unit basis, since different types of dwelling units have
                             different demands for services with different associated costs.
MIXING AND SEPARATING LAND USES
Effective land use planning involves both the mixing and separating of land uses,
depending on the context, to achieve Gridley’s environmental, economic, and social
goals. The mixing of land uses allows more people to walk or bike to destinations,
particularly in areas of the City that already have good pedestrian and bicycle access. In
combination with higher densities and intensities of development, the mixing of land uses
supports more efficient public transit service.
Separating incompatible land uses is also important. For example, when residential
development encroaches into agricultural areas, this can present problems for both
farmers and residents. Residential uses often need buffering from industrial uses, which
can be loud, produce air pollution, and generate truck traffic. Certain transportation
facilities, like Highway 99 and the railroad, also generate noise and air pollution,
requiring buffering from sensitive uses, such as residences and schools.
The appropriate mixing and separating of land uses is addressed by the goals, policies,
and implementation strategies that follow.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to Mixing and
Separating Land Uses include:
    9     A livable community is one with parks, schools, shops, and other destinations
          that are oriented to our neighborhoods and designed for people, rather than
          oriented toward busy roadways and designed exclusively for auto access.
    9     Our streets, neighborhoods, and civic spaces should provide many gathering
          places where we meet up with our friends and neighbors.
                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                 34

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
    9   Downtown should remain our pedestrian-scaled, commercial and civic center in
        which we all take pride.
    9   The City should take an active role in downtown revitalization, supporting
        existing business expansion, new business development, and housing, all
        consistent with downtown’s historic character.
    9   We believe that Gridley should be a complete City, with a variety of shopping,
        commercial services, professional services, and entertainment options.
    9   We will design our community so that people can walk, bicycle, or use public
        transit if they cannot, or choose not to drive.
    9   For safe and convenient travel, we need destinations, like schools, parks, and
        shops, to be oriented to, and blended in with our neighborhoods.
    9   We need local housing options that accommodate our different households’
        needs and preferences.
    9   We do not want our young people to have move away from Gridley to find
        appropriate and affordable housing.
    9   We respect, and should have high-quality housing for our senior population.
 LAND USE GOAL 3:           To accommodate a variety of activities and a full range of
                            housing types in Gridley’s neighborhoods.
 LAND USE POLICY 3.1        New development in the Planned Growth Area shall provide a
                            variety of housing types and densities.
 LAND USE POLICY 3.2        New development in the Planned Growth Area shall accommodate
                            schools, parks, and other civic uses to serve the surrounding
                            neighborhood.
 LAND USE POLICY 3.3        The City will consult with the School District to ensure that
                            schools are located and designed for safe and convenient
                            pedestrian and bicycle access to and from surrounding
                            neighborhoods. The City will require that development include
                            safe and convenient access to nearby schools and work with the
                            School District to ensure this access.
 LAND USE POLICY 3.4        In the Planned Growth Area, higher-activity land uses, such as
                            apartments, schools, shops, small parks, offices, child care
                            facilities, community or civic buildings, places of worship, parks,
                            and related uses will be neighborhood-scaled and located in or next
                            to Neighborhood Centers.
                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                               35

                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                         2030 General Plan
LAND USE POLICY 3.5 The City will encourage and support well-maintained gardens,
                    community gardens, farmer’s markets, produce stands, and urban
                    agriculture on private and public property, including interim use of
                    vacant or underutilized land for gardens.
Land Use            The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance so that zoning districts
Implementation      implement the land use designations contained in the 2030 General
Strategy 3.1        Plan update, including the Neighborhood Center Mixed Use and
                    Residential High Density 2 designations.
LAND USE GOAL 4:    To maintain an active, vibrant, mixed-use Downtown
                    containing civic, cultural, entertainment, shopping,
                    commercial service, professional office, and residential uses.
LAND USE POLICY 4.1 The City will encourage development and redevelopment of
                    Downtown as a vibrant, mixed-use area.
LAND USE POLICY 4.2 The City will encourage retail and visitor-oriented uses, business
                    and personal services, government and other civic uses,
                    professional offices, and high-density residential uses to locate
                    Downtown.
LAND USE POLICY 4.3 The City will identify and address public infrastructure
                    deficiencies and otherwise direct public investment Downtown, in
                    order to encourage development and redevelopment.
LAND USE POLICY 4.4 The City will use its development review process and fee programs
                    to induce both new development and retention of existing uses
                    Downtown.
Land Use            As part of the update of the City’s fees described in Land Use
Implementation      Implementation Strategy 2.3, the City will consider reducing
Strategy 4.1        development impact fees to encourage infill development
                    Downtown.
Land Use            The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance to implement the
Implementation      Downtown Mixed Use designation. The City will consider for
Strategy 4.2        redesignation smaller properties Downtown with Industrial
                    designations that may be suitable for residential, commercial, and
                    mixed-use development.
                    To ensure compatibility in this mixed-use environment, the City
                    will review projects against policies in this General Plan, which
                    provide general design guidance and performance standards for
                    noise, light, glare, air pollution, truck traffic, and other relevant
                    issues. The City will also review projects using Chapter 17.38 of
                    the City’s Municipal Code, which also provides performance
                    standards that can be used in situations where industrial operations
                    may be located close to residential uses.
                              LAND USE ELEMENT
                                        36

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 LAND USE GOAL 5:    To encourage land use patterns that buffer potentially
                     incompatible uses from one another.
 LAND USE POLICY 5.1 Commercial or industrial uses that create noise, air pollution, or
                     other substantial impacts for existing or planned residential uses
                     shall be located, buffered, or otherwise designed to avoid such
                     impacts.
 LAND USE POLICY 5.2 New residential projects near the Union Pacific railroad and
                     Highway 99 will provide buffering from these rights-of-way to
                     avoid adverse air quality, noise, and aesthetic issues.
 LAND USE POLICY 5.3 New residential development adjacent to cultivated agricultural
                     lands shall provide buffers to reduce potential conflicts. The width
                     of such buffers will be determined on a case-by-case basis
                     considering prevailing winds, crop types, agricultural practices,
                     and other relevant factors. In most cases, agricultural buffers
                     should be no less than 300 feet in width. The width of public
                     rights-of-way, drainages, and easements may count as part of the
                     buffer. Lower density residential development may be able to
                     cluster development so that houses are located away from adjacent
                     farmland as a way of providing buffers.
 LAND USE POLICY 5.4 Within agricultural buffer areas, allowed land uses include
                     drainage, trails, other infrastructure, community gardens,
                     landscaped areas, and other uses that would be compatible with
                     ongoing agricultural operations.
 LAND USE POLICY 5.5 Agricultural buffers are not required adjacent to areas planned for
                     future development in this General Plan or areas designated Urban
                     Reserve. Agricultural buffers are not required along the northern of
                     the Planned Growth Area, which is directly adjacent to lands
                     identified for urban development in the City of Biggs. Agricultural
                     buffers are only required in areas adjacent to Butte County land use
                     designations for cultivated crops and grazing – currently called
                     “Orchard and Field Crops” and “Grazing and Open Land.”
 LAND USE POLICY 5.6 Agricultural buffers in the southwestern portion of the Planned
                     Growth Area will be less than 300 feet in width, recognizing that
                     the affected agricultural property to the west is primarily
                     surrounded by existing properties of less than 5 acres in size with
                     residential uses and planned development under this General Plan.
 Land Use            The City will review projects against policies in this General Plan,
 Implementation      which provide general design guidance and performance standards
 Strategy 5.1        for noise, light, glare, air pollution, truck traffic, and other issues
                     may be required to allow for a desired mix of uses in close
                     proximity to one another. The City will also review projects using
                     Chapter 17.38 of the City’s Municipal Code, which also provides
                     performance standards that can be used in situations where
                     industrial operations may be located close to residential uses.
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
                                         37

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
 Land Use                   The City will review projects against policies in this General Plan,
 Implementation             which provide general design guidance and performance standards
 Strategy 5.2               for mixing uses in close proximity to one another, including
                            agricultural uses, the railroad, Highway 99, and residential uses.
                            The City will use guidance in this General Plan to determine the
                            adequacy of proposed buffering between residential land uses,
                            Highway 99 and the Union Pacific railroad.
 Land Use                   The Planning Department will consult with Butte County to
 Implementation             determine the specific application of the City’s agricultural buffer
 Strategy 5.3               policy in the Planned Growth Area. The City will consider
                            developing an ordinance to apply this policy in areas adjacent to
                            long-term ongoing agricultural operations.
CONVENIENT LOCAL SHOPPING
The amount of land needed for commercial services and retail development depends on
future population, disposable income, and other factors. Because there is a finite demand
for commercial services and retail, and because there is more than enough vacant,
commercial designated land available for development to meet future demand, the City
decided not to designate large new areas for commercial development as a part of the
2030 General Plan update. Instead, commercial development and redevelopment will
occur in the existing City and SOI where infrastructure and development capacity exists.
The General Plan provides for different types of commercial development, including
regional-serving, community-serving, neighborhood-serving, and Downtown commercial
development. The City will encourage larger-scale commercial development along
Highway 99. Neighborhood-scale commercial development is provided in Neighborhood
Centers in the Planned Growth Area. Additional commercial potential is available
Downtown. Each commercial setting – regional, community, neighborhood, and
Downtown – is important to ensure convenient local shopping opportunities for residents
and visitors.
                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                38

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to Convenient Local
Shopping include:
    9    Unique, locally-owned businesses are a critical part of small-town character. The
         City should encourage preservation, expansion, and establishment of local business.
    9    Downtown should remain our pedestrian-scaled, commercial and civic center in
         which we all take pride.
    9    Downtown must grow and change with the rest of the City. Decisions about
         commercial growth elsewhere in the city should support our downtown.
    9    We believe that Gridley should be a complete City, with a variety of shopping,
         commercial services, professional services, and entertainment options.
    9    The City and community leaders should take an active and supportive role in
         business development that serves the whole community’s long-term interests.
 LAND USE GOAL 6:              Provide convenient regional-, community-, and neighborhood-
                               serving retail, office, and commercial services.
 LAND USE POLICY 6.1           Commercial development through 2030 will be directed to areas
                               along the stretch of Highway 99 in the existing Sphere of
                               Influence, Downtown, and in Neighborhood Centers.
 LAND USE POLICY 6.2           Larger-scale commercial development and redevelopment will be
                               focused within the existing Sphere of Influence along Highway 99.
 LAND USE POLICY 6.3           The City will encourage development of vacant parcels and
                               creative reuse of undeveloped properties along Highway 99.
 LAND USE POLICY 6.4           The City will encourage smaller-scale retail, service, and
                               especially visitor-oriented development Downtown.
 LAND USE POLICY 6.5           The Planned Growth Area will provide for smaller-scale
                               commercial development in the Neighborhood Center Mixed Use
                               designation area to serve new neighborhoods.9
9 Smaller-scale commercial development would include shops, offices, services, and other
   nonresidential uses that are blended into the surrounding neighborhood and located on
   properties of roughly 5 acres or less. Larger-scale industrial and light industrial operations,
   office parks, business parks, and other commercial projects on larger properties are normally
   not integrated into residential neighborhoods.
                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                  39

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
 Land Use                    The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance, as necessary, to
 Implementation              facilitate development and redevelopment of commercial
 Strategy 6.1                properties downtown and along Highway 99. The City will
                             consider flexibility Downtown and along Highway 99, where
                             necessary, with respect to the required loading areas. Public rights-
                             of-way or parking areas may be allowed for loading where this can
                             be accomplished safely and without impeding emergency access.
 Land Use                    The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance to implement the
 Implementation              Downtown Mixed Use and Neighborhood Center Mixed Use
 Strategy 6.2                designations.
DIVERSE LOCAL ECONOMY
Job creation and economic development are fundamental to the economic, fiscal, and
social sustainability of the community. Two related important goals of economic
development are (1) to create a better match between local employment and the local
labor force and (2) create a better balance between housing units and jobs.
Currently, the main employers in Gridley are government, schools, health care providers,
food services, and commercial retail.10 While there is some relationship between the
types of jobs available in Gridley and the skills and interests of the population, this match
could be improved in the future. As of the last U.S. Census, more than 60% of the
Gridley workforce was employed outside the City. Many Gridley residents are employed
in manufacturing, agriculture, arts and entertainment, and construction.11 The match
between the local population and job types would be improved by adding employment in
these areas.
The General Plan is not a precise tool for targeting and attraction of businesses. However,
the City’s General Plan policies are an important part of the overall context for doing
business. The General Plan can ensure that land is provided in the right locations with
adequate infrastructure and reasonable fees for employment development. The General
Plan can help maintain and enhance the quality of life that certain employers are seeking.
The General Plan and implementing regulations can contribute to a “business climate”
attractive to the types of employers sought by the City.
10 2002 Economic Census.
11 2000 U.S. Census.
                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                40

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The goals, policies, and implementation strategies that follow address employment
attraction and retention and jobs-housing balance.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to Diverse Local
Economy include
     9   Unique, locally-owned businesses are a critical part of small-town character. The
         City should encourage preservation, expansion, and establishment of local business.
     9   We believe that our long-term economic future greatly benefits from a unique,
         charming, small-town character.
     9   We believe that the entire community will benefit from a diversity of local job
         opportunities.
     9   We want our children to have the option to stay in Gridley to pursue their careers.
     9   It is important to focus on employment opportunities that offer living wages and
         benefits to existing and future residents.
     9   We recognize that an educated, skilled workforce is important to attracting high-
         quality employment opportunities. We should partner with educational
         institutions to expand and enhance career training opportunities.
     9   Gridley’s long-term quality of life is dependent on a great local school system.
         We believe it is important for the City to communicate with the Gridley Unified
         School District, in order to pursue mutual goals.
     9   The City and community leaders should take an active and supportive role in
         business development that serves the whole community’s long-term interests.
     9   We should enhance the local economy by accommodating agricultural-related
         businesses.
                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              41

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                      2030 General Plan
LAND USE GOAL 7:    Create a diverse commercial and industrial base that provides
                    high-quality employment opportunities for local residents and
                    promotes fiscal, economic, and environmental sustainability.
LAND USE POLICY 7.1 The City will encourage housing development and employment
                    development that creates a better match between the local
                    workforce and locally available jobs.
LAND USE POLICY 7.2 The City will encourage development of employment-generating
                    uses that further the City’s goals by streamlining its development
                    review process, through flexible development standards, by
                    reducing fees for electricity or other infrastructure types, and
                    through other means, as feasible.
LAND USE POLICY 7.3 The City will identify and provide a range of incentives for new
                    development in the Gridley Industrial Park. These incentives could
                    involve public-private partnerships, lower development impact
                    fees, supportive public investments, and other City programs. The
                    City will consider a range of strategies designed to leverage private
                    investment that creates high-quality local jobs.
LAND USE POLICY 7.4 The City will explore opportunities to create a “green” or “eco”
                    industrial park by applying environmental best practices in the
                    Gridley Industrial Park to attract businesses that share the City’s
                    goals for environmental sustainability.
LAND USE POLICY 7.5 The City will consult with local community colleges and schools to
                    link training and education to the needs of current and potential
                    future local employers.
LAND USE            The City will analyze in a Nexus Study and consider in reducing its
Implementation      development impact fees to create incentives for employment-
Strategy 7.1        generating projects.
                    The City’s development impact fees and other funding programs
                    should provide incentives both for development within the Gridley
                    Industrial Park and areas targeted for Agricultural Industrial
                    development.
Land Use            The Planning Department will revise the Zoning Ordinance to
Implementation      implement the Agricultural Industrial land use designation.
Strategy 7.2
Land Use            The Gridley Planning Department, Public Works Department,
Implementation      Building Department, Electric Department, and Finance
Strategy 7.3        Department will be involved in aspects of Gridley’s proactive
                    economic development strategy. Activities could include, but are
                    not limited to:
                         9    Business recruitment and retention, emphasizing employers
                              that share Gridley’s commitment to social, economic, and
                              environmental sustainability
                              LAND USE ELEMENT
                                        42

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                       9    Industrial Park planning for increased vehicular access; best
                            practices in stormwater management; recycled water use;
                            energy conservation strategies; investigating the viability and
                            importance of rail access in the long term; transit, bicycle,
                            and pedestrian access; and, other planning strategies to
                            increase environmental and economic sustainability in the
                            fully developed Industrial Park.
                       9    Incentive programs, including those that address both up-
                            front impact fees and ongoing costs.
                       9    Highway 99 beautification programs. This could include
                            some type of façade and streetscape improvement program
                            for targeted redevelopment properties along the highway
                            corridor. The City could provide small grants, low interest
                            loans, and/or architectural and design assistance to property
                            owners or business owners to improve streetscapes or
                            buildings along Highway 99.
                       9    Electrical facilities planning that accommodates, and creates
                            incentives for renewable energy production and use.
                       9    Coordinating the employment recruitment strategy with local
                            community college districts and schools to encourage a better
                            match between the skill sets and interests of the local
                            workforce and the needs of employers that might be
                            interested in locating or relocating to Gridley.
                       9    Coordinate with other agencies, as necessary, to promote
                            economic development. Caltrans must be consulted for
                            planning and funding of access improvements along
                            Highway 99. The City will monitor and take advantage of
                            State, federal, and regional funding opportunities.
 LAND USE         The City will undertake a planning process for the Gridley
 Implementation   Industrial Park to identify specific actions to create a “green” or
 Strategy 7.4     “eco” industrial park and the types of businesses the City can
                  expected to attract to such a park. The City will evaluate
                  opportunities for energy efficiency, on-site energy generation, low-
                  impact development, water conservation, recycling, re-use of waste
                  heat, the co-location of businesses that can support a “green” or
                  “eco” industrial park, and other options.
                  Through this planning process, the City will determine which
                  actions to adopt, such as a specific plan or master plan with
                  illustrated design guidelines, changes to the Zoning Ordinance,
                  installation of infrastructure, financial incentives, applications for
                  state or federal funding, and/or other actions.
                  Another component of the planning process could be a marketing
                  effort to identify industrial users interested in sustainability that
                  could benefit by locating in the Gridley Industrial Park.
                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                                      43

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
     LAND USE ELEMENT
              44
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  NOISE ELEMENT
                         I

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                Page
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
   Relationship to Other Elements.................................................................................. 2 
   Community Noise Basics ............................................................................................. 2 
   Context .......................................................................................................................... 5 
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES ............................. 6 
EXHIBITS
Noise-1. Typical Noise Levels ...................................................................................... 4
Noise-2. Railroad Noise Contours............................................................................... 7
Noise-3. Roadway Noise Contours .............................................................................. 9
Noise-4. Preferred Residential-Commercial Interface ........................................... 13
TABLES
Noise-1. Summary of Community Noise Survey Results and Estimates ............... 11
Noise-2. Land Use Noise Compatibility Guidelines for Transportation Noise
            Sources.......................................................................................................... 18
Noise-3. Land Use Compatibility Standards for Interior Noise ............................ 19
Noise-4. Noise Level Performance Standards for New Projects Affected By, or
            Including Non-Transportation Noise Sources .......................................... 19
                                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                                                               I

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
       NOISE ELEMENT
              II
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
INTRODUCTION
The Noise Element provides comprehensive local policies to control and abate
environmental noise and to protect the citizens of Gridley from excessive noise exposure.
The Noise Element is intended to:
    9   Provide sufficient information so that noise may be effectively considered in the
        land use planning process,
    9   Suggest cost-effective strategies and measures to abate excessive noise,
    9   Ensure land use and noise compatibility is considered in land use and
        transportation planning,
    9   Provide the basis for City zoning and municipal code standards for noise,
    9   Protect noise-sensitive areas from excessive noise exposure,
    9   Protect existing noise-producing agricultural, commercial, and industrial uses
        from encroachment by noise-sensitive land uses, and
    9   Describe how the City will balance its noise goals with other environmental and
        economic goals.
State Noise Element requirements are specified in Government Code Section 65302(f)
and in the Office of Noise Control’s Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of Noise
Elements of the General Plan. As described in these guidelines, the Noise Element must
identify certain major noise sources and areas containing noise-sensitive land uses and
include generalized noise exposure contours for current and projected levels of activity
within the community. State law requires that the Noise Element consider the following
major noise sources:
    9   Highways and freeways;
    9   Primary arterials and major local streets;
    9   Railroad operations;
    9   Aircraft and airport operations;
    9   Local industrial facilities; and,
    9   Other stationary sources.
Noise-sensitive areas to be considered in the Noise Element should include areas
containing the following uses:
    9   Schools;
    9   Hospitals;
                                       NOISE ELEMENT
                                             1

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
    9    Rest homes;
    9    Long-term medical or mental care facilities; and,
    9    Other uses deemed noise-sensitive by the local jurisdiction (such as residences).
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS
The Noise Element addresses the noise compatibility of proposed land uses, provides
guidelines for determining appropriate uses within areas characterized by high noise
levels, and is used as a basis for policies and proposals within other General Plan
elements.
According to the Government Code requirements, “...noise exposure information shall
become a guideline for use in the development of the Land Use Element to achieve noise
compatible land uses.” As an example, since residential development is considered noise-
sensitive, Noise Element policies will influence the location of new housing. The location
of housing is also addressed in the Housing Element and Land Use Element.
The Noise Element also shares planning issues with the Conservation and Open Space
Elements. Excessive noise can adversely affect the quality of wildlife habitat or outdoor
recreational areas, and thus is considered when planning open spaces. Open space,
building setbacks, and landscaped areas can also be effective tools to buffer sensitive land
uses from noise sources.
Transportation corridors identified in the Circulation Element are major noise sources in
Gridley. The Circulation Element (and Transportation section of the General Plan
Environmental Impact Report) provides policy and information related to future noise
levels along Gridley’s transportation corridors. One focus of the Circulation Element is
providing connectivity by establishing a network of parallel routes that distribute traffic,
and therefore distributes noise rather than concentrating it along any one route.
Circulation Element policies will, in part, determine the need for setbacks, landscaped
buffers, planted earthen berms, and other noise reduction measures.
COMMUNITY NOISE BASICS
Noise is commonly defined as unwanted sound. Common effects of noise include
interference with human activities such as sleep, conversation, recreation, and tasks
demanding concentration or coordination.
                                      NOISE ELEMENT
                                             2

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Sound is a change in air pressure. Because of the ability of the human ear to detect a wide
range of sound pressure changes, sound pressure levels are expressed in decibels (dB). In
addition, because the human ear is not equally sensitive to all sound frequencies, the dBA
scale is used to relate noise to human sensitivity. The dBA scale performs this
compensation by approximating the sensitivity of the human ear. Most jurisdictions use
the dBA scale to regulate environmental noise. Exhibit Noise-1 provides a description of
noise levels associated with common activities, expressed according to the dBA scale.
Community noise is commonly described in terms of the "ambient", or all-encompassing
noise level associated with a given noise environment. The Equivalent Noise Level (Leq)
and Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) are common community noise
descriptors.
    9   Leq (Equivalent Noise Level): The energy mean (average) noise level. The
        instantaneous noise levels during a specific period of time in dBA are converted
        to relative energy values. In noise environments determined by major noise
        events, such as aircraft overflights, the Leq value is heavily influenced by the
        magnitude and number of single events that produce the high noise levels.
    9   CNEL is an average of 24-hour Leq with a 10 dBA ‘penalty’ for noise events that
        occur during the noise-sensitive hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. In other
        words, 10 dBA is ‘added’ to noise events that occur in the nighttime hours, and
        this generates a higher reported noise level when determining compliance with
        noise standards. An additional 5 dBA ‘penalty’ is added to noise events that
        occur during the noise-sensitive hours between 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., which
        are typically reserved for relaxation, conversation, and reading. These “penalties”
        represent that noise during evening and nighttime hours is more disruptive than
        noise during the day.
The City of Gridley uses the CNEL measure for purposes of noise analysis and
regulation. For a more detailed background on acoustics, please refer to the General Plan
glossary and the Noise section of the General Plan Environmental Impact Report (under
separate cover).
 
                                       NOISE ELEMENT
                                              3

                                                        CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                     2030 General Plan
Source: EDAW 2006 
Exhibit Noise‐1. Typical Noise Levels 
                                       NOISE ELEMENT
                                             4

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
CONTEXT
The primary sources of noise in the Gridley Planning Area include SR 99 and other
roadways, industrial operations, agricultural activities, and railroad operations. With the
exception of City parks, most noise-producing land uses are located near the railroad in
the City center or on SR 99 in the commercial area on the east side. The ambient noise
environment in the immediate vicinity of these uses includes noise from other industries,
local traffic, and the railroad. No airport is located in the immediate vicinity, although
occasional commercial, military, and general aviation aircraft fly over Gridley at high
altitudes.
Gridley’s noise environment can be represented using noise contours, which show the
average noise level from major noise sources. Contours are used, among other analytical
techniques, to identify areas of high existing or potential noise which may affect noise
sensitive land uses. State General Plan law requires the City to develop noise contours for
both existing and future conditions.
Future conditions are displayed in this Noise Element (see Exhibits Noise-2 and Noise-
3). The 60, 65, and 70 dB CNEL contour levels are illustrated on these maps for the
Union Pacific railroad line and SR 99. In areas closer to the noise source, the noise level
is higher than the contour. In areas further from the noise source, noise levels are
expected to be lower than the contour. For railroad noise, the contours show higher levels
of noise in areas where trains typically use a horn.
A community noise survey was conducted as a part of the research and analysis
supporting the 2030 General Plan. The City selected noise monitoring sites representative
of typical conditions near noise-sensitive uses. To quantify existing noise levels in the
quieter parts of Gridley, the City monitored noise at 10 locations distant from major noise
sources (Table Noise-1).
Much of Downtown Gridley is exposed to train noise. Although train operations produce
noise, the loudest noises are associated with train horns. The Federal Railroad
Administration requires the use of train horns near at-grade crossings unless an approved
“quiet zone” is in effect. Cities around the nation have applied for quiet zone status,
which prohibits the use of train horns and substantially reduces noise along the railroad
tracks. Other safety devices are used in-lieu of the horn to ensure against accidents at the
railroad crossings. Instead of the horn mounted atop the train, smaller roadside mounted
speakers are used to emit a train horn sound, but directed only in the vicinity of the
crossing and toward the roadway.
                                       NOISE ELEMENT
                                              5

                                                                              CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                          2030 General Plan
The following noise-sensitive uses have been identified within Gridley:
    9   Residential areas. Gridley’s residential areas are, for the most part, separated
        from substantial sources of noise. However, there are some residential areas near
        the core of the City that are affected by noise from the Union Pacific railroad
        line.
    9   Schools. Schools are located in and around Downtown Gridley and near the
        Butte County Fairgrounds, east of SR 99. Schools located Downtown (McKinley
        Elementary, Sycamore Middle, Wilson Elementary) are in areas with train noise.
    9   Convalescent hospitals and care facilities. The Biggs-Gridley Memorial
        Hospital is located along Spruce Street, with enough distance from SR 99 and the
        railroad to avoid substantial noise issues.
    9   Parks and recreation areas. Gridley’s parks are distributed around the
        Downtown area and newly developed residential areas. Downtown parks,
        including Daddow Plaza, Vierra Park, Quota Park, and Rotary Park are located
        very near the Union Pacific railroad. Other parks located within newly developed
        residential areas are not affected by major sources of noise.
    9   Hotels and transient lodgings. These types of businesses are located along SR
        99 today, and therefore require building construction methods and materials to
        ensure acceptable interior noise levels.
    9   Places of worship. Churches are located throughout Gridley, including in and
        around the Downtown, in areas affected by noise from the railroad.
    9   Libraries. The County library in Gridley is located along Spruce Street, in an
        area without existing noise exposure issues.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES
Existing sources of noise in Gridley include industrial uses and transportation facilities.
The City seeks to avoid planning mistakes of the past, such as funneling vehicle trips
within and between neighborhoods onto arterial roads that divide neighborhoods. As
noted in the policies that follow, buffering and earthen berms will be used to attenuate
transportation noise, where necessary, rather than sound walls. The City will ensure noisy
industrial uses are separated from noise-sensitive uses.
Since federal and state regulations preempt local control over transportation noise
sources. For this reason, the City’s policies for transportation noise relates less to sources,
and more to land use and transportation planning to reduce noise generation and
exposure. Following are Gridley’s noise goals, policies, and implementation strategies.
                                       NOISE ELEMENT
                                               6

     Exhibit Noise-2
Railroad Noise Contours

    Exhibit Noise-3
Roadway Noise Contours

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                                                                                                    Table Noise-1
                                                                                     Summary of Community Noise Survey Results and Estimates
  Site                 Location                      Dates1        Time Period           Leq             Lmax              L50            Estimated CNEL                                                Sources
   1. Corner of Georgia Street and Paradox          5/20/08            Day              48.3             68.1             43.0                                 Vehicle pass-bys, kids playing, birds chirping, dogs barking. Strong wind during evening
       Drive                                        5/20/08          Evening            58.2             83.7             48.7                  52.51          and night measurements.
                                                    5/21/08           Night             47.4             65.4             45.8
   2.  Corner of Jay Drive and Jacob Street         5/20/08            Day              47.1             65.8             41.1                                 Vehicle pass-bys, kids playing, birds chirping, pedestrians, motor scooter. Strong wind
                                                    5/20/08          Evening            56.8             74.3             54.7                  57.3 1         during evening and night measurements.
                                                    5/22/08           Night             55.8             64.6             55.5
   3.  Corner of Magnolia Street and                5/20/08            Day              54.8             77.1             51.1                                 Vehicle pass-bys, kids playing, birds chirping, pedestrians, skateboards. Strong wind
       Indiana Street                               5/20/08          Evening            57.2             77.0             47.2                  55.4 1         during evening and night measurements.
                                                    5/22/08           Night             50.5             54.8             43.0
   4.  Corner of Vermont Street and Pecan           5/20/08            Day              54.7             70.9             46.6                                 Vehicle pass-bys, kids playing, birds chirping, pedestrians, air conditioning units. Strong
       Street                                       5/20/08          Evening            46.6             65.4             39.9                  54.2 2         wind during night measurement.
                                                    5/22/08           Night             49.2             59.5             47.3
   5.  Corner of East Hazel Street and              5/21/08            Day              63.5             83.9             56.7                                 Vehicle pass-bys, kids playing, birds chirping, pedestrians, school buses, vehicles on
       Fairview Drive                               5/21/08          Evening            51.6             66.9             49.9                  56.73          SR 99. Strong wind during all measurements
                                                    5/22/08           Night             49.1             55.3             48.4
   6.  Corner of Heron Landing Way and              5/21/08            Day              52.7             69.6             47.6                                 Vehicle pass-bys, hammering, lawn mower, birds chirping, pedestrians, vehicles on
       Cinnamon Teal Court                          5/21/08          Evening            44.8             60.6             41.1                  51.4           Biggs-Gridley Road.
                                                    5/22/08           Night             41.4             54.4             38.8
   7.  Corner of Pryde Avenue and                   5/21/08            Day              62.7             83.8             52.5                                 Vehicle pass-bys, birds chirping, heavy trucks, distant train horn. Strong wind during all
       6th Street                                   5/21/08          Evening            63.2             76.5             62.8                  59.2 3         measurements
                                                    5/22/08           Night             53.2             75.2             47.4
  A.   On the rail line off the end of Flyway       5/20/08            Day              73.8             94.6             50.5                                 Placed outside of community noise influence, captured mostly railroad operations
       Court                                        5/20/08          Evening            72.4             94.0             58.3                  76.8           without horn blasts.
                                                    5/21/08           Night             76.3             95.7             59.7
   B.  Washington Street and Laurel Street          5/20/08            Day              83.3            111.9             63.1                                 Placed in the City 60 feet from an at grade rail crossing. Captured mainly rail events and
       at grade Railroad Crossing                   5/20/08          Evening            88.8            118.7             56.4                  88.2           some traffic noise.
                                                    5/21/08           Night             85.7            113.3             58.5
   C.  SR 99 between Obermeyer Avenue               5/21/08            Day              77.3             90.5             76.0                                 Located approximately 75 feet from centerline of SR 99 on the south end of the City.
       and Sheldon Avenue                           5/21/08          Evening            74.8             87.7             72.4                  78.6           Captured mainly SR 99 traffic noise.
                                                    5/22/08           Night             71.4             87.9             64.3
Note:
1
    Measured Leq levels for evening and night monitoring were reduced by 5 dB for CNEL calculations because of wind conditions exceeding 20 miles per hour.
2
    Measured Leq levels for night monitoring were reduced by 5 dB for CNEL calculations because of wind conditions exceeding 20 miles per hour.
3
    Measured Leq levels for day, evening, and night monitoring were reduced by 5 dB for CNEL calculations because of wind conditions exceeding 20 miles per hour.
Source: EDAW 2008
                                                                                                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                                                           11

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 NOISE GOAL 1                   To create land use patterns and transportation networks that
                                minimize noise problems.
 NOISE POLICY 1.1               The City will not allow the construction of new large-volume,
                                high-speed roadways, such as arterials, within or near residential
                                neighborhoods, and will instead require a network of fully
                                connected, smaller roadways, such as collectors and local streets,
                                that disperse traffic and minimize stopping and accelerating of
                                vehicles.
 NOISE POLICY 1.2               New developments shall provide buffers or other effective
                                measures to reduce noise exposure for proposed residential uses
                                adjacent to ongoing agricultural uses.
 NOISE POLICY 1.3               Parking and loading areas serving commercial and industrial uses
                                should be designed to avoid adverse noise impacts to adjacent
                                residential areas. Parking and loading areas should not be located
                                adjacent to outdoor activity areas on residential properties (such as
                                back yards). Commercial uses requiring large truck deliveries or
                                other noisy outdoor operations located across from or adjacent to
                                new or existing residential neighborhoods should site public
                                entrances to face toward the residences, where feasible (see Exhibit
                                Noise-4 below).
 Exhibit Noise‐4. Preferred Residential‐Commercial Interface
                                            NOISE ELEMENT
                                                    13

                                                                       CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                   2030 General Plan
NOISE POLICY 1.4 Since they create barriers to multi-modal travel, soundwalls are
                 prohibited within neighborhoods as a method for reducing noise
                 exposure and can only be used at the edges of neighborhoods for
                 noise attenuation where buffering and planted earthen berms are
                 not feasible.
NOISE POLICY 1.5 New developments proposing noise-sensitive land uses in areas
                 exposed to existing or projected noise levels from transportation,
                 stationary sources, or agricultural operations shall require
                 transportation planning, traffic calming, site planning, buffering,
                 sound insulation, or other methods, where necessary, to reduce
                 noise exposure in outdoor activity areas and interior spaces to
                 acceptable levels, as specified in Tables NOISE-2, NOISE-3, and
                 NOISE-4.
NOISE POLICY 1.6 The City should coordinate with Union Pacific and the Public
                 Utilities Commission to replace at-grade railroad crossings with
                 Federal Railroad Administration-approved quiet zone rated
                 crossing systems designed to reduce or eliminate the use of rail
                 horn blasts within the City, as funding is available.
Noise            The City will coordinate with Union Pacific Railroad to establish a
Implementation   Quiet Zone within the City limits of Gridley, as feasible. As
Strategy 1.1     funding is available, the City will improve crossings with
                 appropriate technologies to implement the Quiet Zone. The City
                 will coordinate with Union Pacific to reduce or eliminate the use of
                 horns in noise-sensitive areas of the community with the
                 installation of alternative crossing devices.
NOISE GOAL 2     To minimize noise impacts from development projects and
                 other land use changes.
NOISE POLICY 2.1 The City will review and condition proposed projects to ensure an
                 appropriate daytime and nighttime land use/noise environment, as
                 measured at outdoor gathering spaces, according to the standards
                 presented in Table NOISE-2 for transportation-related noise.
NOISE POLICY 2.2 The City will review and condition proposals to ensure an
                 appropriate daytime and nighttime indoor noise environment
                 indoors for noise-sensitive land uses according to the standards
                 presented in Table NOISE-3.
                              NOISE ELEMENT
                                     14
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 NOISE POLICY 2.3 Development projects and roadway improvement projects that
                  increase traffic noise levels shall employ noise reduction
                  techniques to achieve acceptable levels at outdoor activity areas
                  specified in Table NOISE-2 and within interior spaces of existing
                  and planned noise-sensitive uses specified in Table NOISE-3. The
                  following thresholds of significance shall be employed by the City
                  for purposes of noise analysis conducted pursuant to the California
                  Environmental Quality Act (CEQA):
                       9   Where existing exterior noise levels are less than 60 dBA
                           CNEL at outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive uses, an
                           increase of 5 dBA CNEL or greater is considered
                           significant and requires mitigation to reduce noise to
                           acceptable levels.
                       9   Where existing exterior noise levels are between 60 and
                           65 dBA CNEL at outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive
                           uses, an increase of 3 dBA CNEL or greater is considered
                           significant and requires mitigation to reduce noise to
                           acceptable levels.
                       9   Where existing exterior noise levels are greater than 65
                           dBA CNEL at outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive
                           uses, an increase of 1.5 dBA CNEL or greater is
                           considered significant and requires mitigation to reduce
                           noise to acceptable levels.
                       9   Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity
                           areas of noise-sensitive land uses to 60 dBA CNEL or less
                           using practical application of the best-available noise
                           reduction measures, an exterior noise level of up to 65
                           dBA CNEL may be allowed, provided that available
                           exterior noise level reduction measures have been
                           implemented and interior noise levels comply with
                           standards identified in Table NOISE-3.
 NOISE POLICY 2.4 The City will review and condition development proposals to
                  ensure an appropriate daytime and nighttime land use/noise
                  environment according to the standards presented in Table NOISE-
                  4 for non-transportation sources.
 NOISE POLICY 2.5 Industrial and other noise-generating land uses shall be located
                  away from noise-sensitive land uses or shall enclose any substantial
                  noise sources completely within buildings or structures to achieve
                  the standards presented in Table NOISE-4.
                              NOISE ELEMENT
                                      15
                                                                        CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                   2030 General Plan
NOISE POLICY 2.6 In general, the last land use proposed within a sequence of phased
                 development projects should be responsible for noise reduction
                 measures. However, if a noise-generating use is proposed adjacent
                 to lands designated for noise sensitive uses (i.e. residential
                 neighborhoods), then the noise-generating use shall employ noise
                 reduction techniques to comply with Table NOISE-4 standards at
                 the property line of the generating use.
NOISE POLICY 2.7 Development projects that produce, or are affected by, non-
                 transportation related noise shall employ noise reduction
                 techniques to achieve acceptable levels specified in Table NOISE-
                 4. The following thresholds of significance shall be employed by
                 the City for purposes of noise analysis conducted pursuant to the
                 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA):
                      9   Where existing exterior noise levels are between 60 and
                          65 dBA at outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive uses,
                          an increase of 3 dBA or greater is considered significant
                          and requires mitigation to reduce noise to acceptable
                          levels.
                      9   Where existing exterior noise levels are greater than 65
                          dBA at outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive uses, an
                          increase of 1.5 dBA or greater is considered significant
                          and requires mitigation to reduce noise to acceptable
                          levels.
                      9   Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity
                          areas to 60 dBA or less using practical application of the
                          best-available noise reduction measures, an exterior noise
                          level of up to 65 dBA may be allowed, provided that
                          available exterior noise reduction measures have been
                          implemented.
NOISE POLICY 2.8 The maximum noise level resulting from new sources and ambient
                 noise shall not exceed the standards in Table NOISE-4, as
                 measured at outdoor activity areas of any affected noise sensitive
                 land use except:
                      9   If the ambient noise level exceeds the standard in Table
                          NOISE-4, the standard becomes the existing ambient level
                          plus 5 dBA.
                      9   If the applicable standards in Table NOISE-4 exceed the
                          existing ambient level by 10 or more dBA, they shall be
                          reduced by 5 decibels.
                             NOISE ELEMENT
                                     16
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 NOISE POLICY 2.9  New developments shall employ all feasible measures to reduce
                   construction and other short-term noise and vibration impacts.
 NOISE POLICY 2.10 Proposed projects that place sensitive receptors within 100 feet of a
                   railroad or heavy industrial facility shall analyze and reduce
                   potential vibration, to the greatest extent feasible.
 NOISE POLICY 2.11 The City will exempt all school-related events, the Butte County
                   Fair, activities related to Red Suspender’s Day, local parades, and
                   other similar community events from noise standards outlined in
                   this element.
 Noise             The City will update implementing ordinances related to noise
 Implementation    consistent with the policies of this element. These updates are
 Strategy 2.1      anticipated to be relatively minor since the City recently updated
                   the noise ordinance. The City will consider adding restrictions on
                   construction activities for Saturdays (in addition to Sundays and
                   holidays). The City will use numerical standards outlined in this
                   element to make revisions, as necessary, to the Municipal Code.
                   The City will adopt a noise permitting ordinance for special events
                   not exempted by General Plan policy. Applicants for such permits
                   must provide an outline of the event, including hours of operation,
                   reasons why the additional noise is temporarily acceptable, and
                   strategies that will be used to reduce noise to the lowest possible
                   level, especially during noise-sensitive times of day (early morning,
                   evening, nighttime).
 Noise             The City will ensure that personnel charged with enforcing noise-
 Implementation    related ordinances are properly trained and equipped for on-site
 Strategy 2.2      measurement techniques and other necessary tasks. Enforcing
                   personnel should use a properly calibrated Type-II or better sound
                   level meter for situations that require numerical measurements. The
                   measuring instrument shall be placed at 4.5 to 6 feet above the
                   ground on the property boundary in question. The measurement
                   shall be taken in A-weighted decibels and shall be measured for no
                   less than 15 minutes.
 Noise             The City will use policies in this Noise Element, including those
 Implementation    standards described in Tables Noise-1, Noise-2, Noise-3, and
 Strategy 2.3      Noise-4 in assessing environmental impacts under the California
                   Environmental Quality Act.
                                NOISE ELEMENT
                                        17

                                                                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                              2030 General Plan
                                           Table NOISE-2
 Land Use Noise Compatibility Guidelines for Transportation Noise Sources
                                                 Community Noise Exposure Level (CNEL, dBA)
            Land Use Category                Normally    Conditionally    Normally      Clearly
                                            Acceptable1 Acceptable2 Unacceptable3 Unacceptable4
Residential, schools, libraries, places of
                                                <60          60–65         65–75          75+
worship, nursing homes
Auditoriums, concert halls,
                                                              <70           70+
amphitheaters
Sports arena, outdoor spectator sports                        <75           70+
Playgrounds, parks                              <70         67.5–75                       75+
Golf courses, riding stables, water
                                                <70                        70–80          80+
recreation, cemeteries
Retail, movie theaters, restaurants             <70          70–75         75–80          80+
Office building, business commercial,
                                                <70        67.5–77.5       77.5+
professional, lodging
Industrial, manufacturing, utilities,
                                                <75          70–80          80+
agriculture
Noise-sensitive manufacturing and
                                                <55          55–70         70–80          80+
communications
Notes: CNEL = community noise equivalent level; dBA = A-weighted decibel
1
  Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of
  conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
2
  New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the
  noise reduction requirements is completed and needed noise insulation features are included in
  the design. Conventional construction with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air
  conditioning will normally suffice.
3
  New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or
  development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be
  completed and needed noise insulation features must be included in the design. Outdoor areas
  must be shielded.
4
  New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
Source: State of California Governor’s Office of Planning and Research 2003, EDAW 2008.
                                            NOISE ELEMENT
                                                  18

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                                          Table Noise-3
                Land Use Compatibility Standards for Interior Noise
                          Land Use                                Maximum Allowable Interior Noise
                                                                             dBA CNEL
Residential and mixed use with residential component            45
Commercial - hotel, motel, transient lodging                    45
School classrooms, libraries, churches                          45
Hospitals, convalescent homes                                   45
Note: CNEL = community noise equivalent level; dBA = A-weighted decibel.
The noise standards described in this table do not apply to bathrooms, toilets, closets, or corridors.
The acceptable interior noise level for other uses (offices, theaters, commercial, industrial) depends
upon the specific nature of the indoor activity.
                                          Table Noise-4
    Noise Level Performance Standards for New Projects Affected by, or
                    Including Non-Transportation Noise Sources
                                                  Daytime (Decibel)           Nighttime (Decibel)
          Noise Level Descriptor
                                                   (7 a.m.–10 p.m.)             (10 p.m.–7 a.m.)
Hourly average level (Leq)                     60                         45
Maximum equivalent levels (Lmax)               75                         65
Notes:
Each of the noise levels specified shall be lowered by 5 decibels for simple tone noises, noises
consisting primarily of speech, or music, or for recurring impulsive noises. These noise level
standards do not apply to residential units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial
uses (e.g., caretaker dwellings). The noise standard is to be applied at the property lines of the
generating land use.
                                           NOISE ELEMENT
                                                  19

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
       NOISE ELEMENT
              20
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                          I

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                             Page
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
   Relationship to Other Elements.................................................................................. 1 
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES ............................. 2 
   Open Space Corridors ................................................................................................. 2 
   Recreation................................................................................................................... 16 
   Open Space Goal 1: Open Space Corridors (Policies 1.1 thorugh 1.11) ................. 4
   Open Space Goal 2: Open Space Corridors (Policies 2.1 through 2.3). .................. 9
   Open Space Goal 3: Open Space Corridors (Policies 3.1 through 3.3) ................. 10
   Open Space Goal 4: Recreation (Policies 4.1 through 4.9) ..................................... 17
   Open Space Goal 5: Recreation (Policies 5.1 through 5.7) ..................................... 18
   Open Space Goal 6: Recreation (Policies 6.1 through 6.6) ..................................... 21
EXHIBITS
   Open Space-1. Open Space Corridors and Parks in the Planned Growth
                      Area ................................................................................................... 4
   Open Space-2. Swales and Parks (Section 6) ........................................................... 6
   Open Space-3 Tree Preservation and Planting along Open Space Corridors
                      and Streets in the Planned Growth Area ....................................... 7
   Open Space-4. Open Space along the Railroad (Section 1) .................................. 11
   Open Space-5. Open Space along Highway 99 (Section 5) ................................... 12
   Open Space-6. Open Space Corridor within a Neighborhood (Section 2a) ........ 13
   Open Space-7. Broadened Open Space Corridor with Stormwater Retention
                      Area (Section 2b). ........................................................................... 14
   Open Space-8. Swales along Streets (Section 4) .................................................... 15
   Open Space-9. Gridley Recreation Areas .............................................................. 17
   Open Space-10. Conceptual Example of a Community Park ................................ 20
   Open Space-11. Conceptual Example of a Neighborhood Park ............................ 21
   Open Space-12. Example Mini-Park ........................................................................ 22
   Open Space-13 Parks and Open Space in the Planned Growth Area .................. 23
TABLES
   Open Space-1 City Recreational Open Space....................................................... 18 
                                            OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                            I

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
    OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
              II
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
INTRODUCTION
Government Code Section 65563 requires that general plans include and Open Space
Element for the "comprehensive and long-range preservation and conservation of open-
space land within its jurisdiction." Open space is a broad term, which can refer to many
different land uses and types of land. However, in a general plan, open space lands are
defined in Government Code Section 65560(b) as lands for:
     9   The preservation of natural resources;
     9   The managed production of resources;
     9   Outdoor recreation;
     9   Public health and safety;
     9   Support of the mission of military installations; or,
     9   Protection of cultural resources.
This Open Space Element addresses multi-use open space corridors for drainage,
aesthetic benefits, buffering for public health and safety, pedestrian and bicycle
circulation, and recreation. This Open Space Element also addresses parkland.
Farmland, parks, natural areas, and other vegetated undeveloped areas benefit residents’
health and well-being by improving air quality, providing recreational space, increasing
the attractiveness of the visual landscape, and raising awareness of natural processes. In
order to maintain these benefits and amenities, a community can work toward preserving
open space, integrating recreational use of open space, and preventing the premature and
unnecessary conversion of agricultural land to urban uses. Please refer to the City’s
General Plan Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for more detailed information about
drainage, aesthetics, public health and safety, and other topics related to Open Space.
Preservation of open space is one way to achieve open space and natural resource
conservation goals. The protection of natural features and resources through planning and
site design is by far the most effective approach to preserving open spaces. Urban
development patterns play an extremely important role in this preservation. With more
efficient use of land in cities, there is more land in open spaces available outside of cities.
Compact growth is a fundamental strategy employed throughout this General Plan to
achieve open space, conservation, and other environmental, social, and economic goals.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS
State law (California Government Code, sections 65300 – 65303.4) describes required
elements for general plans. There is some amount of overlap between the topics required
                                     OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                1

                                                                          CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                      2030 General Plan
for open space and conservation elements, as outlined in the Government Code and the
State General Plan Guidelines. For this reason, many jurisdictions elect to combine the
open space and conservation elements. Gridley, however, has both elements, each with a
somewhat different focus. The Open Space Element focuses on areas of land that should
be preserved to meet public health, social, and economic goals. The Conservation
Element focuses on the conservation of natural resources, whether or not they are land-
based.
Like the Open Space Element, the location of open space lands is also identified in the
Land Use Element. The Open Space Element identifies open space corridors for
pedestrian and bicycle movement, as well as stormwater conveyance – topics which are
also addressed in the Circulation Element and the Public Facilities and Services Element,
respectively. Open space used for noise attenuation is also covered in the Noise Element.
Open space required for public health and safety, such as buffering from airborne
pollutants, is also described in the Safety Element. Preservation of open space for
agriculture is addressed in the Conservation Element.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES
Following are Gridley’s goals related to open space, as well as policies that will be
implemented to achieve these goals, and implementation strategies.
OPEN SPACE CORRIDORS
Open Space in the Planned Growth Area will be designed to serve multiple purposes.
Instead of requiring land separately for stormwater, buffering, and trails, these features
are co-located (Exhibit Open Space-1). Co-locating these uses is strategy to be land
efficient and cost effective in serving the Planned Growth Area. Co-location can address
both up-front and ongoing maintenance costs for development and the City. In addition to
cost savings, the combination of these functions can have environmental and quality-of-
life benefits. Multi-use open space corridors can contribute toward a high-quality,
functional open space system, and a unique community amenity. This efficient and
environmentally beneficial approach to drainage can also be considered within the
existing City (in addition to within the Planned Growth Area).
                                    OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                              2

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
The General Plan envisions a fully connected open space system in the Planned Growth
Area (see Exhibit Open Space 1).1,2 Open Space will be located and designed to provide
drainage, linear park space, trails, landscaping, and buffering from Highway 99 and the
railroad. Existing agricultural drainage ditches will be improved and widened to increase
stormwater conveyance capacity and create a more naturalized swale. The ditches can be
restored with appropriate native, low-maintenance landscaping for visual relief, filtering
pollutants out of stormwater, and enhancing the habitat value. Off-street pedestrian and
bicycle trails will be placed alongside the restored drainage features. The Open Space
corridors are located to connect with parks in the Planned Growth Area. There are two
primary reasons for this:
     9    The bicycle and pedestrian component of the Open Space area can accommodate
          travel to and from parks.
     9    The drainage conveyance component of the Open Space leads to parkspace that
          can be used for stormwater detention following larger storm events.
While this more natural drainage approach is envisioned for the Planned Growth Area,
the City could identify opportunities for phased incorporation of these best management
practices within existing City limits, as well, through drainage master plan updates.
1
    Please also refer to the Land Use Diagram in the Land Use Element, which generally illustrates
    the location and width of Open Space in the Planned Growth Area.
2
    The section labels on this exhibit correspond to cross-section illustrations that follow.
                                       OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                  3
                                                                                    CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                 2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐1. Open Space Corridors and Parks in the Planned Growth Area 
                                                        OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                   4

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 OPEN SPACE GOAL 1:    To create high-quality, functional open space corridors
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 1.1 New developments shall contribute to, or dedicate, on a fair-share
                       basis, multi-use open space corridors, which shall be designed to
                       provide drainage, an off-street pedestrian and bicycle trail system,
                       buffering, and habitat value.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 1.2 Open space corridors in the Planned Growth Area shall be designed
                       to incorporate agricultural drainage ditches, which may need to be
                       broadened into swales with gentler slope banks, in order to prevent
                       erosion.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 1.3 New developments shall locate open space corridors to provide for
                       connections to parkland.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 1.4 The City will plan to connect drainage swales with open playfields
                       in parks whenever feasible to convey excess stormwater following
                       storm events (Exhibit Open Space-2).
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 1.5 Within open space corridors, mature trees, including old orchard
                       trees shall be preserved, wherever feasible, as new trees are planted
                       to ensure an ongoing tree canopy. (Exhibit Open Space-3).
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 1.6 Existing vegetation in open space corridors should be preserved, where
                       it could provide ongoing habitat benefits or stormwater filtering.
                       Noxious weeds, invasive species, and unhealthy plants can be
                       removed, as well as vegetation posing an issue for public health or
                       safety.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 1.7 Newly planted landscaping in open space corridors shall be
                       selected and designed to enhance habitat, provide aesthetic value,
                       filter pollutants out of, and slow down stormwater runoff, and
                       minimize ongoing landscape maintenance and watering.
                                OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                            5
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐2. Swales and Parks (Section 6) 
                                                    OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                            6

        Exhibit Open Space-3
Tree Preservation and Planting along
Open Space Corridors and Streets in
      the Planned Growth Area
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 Open Space       Following the adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will
 Implementation   update the existing or prepare a new drainage master plan to
 Strategy 1.1     address the Planned Growth Area. The drainage master plan will be
                  designed to move away from individual site drainage requirements
                  to an areawide approach for the Planned Growth Area, consistent
                  with the General Plan. Although the focus for the natural drainage
                  system is on the Planned Growth Area, the City will look for
                  opportunities to expand these concepts into the existing developed
                  City, also.
                  The drainage master plan will be designed to handle specified
                  storm events and deliver pre-development flows to the reclamation
                  districts under post-development conditions. Construction of the
                  Planned Growth Area stormwater management system will be
                  phased in a way that provides adequate drainage as the area builds
                  out. Temporary detention facilities may be necessary.
                  The drainage master plan will emphasize the use of drainage swales
                  to convey runoff although piping may be used in combination with
                  swales, as appropriate, in the Planned Growth Area. The drainage
                  master plan will be coordinated with the location of future parks so
                  that excess stormwater can be detained and infiltrated within open
                  playfield areas. Linear open space corridors themselves may also
                  be designed to detain and infiltrate stormwater runoff.
                  Preservation and restoration of agricultural drainage ditches should
                  consider habitat value, sensitive species, and water quality objectives
                  (see the Conservation Element). The City will explore whether
                  mitigation fees through regional habitat conservation planning or
                  grants from other government agencies could be made available to
                  fund restoration elements of the City’s open space strategy.
                  The drainage master plan will be coordinated with a Nexus Fee
                  Study to allow fair-share contribution to drainage improvements.
                  The Nexus Fee Study should consider efficiencies created through
                  co-location of linear parkland, trails, drainage, and buffering.
                  Drainage fees should be structured to provide incentives for use of
                  low impact development stormwater management best practices
                  (see also the Conservation Element).
                  The City will revise the Subdivision Ordinance, as necessary, to
                  implement the drainage approach in the 2030 General Plan (and as
                  reflected in the master drainage plan). Fenced-off, single-use
                  detention basins will be prohibited.
                           OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                      9

                                                                           CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                       2030 General Plan
OPEN SPACE GOAL 2:    To provide visual screening, buffering, trails, and drainage in
                      open space corridors along the railroad and Highway 99 in the
                      Planned Growth Area.
OPEN SPACE POLICY 2.1 Open space corridors along the railroad and Highway 99 shall
                      include a natural drainage swale, a bike/pedestrian trail, and
                      landscaped earthen berms designed to attenuate noise and provide
                      visual screening (Exhibit Open Space-4).
OPEN SPACE POLICY 2.2 Open space corridors along Highway 99 and the railroad will need
                      to be wider than open space corridors within new neighborhoods in
                      order to reduce exposure to potentially harmful air pollution and
                      reduce noise exposure. (Exhibit Open-Space 5)
OPEN SPACE POLICY 2.3 Through a combination of tree preservation and new landscaping,
                      open space corridors along Highway 99 shall provide visual
                      screening for new neighborhoods.
OPEN SPACE GOAL 3     To provide for drainage, pedestrian and bicycle circulation,
                      and landscaping in open space corridors within
                      neighborhoods.
OPEN SPACE POLICY 3.1 Open Space corridors within neighborhoods can be narrower than
                      those along Highway 99 and the railroad since noise and air
                      pollution are not an issue, and should include preserved and planted
                      vegetation, drainage swales, and a pedestrian/bicycle trail (Exhibit
                      Open Space-6).
OPEN SPACE POLICY 3.2  The City encourages broader open space corridors within
                      neighborhoods that could accommodate ponds or similar water
                      features, hold stormwater for longer periods following a storm
                      event, provide riparian planting and other landscaping, and
                      represent valuable amenities within new neighborhoods, where
                      feasible (Exhibit Open Space-7).
OPEN SPACE POLICY 3.3 In lower-density portions of neighborhoods, small drainage swales
                      are encouraged instead of buried pipes along City streets to slow
                      down, filter, and convey stormwater runoff (Exhibit Open Space-
                      8).
                              OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                         10
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐4. Open Space along the Railroad (Section 1) 
                                                                 OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                         11

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐5. Open Space along Highway 99 (Section 5)
                                                              OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                      12

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐6. Open Space Corridor within a Neighborhood (Section 2a) 
                                       OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                  13

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐7. Broadened Open Space Corridor with Stormwater Retention Area (Section 2b). 
                                                                     OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                                14

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐8. Swales along Streets (Section 4) 
                                       OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                   15

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
RECREATION
Open space for outdoor recreation accommodates the public’s leisure time, relaxation,
exercise, and play. With growth and development, the amount of land needed for various
types of recreational activities increases. Since much of the demand is usually fulfilled by
public or non-profit agencies, planning and acquiring sites for recreational use requires
the community’s cooperative attention to anticipating that demand.
There two main types of recreational open space: (1) natural or preserved open space;
and, (2) developed parkland, or improved open space. Natural open space areas are
valuable for their natural qualities, such as water bodies, terrain, vegetation, wildlife,
beauty, or vistas. The natural areas with the highest value in the Gridley area are the
natural and manmade surface water bodies and related vegetation. Public parks are the
most common type of improved open space. Park improvements could include access
roads, parking areas, trails, signs, picnic tables, hard court play areas and other
recreational facilities, and restrooms. A single facility can combine natural open space
areas and improved recreational areas. One example of this in Gridley is the boat ramp on
the Feather River near the City’s wastewater treatment facility. For recreational open
space design, it is often important to balance goals for resource conservation with goals
for public use in a single open space area.
Public parks, playgrounds, ballfields, and similar recreational areas are the most
important type of recreational open space in many communities. Recreational lands and
facilities in the Gridley area include those maintained by the City, private or commercial
recreation, and those maintained by the State, school district, or the County.
The City owns and maintains parks near Downtown, including: Vierra Community Park
(12.5 acres); Daddow Plaza, Rotary Park, and Quota Park (totaling 4.4 acres); and the
skateboard/water park (1.01 acres). Parks are also provided in residential areas, including:
August Boeger Park (1.9 acres) and Eagle Meadows Park (6.01 acres of private parkland).
There was a total of 19.8 acres of City-owned parkland, or 3.1 acres per thousand residents,
as of the writing of the 2030 General Plan (Exhibit Open Space-9, Table Open Space-1).3
This total does not include Eagle Meadows Park (private) or the City-owned boat launch
area on the Feather River.
3
    The City’s official 2008 population was 6,403 according to the California Department of
    Finance: State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates
    for Cities, Counties and the State, 2001-2008, with 2000 Benchmark. Sacramento, California,
    May 2008.
                                        OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                16

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐9. Gridley Recreation Areas 
                                       OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                17

                                                                                      CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                 2030 General Plan
                                       Table Open Space-1
                                City Recreational Open Space4
          Name                     Facilities                           Notes                   Acres
 Manuel Vierra           Softball and baseball       Adjacent to Daddow Plaza. Recreation       12.5
 Park                    fields, 2 playgrounds, tot facilities are in condition.
                         lot, 2 recreational
                         buildings, 2 tennis courts,
                         barbeque and picnic area
 Daddow Plaza,           Bandstand, picnic tables, Daddow Plaza, Rotary Park and Quota           4.4
 Rotary Park and         benches, and a gazebo. Park were owned by the railroad and
 Quota Park                                          leased by the City as parkland since
                                                     1906. In Fiscal Year 2004-2005 the
                                                     park areas were purchased from the
                                                     railroad by the City using State
                                                     Proposition 12 grant funds. Recreation
                                                     facilities are in good condition.
 August Boeger           Pedestrian / bicycle        Located in the Heron Landing                1.9
 Park                    pathway, lights, benches    subdivision on the northern side of the
                                                     City.
 Gridley                 Skateboard facilities,      Newly constructed                          1.01
 Skate/Water Park        water fountains and
                         supportive facilities.
 Eagle Meadows           None                        Located in the Eagle Meadows                 5
 Park                                                subdivision in the west of the City,
                                                     north of Sycamore Street. The City is
                                                     planning to add ball fields and
                                                     landscaping.
 Boat Ramp on the Boat ramp, access road,            Located on the Feather River frontage      N/A**
 Feather River                                       of the City wastewater treatment land
                                                     site on the east side of the river, south
                                                     of the East Gridley Road bridge.
                                                     Upgrades funded through a grant from
                                                     the California Boating and Waterways
                                                     Commission.*
 Notes: *   California Department of Boating and Waterways, online:
            http://www.dbw.ca.gov/PressRoom/2007/071005BWC.aspx. In Fiscal Year 2006-
            2007, the City was awarded $935,000 by the California Boating and Waterways
            Commission. Planned improvements include a fully functional boat dock and various
            riverbank renovations, bathrooms, improved parking, signage, and an automated gate.
        ** The great majority of the property is used for City wastewater treatment facilities.
 Source: Butte LAFCO, Final Municipal Service Review: Recreation and Park Services. Adopted
 September 1, 2005.
4
   City of Gridley and Burr Consulting. Report to the Butte Local Agency Formation
   Commission Final Municipal Service Review: Approved on February 6, 2008.
                                        OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                  18
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Aside from the parks listed above, there are other recreational lands and facilities within
City limits. The Butte County Fairgrounds and the Gridley Swimming Pool are located
east of Highway 99, near East Hazel Street and the high school. These facilities provide
for a variety of recreational activities, such as the annual County Fair, swim team
competitions, and dog shows. Public schools in the City also provide recreational
facilities. School recreation facilities are located on the campuses of the McKinley
School, Wilson School, Sycamore Middle School, and Gridley High School. Outside of
the City limits, the use of the Manzanita School gym for up to 20 hours per week is
provided by joint use agreement between the City and the Manzanita School District.5
The Land Use Element identifies land for parks in the existing City, as well as in the
Planned Growth Area. The amount and location of this parkland in the Planned Growth
Area shown on the Land Use Diagram is approximate. Many factors could influence the
actual location and amount of parks. Specific size, location, design, and facilities in parks
will depend on population density and community preferences. Demographic changes
that occur during buildout of the General Plan may result in more or less of a demand for
certain types of parks and recreational facilities. For example, with a younger population,
oftentimes there is more of a demand for running and bicycling trails, or for basketball
courts or soccer fields. The City has provided for joint-use parkland adjacent to potential
future school sites in the Planned Growth Area. While the City does not dictate the
location of school sites, General Plan policies indicate a preference to coordinate with the
School District on mutually beneficial and cost-effective joint use strategies. However,
because the City does not control the location of school sites, the location of this joint-use
parkland may vary somewhat from that shown on the Land Use Diagram.
This General Plan provides for both linear parkland (as addressed earlier under “Open
Space Corridors”) and neighborhood, or community parkland. Linear parkland along
natural drainageways in the Planned Growth Area can accommodate trails, benches,
drinking fountains, landscaping, and other improvements. Neighborhood and community
parks provide for playfield areas, hard court areas, recreational buildings, and a variety of
other improvements.
Community Parks. Community parks are large parks that provide recreational facilities
for the entire city (see Exhibit Open Space-10). Community parks are approximately 10
to 30 acres in total land area and would provide sports fields, activity buildings (for
indoor public events), and a variety of other recreational facilities, such as sports courts.
Community parks can also provide spaces for passive recreation (e.g., walking,
picnicking, wildlife observation, reading). Community parks are designed and outfitted
with facilities appropriate to serve the entire community with venues for sporting or other
events that would attract local and, occasionally, regional participants and spectators.
5
   Butte LAFCO, Final Municipal Service Review: Recreation and Park Services. Adopted
   September 1, 2005.
                                    OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                              19

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Open Space‐10. Conceptual Example of a Community Park 
                                                               OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                       20

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Neighborhood Parks. Neighborhood parks are between 4 and 6 acres in total land area
and are located and designed to serve the surrounding neighborhood (see Exhibit Open
Space-11). Neighborhood parks would provide active recreational facilities, such as
playground equipment, sports fields, and sports courts. Neighborhood parks can also have
passive elements, such as picnic areas, benches, and walking paths. Neighborhood parks
can be designed to meet the needs of an adjacent public school in addition to the broader
community. Neighborhood parks are provided in this General Plan in areas adjacent to
“Public” land use designation that could accommodate new schools, with this joint-use
strategy in mind.
Mini-Parks: Mini-parks are small parks of ½ acre to 2 acres in land area that provide
recreational space for residents living nearby. These parks are sometimes called “pocket
parks,” “tot lots,” or “neighborhood greens.” Mini-parks can have picnic areas,
playground equipment, and small landscaped areas for passive or active recreational use
(see Exhibit Open Space-12).
                                                                                           
Exhibit Open Space‐11. Conceptual Example of a Neighborhood Park 
                                      OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                 21

                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
                                                                               
Exhibit Open Space‐12. Example Mini‐Park 
Exhibit Open Space-13 illustrates the conceptual sizes and locations of different parkland
in the Planned Growth Area.
Because of the large land areas involved; the costs of acquiring, developing, and
maintaining parks; and the wide range of recreational needs, the City will need both
proactive and long-range planning, as well as ongoing implementation to ensure adequate
recreational open space as the community grows. Please refer to the City Municipal Code
Chapter 16.40, Park and Recreation Land Dedication and In-Lieu Fees.
 OPEN SPACE GOAL 4            To ensure adequate outdoor recreational open space to meet
                              local needs as the City grows.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.1        New developments shall provide for improved, public parkland
                              according at a minimum rate of 5 acres per 1,000 residents.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.2        The distribution of parkland between community parks,
                              neighborhood parks, and mini-parks should be:
                                  9    Community parks (1–3 acres per thousand residents)
                                  9    Neighborhood parks (1–3 acres per thousand residents)
                                  9    Mini-parks (0.5–1 acres per thousand residents)
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.3        New developments shall contribute on a fair-share basis toward
                              improved, publicly accessible parkland, according to City park
                              standards. If new developments dedicate parkland, fees would be
                              decreased proportionally.
                                      OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                 22

  Exhibit Open Space-13
Parks and Open Space in the
   Planned Growth Area
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.4 New parks will be located and designed to encourage pedestrian
                       and bicycle travel to and from the surrounding neighborhoods.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.5 On-street parking shall be provided along the perimeter of new
                       community and neighborhood parks to reduce the amount of land
                       within the park that must be devoted to surface parking.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.6 Active portions of parks, where facilities and programming may
                       result in light and noise should be located and designed to promote
                       compatibility with surrounding residential areas.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.7 Parkland that also provides stormwater detention will be designed
                       to serve these dual uses without compromising the quality of
                       playfield space for recreation.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.8 The City will encourage joint-use of parks planned adjacent to
                       school sites in consultation with the Gridley Unified School
                       District.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 4.9 In the design of developed parkland, the City will incorporate
                       opportunities for preservation of land with natural vegetation that
                       could provide wildlife habitat, where feasible.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY     In new developments outside the Planned Growth Area, on-site
 4.10                  detention shall not be fenced off, and shall be designed to also
                       provide publicly accessible open space.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY     The City will consult with Biggs and Butte County to explore the
 4.11                  possibility of a cooperatively-developed regional park in the
                       Gridley-Biggs area.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY     The City will proactively seek to partner with nearby public
 4.12                  agencies and service providers to identify financing strategies and
                       methods for meeting existing and future regional parks and
                       recreation needs.
                                OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                           24
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 Open Space            During buildout of the 2030 General Plan, the City will ensure
 Implementation        development and ongoing maintenance of new parkland to serve a
 Strategy 4.1          growing population. The City will conduct a Nexus Study to
                       determine fees necessary to develop parkland consistent with the
                       General Plan. New developments shall dedicate and/or contribute
                       to new parks according to the City’s revised development impact
                       fees. The City will consider contributing toward a new community
                       park in the Planned Growth Area, with new development in the
                       Planned Growth Area contributing on a fair-share basis.
 Open Space            The City will collaborate with the Gridley Unified School District
 Implementation        on planning, financing, and development of new park space
 Strategy 4.2          adjacent to school sites. It is intended that this park space can be
                       jointly used by schools and new residential development in the
                       surrounding neighborhood. It is anticipated that the City and
                       School District can share maintenance responsibilities for this new
                       joint parkland.
 Open Space            The City will revise the Subdivision Ordinance, as necessary, to be
 Implementation        consistent with the approach to parkland provision in the 2030
 Strategy 4.3          General Plan.
 OPEN SPACE GOAL 5     Maintain, expand, and upgrade facilities in existing recreation
                       areas.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 5.1 The City will maintain and improve existing parks and develop
                       new parks in the existing developed portions of the City, as
                       feasible.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 5.2 The City will prioritize adding parkland in areas lacking adequate
                       park acreage according to City parkland standards.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 5.3 The City will consult with the Gridley Unified School District to
                       introduce joint school-City use and maintenance of park space at
                       existing schools.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 5.4 The City will consult with the Gridley Unified School District to
                       provide City-sponsored recreational programming on undeveloped
                       School District property where such recreational programming
                       would not involve substantial physical improvements.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 5.5 The City will plan for ballfields and landscaping improvements to
                       Eagle Meadows Park and walking paths that connect this park
                       across drainage laterals to West Biggs-Gridley Road (see also the
                       Circulation Element).
                                OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                          25

                                                                            CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                         2030 General Plan
OPEN SPACE POLICY 5.6 The City will explore opportunities to improve ongoing public
                      access to, and expand recreational opportunities related to the
                      Feather River on property owned by the City and used for
                      wastewater treatment.
OPEN SPACE POLICY 5.7 The City will communicate with the Gridley-Biggs Cemetery
                      District to connect planned City trails and recreational spaces with
                      Cemetery trails and access roadways to promote public access to
                      the Cemetery.
Open Space            The City will promote awareness of regional, state, and private
Implementation        parks and recreation planning and facilities development near
Strategy 5.1          Gridley, such as Grey Lodge, Lake Oroville Recreation Area, or
                      new facilities. The City will encourage development of uses and
                      facilities within Gridley that would be complementary to these
                      regional recreation opportunities, in order to take best local
                      advantage of these resources. The City will coordinate signage to
                      promote awareness of these regional facilities.
Open Space            As funding is available, the City will pursue improvements to
Implementation        existing recreational facilities. For example, the City will look for
Strategy 5.2          opportunities to improve sprinkler systems, add low maintenance
                      landscaping, and replace other improvements, as necessary. The
                      City will also examine existing recreational facilities relative to
                      neighborhoods they serve and pursue opportunities to improve
                      multi-modal access to these facilities, as funding is available.
Open Space            The City will proactively seek state and federal funds for parkland
Implementation        acquisition to serve the existing City relative to parkland acreage
Strategy 5.3          standards.
Open Space            The City will consult with the Gridley Unified School District to
Implementation        identify mutually beneficial strategies for joint-use of existing
Strategy 5.4          school recreation spaces. The City will consider assisting the
                      School District with maintenance of recreation space that is made
                      available for community use and City recreational programming.
                      The City will also consult with the School District to determine
                      whether there would be an opportunity to provide recreational
                      programming using undeveloped lands owned by the School
                      District. This recreation programming may be considered
                      temporary until such time as the School District decides to develop
                      or sell the property. As such, the City should focus on types of
                      recreation that do not require any substantial investment in
                      improvement.
                               OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                          26
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 OPEN SPACE GOAL 6     To provide recreation facilities and programs that meet the
                       needs of existing and future residents.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 6.1 The City will monitor the use of existing recreational facilities and
                       participation in recreational programs in order to identify local
                       preferences and priorities for future recreational facilities
                       development.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 6.2 The City will require a variety of recreational facilities in new
                       community, neighborhood, and mini-parks to serve local needs
                       during General Plan buildout.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 6.3 The City will encourage flexible strategies for recreation facilities
                       improvements in new parks. For example, the City will provide
                       baseball/softball fields part of which can also be used for soccer.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 6.4 The City will provide a variety of recreational programming for all
                       ages and abilities.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 6.5 The City will promote local groups that provide recreational
                       programs and will provide access to City recreational facilities for
                       use by these groups, as needed.
 OPEN SPACE POLICY 6.6 The City will support the activities of the Butte County Fairgrounds
                       through promotion and cooperation and encouragement of local
                       businesses to accommodate fair visitors.
 Open Space            The City will require development of recreational facilities in new
 Implementation        community, neighborhood, and mini-parks during buildout of the
 Strategy 6.1          General Plan. General types of recreational facilities are described
                       for each park type in the General Plan. However, to provide better
                       direction for the array of facilities and programming that will be
                       necessary in the future, the City will consider community surveys
                       to identify local preferences and any local gaps in recreational
                       facilities and programming. Recommendations from this
                       community survey should be used in future recreational facilities
                       planning and programming. The City may consider preparation of a
                       parks and recreation master plan for further analysis and
                       description of future facilities and programming needs.
                                OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                           27
                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
    OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
              28
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                              I

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                Page
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS................................................................. 2 
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES ............................. 2 
   Overall Goals for Public Facilities ............................................................................. 3 
   Water ............................................................................................................................ 6 
   Wastewater ................................................................................................................. 10 
   Drainage ..................................................................................................................... 14 
   Electricity.................................................................................................................... 19 
   Police, Fire, and Emergency Response .................................................................... 20 
   Solid Waste ................................................................................................................. 24 
   Library ........................................................................................................................ 26 
   Schools ........................................................................................................................ 27 
EXHIBITS
Public Facilities-1 - Joint Use Public Facilities ............................................................... 4 
Public Facilities-2 – Gridley Unified School District, SOI, and Planned Growth Area ..... 31
                                           PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                               I

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
              II
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
INTRODUCTION
The City of Gridley has consolidated the topics of public services and facilities in this
Public Facilities Element. This Element is optional (not one of the 7 mandatory
elements), but has the same force and effect as the mandatory elements and must be
consistent with the other elements of the plan.
Many communities have recognized the critical importance of planning improvements
and public facilities by adopting a separate general plan element. Capital improvements
such as roads, drainage facilities, sewer and water lines, treatment plants, and transit lines
are the framework that supports development. Their availability plays an important part
in determining the pattern of land uses within the community, as well as the direction and
intensity of growth. Public facilities such as police and fire stations, city or county
offices, libraries, and parks are important to residents’ safety and quality of life.
The ability to provide these facilities is important to the well-being of the community.
The focus of this Element is to ensure that facilities and services are provided to existing
and future planned development in an efficient and cost-effective way. This Element
directs the general character and location of future facilities and improvements,
acceptable levels of service, funding priorities, and the timing of availability.
Specifically, this Public Facilities Element addresses the following subject areas:
     9   Water;
     9   Wastewater;
     9   Drainage;
     9   Electricity;
     9   Police, Fire, and Emergency Response;
     9   Solid Waste;
     9   Library; and,
     9   Schools.
This Element is drafted, in part, to implement findings and recommendations of the
City’s Municipal Service Review (MSR).1 Another LAFCO required document – the
Sphere of Influence Plan – provides detailed information regarding the City’s future
Sphere of Influence.2 The MSR and Sphere of Influence Plan include background
1
    Burr Consulting. City of Gridley. Report to the Butte Local Agency Formation Commission.
    Final Municipal Service Review: City of Gridley. Approved on February 6, 2008 by the Butte
    Local Agency Formation Commission.
2
    Burr Consulting. Sphere of Influence Plan, City of Gridley. Report to the Butte Local Agency
    Formation Commission.
                                   PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                 1

                                                                               CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                            2030 General Plan
information for General Plan policies, as well as specific background information for the
City’s Sphere of Influence, growth rate assumptions and projections, and anticipated
phasing.3 The MSR and Sphere of Influence Plan provide information required by the
Butte Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) to address the City’s ability to
provide municipal services and facilities to areas within the expanded Sphere of
Influence, as adopted by the City of Gridley, including areas that the City plans to
eventually annex.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER
ELEMENTS
Several of the topics in this Element are addressed in other General Plan elements
(notably Land Use, Circulation, Open Space, and Conservation). The Land Use Element
identifies areas for public uses (including schools, fire, police, cemetery expansion, and
other public and quasi-public uses). Roadways and other transportation lines – a crucial
part of the City’s infrastructure is not addressed in this Element, but is addressed in detail
in the Circulation Element. Parks and recreational facilities are addressed in the Open
Space Element. Water supply and delivery are addressed in this Element, while water
conservation and quality are covered in the Conservation Element. Drainage facilities are
addressed in this Element, while drainageways and their conservation are addressed in
the Open Space and Conservation Elements and flooding is addressed in the Safety
Element. Although electrical facilities are addressed in this Element, energy conservation
(including some topics related to electricity) is addressed in the Conservation Element.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES
Following are Gridley’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies related to public
facilities, services, and infrastructure.
3
  Much of the background information in this Element is contributed by Burr Consulting.
                                   PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                2

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
OVERALL GOALS FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES
This Element is organized topically according to the type of public facility or service.
However, the City has established overarching goals for providing public facilities and
services and constructing infrastructure related to those services. These overall goals and
policies are embodied in the topic-specific discussion that follows.
The City’s goals for public service and facilities are oriented around a few basic themes:
    9    Public and environmental health. The paramount consideration is public health
         and environmental health. Federal and state legislation and regulatory guidance is
         available for many aspects of public services, facilities, and infrastructure. Much
         of the state and federal guidance for these topics is intended to protect public and
         environmental health. The City’s policy array is drafted to be consistent with
         federal and state law, including provisions to protect public and environmental
         health.
    9    Quality of life. The quality and design of public facilities, services, and
         infrastructure can substantially affect the quality of life for residents of Gridley.
         During the substantial public outreach that accompanied the 2030 General Plan
         update, many public services and facilities issues arose. For example, the
         community confirmed that the quality of educational services in Gridley is
         crucial for quality of life in Gridley – now and in the future. Water quality,
         drainage, and other public facility issues were also important points of
         discussion.
    9    Efficiency. During buildout of the 2030 General Plan, the City has the
         opportunity to take advantage of the state-of-the art in public services, facilities,
         and infrastructure design. One of the most important facets of current thinking in
         public facilities planning is to optimize space and facility planning to take
         advantage of efficiencies. Many public facilities are not fully occupied at any
         given time. The simplest example in this respect may be joint-use facilities for
         school and community recreation and drainage. During school hours, recreational
         facilities can be used for student activities (physical education classes, for
         example). When students are not in class, the same recreational areas and
         facilities can be used by the community at large. When it is raining, students and
         the community will not be using the playfields, which can also be designed to
         detain stormwater. When joint-use recreational/drainage facilities are provided,
         communities can enjoy the same or similar level of service at a reduced overall
         cost (Exhibit Public Facilities-1). Other efficiencies in public services and
         infrastructure are realized through compact development, which, compared to
         lower-density development, is more efficient to serve in the short and long term,
         all else held constant. As noted in Gridley’s Municipal Service Review, “land use
         planning designed to promote infill development, redevelopment of
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                              3

                                                                              CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                           2030 General Plan
          underutilized, urban lands, and creation of compact, well-served communities
          present opportunities to minimize future public service costs ...”
    9     Growth management. The City provides most of the public facilities and
          infrastructure needed for urban development (some services are provided locally
          in coordination with other agencies). In order to achieve goals for public and
          environmental health, quality of life, and efficiencies, the City can plan for public
          facilities and infrastructure sized and located to support planned land uses and
          development patterns. The City can use its public facilities and infrastructure
          planning, in part, to encourage development patterns that achieve the City’s other
          goals – for economic development, environmental sustainability, and overall
          quality of life.
                                                                                                In the illustration on 
                                                                                                the left, parks, 
                                                                                                schools, and 
                                                                                                detention is 
                                                                                                provided separately, 
                                                                                                which is more land‐
                                                                                                consumptive. In the 
                                                                                                illustration on the 
                                                                                                right, these facilities 
                                                                                                are combined. 
Exhibit Public Facilities‐1. Joint Use Public Facilities 
                                        PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                          4

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Several of the City’s General Plan Guiding Principles relate to the City’s public service,
facility, and infrastructure planning, including:
    9     Our streets, neighborhoods, and civic spaces should provide many gathering
          places where we meet up with our friends and neighbors.
    9     The community should continue to invest in streetscape, infrastructure
          improvements, and other programs downtown that will encourage property
          owners to invest and re-invest in the area.
    9     We recognize that an educated, skilled workforce is important to attracting high-
          quality employment opportunities. We should partner with educational
          institutions to expand and enhance career training opportunities.
    9     Gridley’s long-term quality of life is dependent on a great local school system.
          We believe it is important for the City to coordinate with the Gridley Unified
          School District, in order to pursue mutual goals.
    9     Children in Gridley should be able to safely and conveniently walk to school.
    9     For safe and convenient travel, we need destinations, like schools, parks, and
          shops, to be oriented to, and blended in with our neighborhoods.
    9     The City should continue to invest in, and improve existing neighborhoods, even
          as new neighborhoods are constructed.
    9     New development should compensate the City and other public service providers
          for the cost of providing public facilities, infrastructure, and services.
    9     The City should develop in a compact way that is more efficient and less costly
          to serve, compared to a development pattern that is more spread out.
    9     We believe that growth should be managed to promote the long-term economic
          health of our community.
GOALS
Overall goals for public services, facilities, and infrastructure include:
    9     To design public facilities and infrastructure, and provide public services in a
          way that is protective of public and environmental health.
    9     To provide high quality and well maintained public facilities that promote civic
          pride and enhance the local quality of life.
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                5

                                                                             CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                         2030 General Plan
     9   To take advantage of opportunities for facilities sharing between City
         departments or between the City and the School District, the County, the City of
         Biggs, and other public agencies, where there are mutual benefits.
     9   To provide efficiencies in public service, facility, and infrastructure provision
         through infill, redevelopment, and compact new development.
     9   To ensure that existing residents and businesses do not pay for public facilities,
         infrastructure, or services required to serve new growth.
     9   To balance up-front costs of infrastructure and public facilities with long-term
         costs to residents, businesses, and the City related to infrastructure and facilities
         design.
     9   To create, through the City’s infrastructure and public facilities planning,
         incentives for growth and change that is consistent with the City’s long-range
         land use and environmental planning.
WATER
Domestic water is provided within City limits primarily by the City’s water system, with
the exception of private wells at the Butte County Fairgrounds and the Signature Fruit
cannery (south of downtown). City water is provided from wells located throughout the
City ranging in depth from 240 to 450 feet. The water is treated with chlorine at each well
site prior to delivery to customers. Wells are equipped with backup generators. The
City’s system, as of the writing of the 2030 General Plan had a pumping capacity of
6,280 gallons of water per minute (gpm). The City’s distribution system consists of
almost 40 miles of pipes that carry water from groundwater wells to Gridley’s homes and
businesses.
The City will need to acquire new wells to serve new growth anticipated under the
General Plan. The City plans to install a new water main on West Biggs Gridley Road for
future connections with new subdivisions. To accommodate future growth and
development, the City plans to maintain loops along the perimeter of the system to
maintain adequate pressure and install a large diameter pipe along the easterly boundary
of the sphere of influence (SOI) to provide fire flows to potential development in the
area.
In Gridley, domestic water use in 2007 was 225 gallons of domestic water per capita per
day (gpcd). By comparison, in the Sacramento region, the average urban community
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                               6

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
consumes 286 gpcd.4 Domestic residential water is used for outdoor, toilet flush, shower,
cleaning, and kitchen uses. Outdoor uses, such as landscaping, swimming pools and
washing cars, are the most significant portion, consuming 44 percent of domestic water
statewide.5 During the summer months, water usage in Gridley more than triples
compared to winter months. This increase in demand is mostly attributable to outdoor
water uses such as swimming pools and landscape irrigation. Therefore, lot size is an
important factor affecting differences in water demand for new development, given the
large amount of water typically used for lawn and landscape irrigation. Toilet flushing is
the second most important use of water—constituting about 23 percent of use. Showering
and bathing consume about 18 percent of domestic water. Dishwashers and clothes
washing machines consume 12 percent of domestic water. The remainder of water
consumption relates to cooking and other kitchen uses.
Indoor water demand can be estimated according to the number of residents or employees
of a proposed project, or the estimated number of plumbing fixtures. The evolution in
building standards has resulted in newer buildings having more water-efficient plumbing
fixtures.
The City uses groundwater from the East Butte subbasin. The water table in the Gridley
area ranges from eight to 10 feet below the surface of the ground. A 2006 groundwater
status report indicates that there is no declining trend in groundwater levels in the
southwest valley portion of the County, and in fact, there was little or no change in
groundwater levels during the 1976-77 and 1986-94 droughts.6
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible for enforcing drinking
water quality standards, although much of this authority is delegated to the states. The
Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) is the main federal law that ensures the quality of
Americans' drinking water. EPA drinking water standards are developed as a Maximum
Contaminant Level (MCL) for each chemical or microbe. The MCL is the concentration
that is not anticipated to produce adverse health effects after a lifetime of exposure, based
upon toxicity data and risk assessment principles. The California Department of Health
Services (DHS) implements the SDWA in California. DHS requires public water systems
to perform routine monitoring for regulated contaminants that may be present in their
drinking water supply. A water system with a contaminant exceeding an MCL must
notify the public and remove the source from service or initiate a process and schedule to
install treatment for removing the contaminant.
4
    Burr Consulting. Final Municipal Service Review: City of Gridley. Approved on February 6,
    2008.
5
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1995.
6
    Butte Basin Water Users Association. Groundwater Status Report. February 2007.
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                               7

                                                                            CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                        2030 General Plan
The State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) develops statewide water protection
plans, establishes water quality standards, allocates and adjudicates water rights, and
guides the 9 Regional Water Quality Control Boards (RWQCB) located in the major
watersheds of the state. Gridley is within the jurisdiction of the Central Valley RWQCB
for water quality objectives and implementation plans. The California Department of
Health Services (DHS) is responsible for the enforcement of the federal and California
Safe Drinking Water Acts and the operational permitting and regulatory oversight of
public water systems.
Senate Bill (SB) 610 (Section 21151.9 of the Public Resources Code and Section 10910
et seq. of the Water Code) requires the preparation of “water supply assessments” (WSA)
for large developments (e.g., for projects of 500 or more residential units, 500,000 square
feet of retail commercial space, or 250,000 square feet of office commercial space).
These assessments, prepared by “public water systems” responsible for service, address
whether there are adequate existing or projected water supplies available to serve
proposed projects, in addition to urban and agricultural demands and other anticipated
development in the service area in which the project is located. SB 610 does not apply to
long-range planning documents, such as the General Plan, that do not specify specific
projects or subdivisions of land.
Water conservation is also addressed by state law. Since 2005, urban water suppliers
have been required to install water meters on municipal and industrial services
connections, and must begin by 2010 to charge customers based on volume of water. The
City of Gridley installed water meters throughout its service area. Domestic water
suppliers with more than 3,000 customers are required by the Urban Water Management
Planning Act to prepare a water shortage contingency plan every five years. The plan
describes and evaluates sources of water supply, projected water needs, conservation,
implementation strategy and schedule. Please refer to the Conservation Element for
policies on water conservation.
Two irrigation district boundaries overlap the City’s boundary and SOI. The two districts
provide water for agricultural purposes to some parcels within the City’s limits and SOI.
Butte Water District (BWD) and Biggs-West Gridley Water District (BWGWD) both
provide surface water from the Feather River to agricultural customers in the vicinity of
Gridley and for wetlands southwest of the City. Generally, as parcels are annexed into the
City, they are detached from these irrigation districts.
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies for water. Please
refer also to the Conservation Element, which addresses water conservation.
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                              8

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 PUBLIC FACILITIES To maintain safe and reliable ongoing water supply
 GOAL 1:
 PUBLIC FACILITIES New development shall set aside land, install and dedicate land and
 POLICY 1.1        water infrastructure, and/or contribute in-lieu fees, as directed by
                   the City, for new water supply, pumping, treatment, storage, and
                   delivery.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will treat, monitor, and remediate water supplies using
 POLICY 1.2        state and federal public health and water quality standards.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will maintain, and update as appropriate, a water master
 POLICY 1.3        plan to identify needed improvements to serve new and infill
                   growth under the General Plan.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City should consult with irrigation districts that maintain
 POLICY 1.4        canals in the Gridley area to identify cost-effective approaches for
                   ensuring that urban development in Gridley does not adversely
                   affect irrigation water supply and quality.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will ensure reliable water supplies and provide prompt
 POLICY 1.5        response to any disruption in water supply to the greatest extent
                   feasible.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City should consider future conjunctive use of both
 POLICY 1.6        groundwater and surface water, where feasible and where shown to
                   be beneficial to Gridley residents.
 Public Facilities During General Plan buildout, the City will monitor water quality
 Implementation    and intervene, as necessary, to address water supply and quality
 Strategy 1.1      issues. The City will remove wells from service and establish new
                   well sites, if necessary. The City will upgrade treatment facilities, if
                   necessary. The City will consider long-term public health, state and
                   federal standards, and cost/benefits to residents in future
                   investments in the water system. The City will proactively pursue
                   grant programs to finance water supply improvements, and will
                   consult with other local agencies and special districts, where
                   necessary to address water quality or supply problems.
 Public Facilities The City will direct extension of the City’s water system to serve
 Implementation    the Planned Growth Area, consistent with the policy direction in
 Strategy 1.2      this General Plan. To assist with implementation, the City will
                   consider drafting a water master plan to identify phased
                   improvements to the City’s infrastructure, costs, and financing
                   strategies for extending water infrastructure to the Planned Growth
                   Area. The City will also consider including in this master plan
                   updates to water infrastructure and facilities planning in the
                   existing Sphere of Influence and the Planned Growth Area,
                   covering the same topics. The City will identify water flow
                   requirements including water flow rate (gallons per minute) and
                   duration, which may vary throughout a community by building area
                   and construction type. The water master plan will identify
                         PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                        9

                                                                                   CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                               2030 General Plan
                            candidate well sites in the Planned Growth Area, as well as
                            pumping, the location of water mains, fire hydrants, new storage
                            tanks, and other components of the water infrastructure. The City
                            will consider also priority upgrades in the existing City to maintain
                            pressure or supply. The water master plan will be coordinated with
                            capital improvements planning and development impact fee
                            programs. Financing of the water system shall be on a per-capita or
                            other fair-share basis, per State law. Smaller housing units with
                            fewer bedrooms and faucets, homes with smaller yards, and other
                            types of development that would have lower demand for water
                            should contribute proportionally less in development impact fees,
                            as appropriate.
  Public Facilities         The City will maintain a plan for emergency response to disruption
  Implementation            in water supply. This plan will also review vulnerability of source
  Strategy 1.3              and delivery and distribution systems to events, such as regional
                            power outages and system failures. The City will maintain a
                            notification plan for both personnel and residents in case of
                            emergency.
  Public Facilities         During implementation of the 2030 General Plan (present to 2030),
  Implementation            the City will consult with area irrigation districts and other water
  Strategy 1.4              purveyors to examine any surface water supply options. Among
                            other options, the City will consult with Butte Water District to
                            investigate surplus water availability. State water law will dictate to
                            a large degree the City’s ability to obtain surface water supply and
                            effectively create a conjunctive surface/groundwater water system.
                            Implementing a conjunctive water system in Gridley could also be
                            very expensive. In determining the feasibility of conjunctive use,
                            the City will examine environmental and public health benefits and
                            impacts and the long-term costs and benefits for residents of
                            Gridley before implementing this program. Any future conjunctive
                            use program should be consistent with policies in Gridley’s Urban
                            Water Management Plan, once developed (see the Conservation
                            Element).
WASTEWATER
The City provides wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal services within City
limits. The City maintains wastewater collection lines, a treatment plant, treatment ponds,
percolation ponds, and emergency storage facilities. Wastewater flows through gravity-
fed lines to the primary force main south of the City and is then pumped five miles along
Sheldon and Richards avenues to the east. The force main crosses under the Feather
River to the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP), which is located just east of the
Feather River. The City will need to expand both treatment plant capacity and
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                               10

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
conveyance capacity to the WWTP to serve new growth anticipated under the General
Plan.
Outside its bounds, the City serves two connections in south Gridley and treats
wastewater from septic tanks. Also, the City operates a sewer lift station outside its
bounds by contract with the Butte County Housing Authority for a farm labor camp
located on the west side of the Feather River across from the City’s wastewater treatment
plant (WWTP).
The City of Gridley conducts land disposal at percolation ponds. For this reason, the City
is not subject to a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, but
instead its WWTP, percolation ponds, and emergency ponds are regulated by Waste
Discharge Requirements ordered by the Regional Water Quality Control Board
(RWQCB). Wastewater treatment providers are required to comply with effluent quality
standards under the waste discharge requirements determined by RWQCB.
Wastewater flow includes not only discharges from residences, businesses, institutions,
and industrial establishments, but also infiltration and inflow. Infiltration refers to
groundwater that seeps into sewer pipes through cracks, pipe joints and other system
leaks. Inflow refers to rainwater that enters the sewer system from sources such as yard
and patio drains, roof gutter downspouts, uncapped cleanouts, pond or pool overflow
drains, footing drains, cross-connections with storm drains, and even holes in manhole
covers. Infiltration and inflow tend to affect older sewer systems to a greater degree and
are highest during or right after heavy rain.
Wastewater demand is affected primarily by growth in residential population and
commercial development, and secondarily by factors such as water usage and
conservation efforts. Many of the water demand drivers are also wastewater demand
drivers during dry periods. Water used for outdoor purposes, such as landscape,
irrigation, firefighting, street cleaning, and residential car washing, does not flow into the
wastewater system (except through infiltration). Therefore, water conservation efforts for
outdoor water use do not substantially affect wastewater demand. But, water-efficient
plumbing fixtures do reduce wastewater flows.
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies on wastewater
collection, conveyance, and treatment.
                                   PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                               11

                                                                        CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                     2030 General Plan
PUBLIC FACILITIES To provide environmentally sustainable, efficient and effective
GOAL 2:           wastewater collection, conveyance, and treatment.
PUBLIC FACILITIES New development shall install and dedicate and/or contribute in-
POLICY 2.1        lieu fees, as directed by the City, for new wastewater collection,
                  conveyance, pumping, treatment, and disposal.
PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will direct phased, efficient extension of wastewater
POLICY 2.2        collection and improvements to wastewater treatment and disposal
                  systems, to meet existing and future needs.
PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will investigate and identify cost-effective options for
POLICY 2.3        adding treatment capacity to serve the Planned Growth Area.
PUBLIC FACILITIES Wastewater infrastructure extensions will be phased by the City
POLICY 2.4        consistent with this General Plan.
PUBLIC FACILITIES Wastewater infrastructure will generally be provided first to areas
POLICY 2.5        directly adjacent to City limits, and then infrastructure will be
                  extended outward.
PUBLIC FACILITIES Properties located within City limits prior to adoption of the 2030
POLICY 2.6        General Plan have access to existing remaining wastewater
                  treatment and force main sewer capacity and such properties shall
                  not be required to contribute toward treatment capacity expansion
                  necessary to serve the Planned Growth Area.
PUBLIC FACILITIES The City and Redevelopment Agency will ensure that collection
POLICY 2.7        and wastewater treatment capacity is available for infill
                  development needs.
PUBLIC FACILITIES The Redevelopment Agency should consider using tax increment
POLICY 2.8        funds to help finance infrastructure improvements for infill areas
                  within the redevelopment project area.
PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will identify regional, state, or federal funding that can be
POLICY 2.9        used to make improvements to the City’s existing wastewater
                  infrastructure in order to encourage infill development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will ensure compliance with applicable state and federal
POLICY 2.10       standards for wastewater disposal.
PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will conduct monitoring and reporting programs may be
POLICY 2.11       required, as appropriate, to comply with state and federal
                  regulations.
PUBLIC FACILITIES The City should examine the older sections of the wastewater
POLICY 2.12       collection system and address infiltration and inflow problems, as
                  funding is available.
PUBLIC FACILITIES Improvements in the existing City should be coordinated through
POLICY 2.13       ongoing capital improvements planning.
                        PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                      12

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City should look for cost-effective strategies to extend
 POLICY 2.14       municipal wastewater service to properties within City limits
                   currently served by septic systems, as appropriate.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The establishment of new septic systems is not allowed in the
 POLICY 2.15       City’s Sphere of Influence unless needed to serve a City supported
                   employment generating land use.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will promote wastewater demand management strategies,
 POLICY 2.16       such as controlling infiltration and inflow, industrial pretreatment
                   and recycling, and water conservation, as appropriate.
 Public Facilities Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will identify
 Implementation    wastewater improvements necessary to serve development in the
 Strategy 2.1      2030 General Plan. The City will require wastewater demand
                   analysis for new development, using City endorsed peaking factors
                   and other methodology.
                   The City will continue with capital improvements necessary to
                   accommodate future development through build-out of the City’s
                   sphere outlined in the City’s Wastewater System Capacity
                   Analysis. The City will continue with plans to expand wastewater
                   treatment plant and add conveyance capacity to the WWTP. The
                   City will continue current plans to expand the City’s waste
                   discharge to 1.7 mgd ADWF (treatment capacity for an additional
                   2,600 EDUs). The City will install groundwater monitoring, as
                   necessary, to ensure against impacts of wastewater treatment. The
                   City will plan for additional wastewater treatment plant expansion
                   needs following General Plan adoption, as necessary. The City will
                   continue plans to construct new gravity and force mains and pump
                   stations to direct flow around the City. The City will consider a
                   second parallel force main crossing the Feather River at the bridge
                   to the north of the WWTP after examining the condition of existing
                   sewer mains under the river. The City will examine the sewer
                   collection pipe on the west end of Sycamore Street and other
                   problem areas in the City and identify phased improvements, as
                   feasible. The City will examine remaining sewer line capacity in
                   areas east of State Route 99 compared to development potential and
                   identify cost effective solutions to expand conveyance capacity in
                   this area, as feasible.
                   The City will phase wastewater capacity and infrastructure
                   improvements consistent with the General Plan and, as required, to
                   provide efficiencies in service. The City will coordinate wastewater
                   treatment planning with the RWQCB using groundwater basin plan
                   objectives. The City will proactively pursue grant funding from
                   SWRCB, the Small Community Grant program, other federal/state
                   sources for wastewater improvements.
                   Wastewater improvements will be financed in new growth areas on
                   a fair-share basis according to expected population and treatment
                   demand of new projects. The City will consider available
                         PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                        13

                                                                                CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                            2030 General Plan
                           techniques to improve wastewater effluent, including but not
                           limited to: 1) limit on the strength and contaminant levels of
                           industrial and commercial wastewater; 2) increased rates or
                           surcharges on high-strength wastes; and/or 3) incentives or
                           requirements for water recycling and reuse within the industrial or
                           commercial operation.
 Public Facilities         The City will maintain a Sewer System Management Plan (SSMP)
 Implementation            consistent with State Water Resources Control Board policies. The
 Strategy 2.2              City’s SSMP will identify sewer capacity, management, operations,
                           and maintenance plans. The SSMP will be consistent with other
                           City wastewater plans, prioritizing infrastructure investments
                           needed to address any existing deficiencies.
 Public Facilities         The City will submit a groundwater quality study report to the
 Implementation            RWQCB comparing the groundwater quality at locations both up-
 Strategy 2.3              gradient and down-gradient from the City’s wastewater percolation
                           ponds. The City will evaluate nitrate levels and other applicable
                           constituents. The City will plan for upgrades to a tertiary level of
                           treatment at the WWTP, as necessary.
 Public Facilities         The City will monitor and inspect the condition of its wastewater
 Implementation            system and perform routine cleaning, as required, during General
 Strategy 2.4              Plan buildout.
 Public Facilities         The City will consider recommendations from the Wastewater
 Implementation            System Capacity Analysis to analyze and improve infiltration and
 Strategy 2.5              inflow (I/I) problems in the existing City. The City will review
                           peaking factors for the east and west side tributary gravity flow
                           mains to isolate the location of I/I problems. The City will explore
                           opportunities to improve wastewater infrastructure downtown
                           inflow locations and make corrective measures, as funding is
                           available. The City will consider such measures as pipeline
                           rehabilitation, manhole cover replacement, and root eradication,
                           repairing service lines, uncapped cleanouts and exterior drains,
                           public education, incentives, and regulatory strategies.
DRAINAGE
The Gridley area drains primarily to the southwest through ditches and sloughs toward
the Sacramento River. Drainage rates are slow due to relatively flat terrain, with an
average gradient of 0.5 foot per thousand feet in the ditches and sloughs.
The City and Caltrans operate stormwater collection systems within the Gridley area.
Within City limits, an underground stormwater collection system serves areas east and
west of State Route 99 (SR 99). Caltrans maintains a collection system along portions of
                                PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                               14

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
SR 99 in the City. Detention basins meter stormwater flows from developed areas of the
City.
Gridley’s stormwater collection system discharges to several open drainage ditches
located near the perimeter of the city. These sloughs and ditches are maintained by three
special districts: Reclamation District No. 833, Reclamation District No. 2056 and
Drainage District No. 1. The ditches maintained by these special districts were designed
to convey agricultural flows. Although the open ditches had been located outside City
limits in the past, annexations have brought the ditches within City limits. The drainage
from these special districts eventually flows to the Butte Sink, Sacramento River, Live
Oak Slough, and the Feather River.
The Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) is responsible for
water quality control plans (basin plans), water quality objectives and regulating
stormwater runoff pollution. Cities and industries known to contribute to stormwater
runoff pollution are regulated by National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permits and waste discharge requirements issued by RWQCB. Stormwater
NPDES permits are issued to protect water quality from non-point source discharges,
such as road runoff or construction sites.
In the Basin Plan, RWQCB has designated beneficial uses for local aquifers, streams,
marshes, and rivers, as well as the water-quality objectives and criteria that must be met
to protect these uses. A number of existing beneficial uses have been designated for the
lower Sacramento River, and are considered to reasonably apply to its tributaries. These
include agricultural supply, contact and noncontact aquatic recreation, cold and warm
freshwater habitat and wildlife habitat. To reduce pollution in watersheds, the Clean
Water Act directed the states to establish Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs) of
pollutants. The TMDLs require monitoring of pollutant levels and remedial actions that
will prevent contaminants from exceeding maximum allowable levels. TMDLs are
numeric targets for water quality pollutant levels in impaired water bodies.
The Sacramento Valley Integrated Regional Water Management Plan includes water
quality objectives for the Gridley area, Butte County and other northern California
jurisdictions.
Drainage needs are primarily affected by precipitation, urban development, downstream
flood conditions, and the capacity of drainage facilities. Urban development adds
impervious surfaces—paved streets, sidewalks, driveways, building footprints and
parking lots—and decreases rainwater absorption into soil. As development proceeds,
new pollutant sources are introduced and pollution levels increase. Urban runoff can be
reduced with permeable asphalt, open space preserves, infiltration basins, soil erosion
                                PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                             15

                                                                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                              2030 General Plan
control, monitoring of development plans and projects, public education, and other best
management practices.
Conditions outside the urban area also affect capacity needs for the drainage
infrastructure serving Gridley. The drainage system is subject to backup conditions south
of Gridley, and is affected by Sacramento River flood conditions and competing drainage
flows.
In the Gridley area, rainwater percolation is already limited by the high groundwater
elevation. The elevated water table makes trenching for drainage facilities difficult and
expensive, and open ditches must be widened rather than deepened to increase capacity.
The surface soils become completely saturated and drainage flows are high during the
winter storms, and during the spring and summer irrigation season. In many locations the
groundwater elevation is as high, or higher, during the summer irrigation season as it is
during the winter.
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies on drainage.
Please refer also to the Conservation Element and Open Space Element, which also
address components of Gridley’s drainage system.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         To provide effective and environmentally responsible storm
  GOAL 3:                   drainage for existing developed and newly developing areas of
                            Gridley.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will maintain drainage standards and methodology, and
  POLICY 3.1                improvement standards for new development.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will ensure that new development provides for no net
  POLICY 3.2                increase in peak flow conditions during a 100-year storm event.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         Proposed projects must submit construction and long-term drainage
  POLICY 3.3                plans to the City or otherwise demonstrate consistency with the
                            City’s drainage standards and applicable Regional Water Quality
                            Control Board standards prior to project approval.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         New developments shall construct a drainage collection system
  POLICY 3.4                consistent with City standards, which could be a combination of
                            underground pipes and natural drainage swales that connect on-site
                            facilities with planned detention areas.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         New development shall construct and dedicate and/or contribute in-
  POLICY 3.5                lieu fees, as directed by the City, to develop drainage infrastructure
                            needed to support new growth.
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                16

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 PUBLIC FACILITIES In the Planned Growth Area, the City will plan for an area-wide
 POLICY 3.6        approach to stormwater detention and conveyance, instead of
                   project-by-project approach, with new projects contributing in-lieu
                   fees for their fair-share of the Planned Growth Area drainage
                   system.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City may require construction of temporary stormwater
 POLICY 3.7        detention facilities during buildout of the Planned Growth Area, as
                   necessary, to meter and convey drainage prior to completing the
                   entire drainage system.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES As the City annexes land served by agricultural reclamation
 POLICY 3.8        districts, the City will assume responsibility for maintenance of
                   agricultural drainage ditches.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will monitor stormwater drainage in existing developed
 POLICY 3.9        portions of the City and explore options for infrastructure
                   improvements, as funding is available.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will work cooperatively with reclamation districts
 POLICY 3.10       accepting runoff from Gridley to identify cost-effective solutions to
                   backup conditions and other drainage and water quality issues.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will implement best management practices to slow down
 POLICY 3.11       and treat stormwater runoff and otherwise prevent against
                   stormwater pollution in both existing developed areas and in new
                   developments, to the greatest extent feasible.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will require detention and retention facilities to be
 POLICY 3.12       designed, as necessary, to reduce impacts related to mosquito
                   propagation.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will consider areawide and regional detention basins as a
 POLICY 3.13       part of the City’s approach to stormwater management.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will consult with other agencies and special districts to
 POLICY 3.14       address regional drainage issues and regional funding for
                   improvements.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City should consult with Caltrans to address mutual drainage
 POLICY 3.15       issues along the State Route 99 corridor.
 Public Facilities Following the adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will
 Implementation    update the existing or prepare a new drainage master plan to
 Strategy 3.1      address the Planned Growth Area. The drainage master plan will be
                   designed to move away from individual site drainage requirements
                   to an area-wide approach for the Planned Growth Area, consistent
                   with the General Plan. Although the focus for the natural drainage
                   system is on the Planned Growth Area, the City will look for
                   opportunities to expand these concepts into the existing developed
                   City, also.
                         PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                        17

                                                                          CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                      2030 General Plan
                  The drainage master plan will be designed to handle specified
                  storm events and deliver pre-development flows to the reclamation
                  districts under post-development conditions. Construction of the
                  Planned Growth Area stormwater management system will be
                  phased in a way that provides adequate drainage as the area builds
                  out. Temporary detention facilities may be necessary.
                  The drainage master plan will emphasize the use of drainage swales
                  to convey runoff although piping may be used in combination with
                  swales, as appropriate, in the Planned Growth Area. The drainage
                  master plan will be coordinated with the location of future parks so
                  that excess stormwater can be detained and infiltrated within open
                  playfield areas. Linear open space corridors themselves may also
                  be designed to detain and infiltrate stormwater runoff.
                  Preservation and restoration of agricultural drainage ditches should
                  consider habitat value, sensitive species, and water quality
                  objectives (see the Conservation Element). The City will explore
                  whether mitigation fees through regional habitat conservation
                  planning or grants from other government agencies could be made
                  available to fund restoration elements of the City’s open space
                  strategy.
                  The drainage master plan will coordinated with a Nexus Fee Study
                  to allow fair-share contribution to drainage improvements. The
                  Nexus Fee Study should consider efficiencies created through co-
                  location of linear parkland, trails, drainage, and buffering. Drainage
                  fees should be structured to provide incentives for use of low
                  impact development stormwater management best practices (see
                  also the Conservation Element).
                  The City may require formation of one or more maintenance
                  districts or some other approach to long-term operational funding
                  for drainage facilities in the Planned Growth Area.
Public Facilities The City will consult with local agencies and special districts to
Implementation    draft a comprehensive regional drainage plan to address urban
Strategy 3.2      growth in the southern and western portions of Butte County and
                  northern Sutter County, as feasible. Such a drainage plan should
                  include mitigation fees or other funding mechanisms to provide the
                  needed facilities.
Public Facilities The City will communicate on an ongoing basis with drainage
Implementation    districts in the vicinity as these districts work to address channel
Strategy 3.3      capacity, lack of pumping capacity, or lack of capacity in
                  downstream discharge waterways.
                        PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                       18

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
ELECTRICITY
The City’s electric utility purchases and distributes power, maintains its distribution
system, trims trees, and maintains and operates the City’s street lighting system. Gridley
is a member of the Northern California Power Agency (NCPA) and the Western Area
Power Administration (WAPA), joint powers agencies that purchase, generate, transmit,
distribute, and sell wholesale electrical energy.
In addition to the purchase and distribution of electricity, the Electric Department
performs citywide tree trimming (especially surrounding primary and service wires),
installs decorations and banners for special events, and maintains and operates the City's
street lighting system.
Total energy usage in Gridley reached 35.9 gigawatt-hours in fiscal year 2005-2006.
Summer energy use is approximately 30 to 40% higher than wintertime use.
Municipal utilities are subject to federal and state oversight. On the federal level, the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and Congress set policy and oversee
wholesale markets and transmission access. State energy regulations include standards
for energy efficiency, including reporting requirements to the California Energy
Commission.
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies on electricity.
Please refer also to the Conservation Element, which addresses energy conservation.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         To provide efficient and reliable electricity service to Gridley
  GOAL 4:                   residents and businesses.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         New development shall construct and dedicate per City standards
  POLICY 4.1                and/or contribute in-lieu fees on a fair-share basis for electric
                            infrastructure, including new distribution lines, transformers, a new
                            substation, and other infrastructure, as directed by the City.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will monitor the electricity infrastructure in existing
  POLICY 4.2                developed portions of the City and explore options for
                            infrastructure improvements, as needed and as funding is available.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will consider options for the location, financing, and
  POLICY 4.3                facilities sharing for a new electrical substation.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will monitor, prevent, and respond as quickly as feasible
  POLICY 4.4                to power outages.
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                19

                                                                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                               2030 General Plan
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City should purchase relevant infrastructure from PG&E for
 POLICY 4.5                electrical service upon annexation.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         New electrical infrastructure should be installed underground and
 POLICY 4.6                the City should pursue opportunities to place power lines
                           underground, as funding is available.
 Public Facilities         The City Electric Utility and Department will monitor the adequacy
 Implementation            of infrastructure serving the City and Sphere of Influence,
 Strategy 4.1              including changes to the City’s Sphere of Influence made following
                           the 2030 General Plan update. The City will plan for long-range
                           infrastructure needs, including a new substation to serve planned
                           growth under the General Plan. The City will review the
                           distribution system to assess system infrastructure needs and to
                           propose a plan of action to the City based on findings. The City
                           will consider preparing and/or updating an electricity master plan
                           to identify needed improvements, phasing, and financing, if
                           appropriate. The City will consider any changes to the electrical
                           infrastructure or electrical facilities planning are needed to
                           encourage development and use in Gridley of renewable energy.
 Public Facilities         The City will prepare a Nexus Fee Study and update impact fees
 Implementation            following adoption of the General Plan, including those that
 Strategy 4.2              address electrical infrastructure. The City’s Nexus Fee Study and
                           update to impact fees should include analyze energy procurement
                           and distribution costs. Fees will be on a fair-share basis,
                           considering estimated demand for new development. For newly
                           developing properties that include energy conservation techniques
                           beyond those required by building codes, the City will examine
                           whether reduced impact fees would be appropriate.
POLICE, FIRE, AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
The Police Department provides law enforcement services, and the City provides
emergency medical and fire protection, through a contract with California Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection (CALFIRE).
The City has provided contract police service to the City of Biggs since 2001, when it
changed the name of its police department to the Gridley-Biggs Police Department (PD).
The PD has sworn officers, as well as civilian volunteers, reserve officers, and
dispatchers. The police workload involves responding to 911 calls, burglar alarms and
non-emergency calls, in addition to patrol activities and traffic enforcement. In addition
to law enforcement, the PD provides animal control services and a shelter located in
downtown Gridley. In addition to the routine workload, the PD participates in a number
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                               20

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
of special assignments related to school violence, narcotics, anti-gang enforcement, and
crime education programs.
The PD maintains one facility, located at 685 Kentucky Street adjacent to City Hall. The
facility does not have temporary holding facilities, but does have interview rooms. The
PD typically transports arrested suspects directly to the County Jail. The PD operates a
full dispatch center for 911 calls. The PD operates a fleet of marked and unmarked police
cars, as well as some specialized vehicles. As of the writing of the 2030 General Plan, the
PD provided more than 2 sworn officers per thousand residents.
The City relies on the Butte County Sheriff’s Office for search and rescue, SWAT, bomb
squad, and long-term holding facilities at the Butte County Jail. Crime laboratory services
are provided by the State Department of Justice’s Chico Office. The Butte County
Sheriff’s Office provides law enforcement in unincorporated areas in the City’s SOI.
California Highway Patrol (CHP) is responsible for traffic enforcement in unincorporated
areas.
The City provides emergency medical and fire protection, prevention, investigation, and
permitting services through a contract with California Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection (CALFIRE). The City retains funding control and policy direction, while the
CALFIRE Unit Chief provides for the daily needs of full-service fire protection.
The City is currently served by 5 fire stations – two are located within City limits, one
station is located in the City of Biggs, one in the community of Palermo, and another in
Richvale. The station in Palermo does not provide primary service to the City, but
responds with a back-up engine when required. Gridley benefits from automatic aid
agreements with the City of Biggs (also contracting with CALFIRE) and Sutter County
Fire Department, which provides service to the city of Live Oak. In addition, the City can
receive service from 11 professionally staffed County fire stations and six state fire
stations, when needed, through a cooperative agreement. In accordance with Chapter 8.08
of the Gridley Municipal Code, the Fire Department routinely inspects and, as necessary,
has removed plants that, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property.
Hazardous Materials response services are provided by a Joint Powers Agreement
administered by Butte County Fire Rescue. The Gridley Fire Department provides one
Hazardous Materials Specialist to the Butte Interagency Hazmat Team. Advanced life
support and ambulance transport are provided by Enloe Medical Center in Chico. Gridley
Fire Department provides first-response to emergency medical calls and basic life support
(BLS) prior to Enloe Medical Center arriving on the scene to provide ALS and
ambulance transport.
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                             21

                                                                                    CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                                2030 General Plan
All 911 calls made from landlines are answered by the Public Safety Answering Point—
the Gridley Police Department within city limits and Butte County Sheriff in
unincorporated areas. Once it has been determined that the call is fire or emergency
medical related, it is transferred to the CALFIRE Command Center in Oroville, which
dispatches appropriate personnel.
The Insurance Service Office (ISO), an advisory organization, classifies fire service in
communities from 1 to 10, indicating the general adequacy of coverage. Communities
with the best systems for water distribution, fire department facilities, equipment and
personnel, fire alarms, and communications receive a rating of 1. The current ISO
classification within City limits is 4.
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies on police services
and fire suppression.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES           To provide high-quality law enforcement services designed to
 GOAL 5:                     protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES           The City will maintain a service level of at least 1.9 sworn officers
 POLICY 5.1                  per 1,000 residents served.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES           The Police Department should review development proposals to
 POLICY 5.2                  ensure adequate access, and to make design recommendations that
                             would increase community surveillance and discourage criminal
                             activities.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES           The City will require roadway connectivity, emergency access, and
 POLICY 5.3                  siting of new police facilities with the goal of maintaining an
                             average police response time of 3 minutes or less for emergency
                             calls.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES           The City will charge development impact fees on a fair-share basis
 POLICY 5.4                  to fund purchase of equipment and facilities for use by the Police
                             Department.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES           If additional police facilities are needed to serve growth in
 POLICY 5.5                  population during General Plan buildout, the City will look for
                             opportunities to co-locate with other service providers to the
                             greatest degree feasible.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES           The Police Department should continue to consult with law
 POLICY 5.6                  enforcement officials from nearby jurisdictions, the County Sheriff,
                             and other relevant agencies on monitoring and prevention of gang-
                             related crime and violence.
                                   PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                22

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 Public Facilities Following General Plan adoption, the City will monitor new
 Implementation    growth in light of the City’s policies for staffing levels and
 Strategy 5.1      response time and make investments, as required, to maintain level
                   of service. The City will consider additional non-sworn staff to
                   address accidents and traffic, plus a canine unit to assist with drug
                   enforcement.
 Public Facilities The City will consider establishing or supporting community
 Implementation    outreach programs that encourage residents to be proactive in crime
 Strategy 5.2      prevention. Such programs could include, but are not limited to:
                   neighborhood watch, youth outreach programs, and other
                   community-based programs.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES To provide effective fire suppression and emergency response.
 GOAL 6:
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will ensure that fire suppression service providers have
 POLICY 6.1        facilities with sufficient capacity, personnel, and equipment to
                   provide a response time of four minutes or less at least 90 percent
                   of the time within City limits, with response time measured from
                   the 911 call time to the arrival time of the first responder at the
                   scene.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES New development shall set aside land, and/or contribute
 POLICY 6.2        development impact fees on a fair-share basis for fire suppression
                   facilities and equipment, as needed to serve new development.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES New development shall construct and dedicate infrastructure that
 POLICY 6.3        provides adequate water pressure for fire flow and emergency fire
                   reserve capacity, as required by the City, based on building area,
                   construction type, and occupancy.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will plan for one or more new fire stations to serve
 POLICY 6.4        development anticipated under the 2030 General Plan.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES Wherever feasible, new fire stations should co-locate on the same
 POLICY 6.6        property as other public service providers or other civic uses and
                   share facilities to the greatest extent feasible.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES Gridley fire service providers should review development
 POLICY 6.7        proposals and make recommendations to ensure adequate
                   emergency access or other recommendations that reduce risk
                   related to fire.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City should maintain an Insurance Services Organization (ISO)
 POLICY 6.8        rating of 4 or better within City limits.
                         PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                        23

                                                                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                              2030 General Plan
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will support ongoing fire suppression, hazardous
  POLICY 6.9                materials, lifesaving, and other needed training and drills for fire
                            personnel.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will monitor water pressure for firefighting in existing
  POLICY 6.10               developed portions of the City and explore options for
                            infrastructure improvements, as funding is available.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will review the need for additional fire protection
  POLICY 6.11               facilities, equipment, and personnel, as part of the annual budget
                            preparation process.
  Public Facilities         The City will monitor growth under the 2030 General Plan and
  Implementation            consult with CALFIRE and the Butte County Fire Department to
  Strategy 6.1              ensure adequate staffing, fire stations, and equipment to provide
                            fire suppression services consistent with City policy. The City will
                            communicate with the City of Biggs on siting of a fire station in the
                            northern portion of the Planned Growth Area, as appropriate.
SOLID WASTE
The Butte Regional Waste Management Authority (BRWMA) regulates waste collection
and recycling services in the cities of Biggs and Gridley, and in the unincorporated areas
of Butte County. Solid waste generated in the city is disposed of at the Neal Road
Landfill, in unincorporated Butte County, approximately 19 miles north of Gridley. The
facility is located on 190 acres, 140 of which are used for solid waste disposal. The
landfill is owned by Butte County, and operated by the County Public Works
Department.7 Solid waste in Gridley goes to the Ord Ranch Transfer Station prior to the
landfill. The Ord Ranch Transfer Station is located approximately one-half mile east of
SR 99 on Ord Ranch Road. The transfer station is leased by the City of Gridley from
Butte County, and is operated by North Valley Waste Management.
Solid waste service for the City of Gridley is provided by franchise agreement with North
Valley Waste Management. Recycling services are also provided by North Valley Waste
Management. Curbside recycling containers for green waste and commingled recycling
are provided at no additional charge.
Household hazardous waste disposal is available to all Butte County residents at the
Butte Regional Household Hazardous Waste Collection Facility, including but not
limited to residents of Gridley at the Gridley Household Hazardous Waste disposal
facility located at the Ord Ranch Transfer Station. Electronic hazardous waste facilities
7
   Butte County. Butte County General Plan Setting and Trends Report Public Draft. August 2,
    2007.
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                24
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
are available to all Butte County residents at the Neal Road Landfill and at collection
sites, including one in Gridley.
The California Integrated Waste Management Act established the framework for
integrated waste management planning and waste disposal compliance in order to
conserve resources and extend landfill capacity. The California Integrated Waste
Management Board was organized to oversee integrated waste management planning and
compliance and aid local agencies in implementing programs. Cities and counties are
charged with reducing the amount of solid waste generated in their jurisdictions and
disposed in landfills by 25 percent by the year 1995 and by 50 percent by the year 2000
(compared to 1990 levels). Local governments are required to prepare comprehensive
integrated waste management plans that detail how the waste diversion mandates will be
met and to update elements of those plans every five years. BCRWMA completes this
plan on behalf of the City. Butte County indicates that BRWMA meets the 50 percent
diversion rate requirement.8 California law also governs regional hazardous waste
planning.
Neal Road Landfill has a maximum permitted capacity of approximately 25 million cubic
yards. The estimated remaining capacity of the facility is 21.7 million cubic yards, as of
July 2006. The landfill’s tentative closure date is January 1, 2033 based on estimated
regional growth, solid waste demand and diversion rates, and remaining landfill
capacity.9
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies on solid waste.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES          To ensure adequate solid waste collection services locally and
  GOAL 7:                    reduce Gridley’s waste stream.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will encourage yard waste collection and will explore
  POLICY 7.1                 opportunities for residents or organizations to use compost material
                             for gardens and landscaping, as feasible.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will consult with the local solid waste collection provider
  POLICY 7.2                 to implement community or Citywide composting facilities for yard
                             waste collected locally.
  PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will consult with the Butte Regional Waste Management
  POLICY 7.3                 Authority and the Butte County Environmental Health Division, as
                             necessary, to comply with state law on solid waste collection and
                             disposal.
8
    Butte County. Butte County General Plan Setting and Trends Report Public Draft. August 2,
    2007.
9
    California Integrated Waste Management Board. Solid Waste Information System (SWIS).
    Online at: http://www.ciwmb.ca.gov/SWIS/04-AA-0002/Detail/. Accessed February 24, 2009.
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                25

                                                                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                              2030 General Plan
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         New development shall recycle construction waste to the greatest
 POLICY 7.4                extent feasible.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City should encourage recycling of demolition waste within
 POLICY 7.5                the context of City-sanctioned projects and in consultation with
                           applicants proposing redevelopment of properties with existing
                           structures.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will consider the use of recycled materials in new City
 POLICY 7.6                facilities, as economically feasible.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         Submittal and implementation of a recycling plan for construction
 POLICY 7.7                materials is required for new commercial, industrial, and residential
                           projects with more than 10 units to ensure recycling of construction
                           waste materials to the greatest extent feasible.
 Public Facilities         The City will implement recycling education programs for
 Implementation            residents designed to promote source reduction, recycling, and
 Strategy 7.1              composting to decrease Gridley’s waste stream.
LIBRARY
Gridley is served by the Butte County Library, which has a branch at 299 Spruce Street in
Gridley, which is open 35 hours per week. The Butte County Library has its headquarters
in Oroville and six branch locations throughout the County. In addition to its collection of
books, videos, music, and books on tape, the Library also has access to an extensive
interlibrary loan service. The Library also has a bookmobile program and a literacy
program.
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies on libraries.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         To maintain high-quality library services adequate to current
 GOAL 8:                   and future needs of Gridley residents.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will coordinate with the Butte County Library to develop
 POLICY 8.1                additional library facilities or expand existing facilities during
                           General Plan buildout, using a guideline of 0.5 square feet of public
                           library facilities per capita.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES         The City will support a diversity of books, magazines, music, audio
 POLICY 8.2                books, wireless access, programs, and services for all ages and
                           interests at local libraries, as well as maintenance or expansion of
                           hours.
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                26

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          Public libraries located in Gridley should be readily available for
 POLICY 8.3                 community meetings, special events, and educational extension.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will support Countywide development impact fees for
 POLICY 8.3                 library services to the extent that these fees are not duplicative of
                            other revenue sources.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will support the use of funding from Countywide
 POLICY 8.4                 development impact fees to expand or construct new facilities
                            within Gridley.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will explore opportunities with the Gridley Unified
 POLICY 8.5                 School District to develop joint school and community use libraries
                            at existing and newly planned schools. The City will also consider
                            joint-use libraries/community meeting halls.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          New library facilities in Gridley should locate in a neighborhood
 POLICY 8.6                 center, downtown, or in some other location easily accessible to
                            surrounding neighborhoods.
 Public Facilities          The City will communicate with Butte County to identify funding
 Implementation             sources for development of new library facilities and expansion of
 Strategy 8.1               existing facilities. The City will communicate with the County on
                            local expansion plans and siting of new library facilities, with a
                            guideline of providing 0.5 square feet of public library space per
                            capita as the City grows. The City will consider development
                            impact fees for library services, as well as other revenue sharing
                            with the County and other existing and future sources of revenue
                            for library facilities and services. To the extent that joint-use
                            libraries in schools can provide services to the City during General
                            Plan buildout, any library related development impact fees would
                            be proportionally lower.
SCHOOLS
The Gridley Unified School District (School District) provides public educational
services within the Gridley area. The School District provides services not only within
the City limits of Gridley, but also in unincorporated areas of the County near the City, at
two elementary schools, a middle school, and a high school (Exhibit Public Facilities-2):
    9   McKinley Elementary School at 1045 Sycamore Street is a kindergarten (K)
        through 1st grade school.
    9   Wilson Elementary School at 409 Magnolia Street is a 2nd through 5th grade
        school.
    9   Sycamore Middle School at 1125 Sycamore Street serves 6th through 8th grades.
                                  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                 27
                                                                                 CITY OF GRIDLEY
                                                                             2030 General Plan
     9    Gridley High School at 300 East Spruce Street serves grades 9 through 12.
     9    Gridley Alternative Education Program (continuation high school) serves grades
          9 through 12.
As the City’s population grows during buildout of the 2030 General Plan, new schools,
expansion of capacity of existing schools, or a combination of these approaches will be
necessary. The School District owns land developed with school sites, as well as other
land that is currently undeveloped and could potentially accommodate school
construction. The School District maintains facilities plans that describe how long-term
growth needs will be met. The School District uses student generation rates to estimate
the number of students that will live in proposed housing projects. Student generation
rates are updated from time to time, as are estimates of the cost of providing school
facilities to serve new growth.
Education Code Section 17620 authorizes school districts to levy a fee, charge,
dedication, or other requirement against any development project for the construction or
reconstruction of school facilities, provided that the district can show justification for
levying of fees. Government Code 65995 limits the fee to be collected to the statutory fee
(Level I) unless a school district conducts a Facility Needs Assessment (Government
Code Section 65995.6) and meets certain conditions. SB 50 (1998) instituted a new
school facility program by which school districts can apply for State construction and
modernization funds. This legislation imposed limitations on the power of cities and
counties to require mitigation for school facility impacts as a condition of approving new
development.
Following are the City’s goals, policies, and implementation strategies on schools.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          To support the efforts of the local school district to provide the
 GOAL 9:                    best possible education for Gridley's schoolchildren.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will support the school district in providing high-quality
 POLICY 9.1                 educational facilities during General Plan buildout.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will consult with the School District to determine
 POLICY 9.2                 appropriate locations for new schools.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          The City will encourage new schools in the Planned Growth Area
 POLICY 9.3                 to be located toward the center of new neighborhoods, and within
                            walking or biking distance of homes within attendance boundaries.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES          New developments shall be designed to provide safe and
 POLICY 9.4                 convenient pedestrian and bicycle access for school sites to and
                            from the surrounding neighborhood.
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                28

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City will communicate with the School District to take
 POLICY 9.5        advantage of efficiencies available through joint-use arrangements
                   for recreational facilities and library facilities.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES New developments shall set aside land as identified in the Land
 POLICY 9.6        Use Diagram, contribute school development impact fees, construct
                   and dedicate new school facilities, or provide a combination of the
                   above, according to state law and School District requirements.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES Developments providing more than their fair share of land for
 POLICY 9.7        school facilities use shall be reimbursed through development
                   impact fees from other projects benefitting from school sites.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES The City should proactively engage the School District and other
 POLICY 9.8        area educational providers to provide job training programs,
                   agriculture-oriented education, and other educational programs that
                   could also address the City’s economic development goals (see also
                   the Land Use Element).
 Public Facilities During General Plan buildout, the City will involve the school
 Implementation    district proactively in development proposals, and will
 Strategy 9.1      cooperatively monitor housing, population and enrollment trends,
                   and to evaluate the effects of those trends on future school facility
                   needs. The City will provide information to the School District to
                   support updates to school facilities plans consistent with the City's
                   General Plan, particularly with respect to the proposed location of
                   future school sites. The City will proactively communicate with the
                   School District to create joint-use arrangements for recreational
                   facilities and library facilities. Joint-use facilities could occur on
                   both existing and new school sites. The City will consider potential
                   cost savings in sharing maintenance responsibilities for joint-use
                   facilities.
                         PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                       29

                                  CITY OF GRIDLEY
                               2030 General Plan
This page intentionally blank.
 PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
              30
 
                              Exhibit Public Facilities-2
                            Gridley Unified School District
                               Sphere of Influence, and
                                Planned Growth Area
  PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT
             31

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
                  SAFETY ELEMENT
                         I

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                               Page
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
   Guiding Principles ....................................................................................................... 2 
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS................................................................. 2 
   Geologic Hazards and Soil Conditions....................................................................... 3 
   Flood Hazards .............................................................................................................. 7 
   Hazardous Materials ................................................................................................. 12 
   Fire Risk ..................................................................................................................... 14 
   Emergency Routes and Response ............................................................................. 15 
   Air Quality and Climate Change .............................................................................. 17 
EXHIBITS
   SAFETY-1           Floodplain ........................................................................................... 9
   SAFETY-2           Dam Inundation Areas .................................................................... 11
   SAFETY-3           Potential Evacuation Routes ........................................................... 16
                                                  SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                              I

                           GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                         Safety Element
This page intentionally blank.
      SAFETY ELEMENT
              II
CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
INTRODUCTION
The Safety Element outlines key safety issues facing Gridley, including seismic,
flooding, fire, and air quality. Goals and policies in this Element describe the City’s
approach to minimizing these hazards and maintaining a safe environment for residents.
The Safety Element is written to satisfy the requirements of California planning law, and
is a mandatory component of the City’s General Plan. Government Code section
65302(g) presents a list of safety issues that, at a minimum, must be covered by the
Element if they pertain to conditions in the city. The topics addressed in this Element
include:
Seismically induced conditions including ground shaking, surface rupture, ground failure,
tsunami, seiche, and dam failure;
    9    Slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides;
    9    Subsidence, liquefaction, and other geologic hazards;
    9    Flooding;
    9    Hazardous Materials;
    9    Fire risk;
    9    Emergency response and routes; and,
    9    Air quality.
The seismic safety element was one of the first mandatory general plan elements.
However, California law has changed over time, and those issues previously addressed in
seismic safety elements are now to be incorporated into the safety element. However,
seismic safety is not a major issue for Gridley, compared to other parts of California.
Gridley was a participant in the development of the Butte County Multi-Jurisdictional
Hazard Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan and adopted this plan in March of 2007. This plan is
hereby incorporated by reference.
                                       SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              1

                                                           GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                            Safety Element
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Statements from Gridley’s General Plan Guiding Principles relevant to safety issues
include:
    9    Children in Gridley should be able to safely and conveniently walk to school.
    9    For safe and convenient travel, we need short blocks, connectivity, frequent
         through streets, extension of the historic grid, and ample on- and off-street
         pedestrian and bicycle pathways.
    9    For safe and convenient travel, we need destinations, like schools, parks, and
         shops, to be oriented to, and blended in with our neighborhoods.
    9    Our community should grow without having traffic, air quality, and noise
         problems that would sacrifice our small-town character. In the long run, this
         requires pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit to be considered in land use and
         transportation planning on an equal footing with vehicular travel.
Although the above items are safety-related, these specific issues are, for the most part,
addressed in other elements of this General Plan.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER
ELEMENTS
The Safety Element contains goals and policies to reduce the dangers posed by various
hazards. These goals and policies will, in many cases, relate to goals and policies
contained in other General Plan Elements, including the Land Use Element,
Conservation, and Public Facilities Element.
For example, Conservation Element policies related to water resource protection,
agriculture, and the natural environment may lead to land use policies that direct
development away from areas that pose significant risk of flooding. Another example is a
well planned, highly connected, and well maintained circulation network provided for in
the Circulation Element that allows for multiple routes to a given location for emergency
services personnel and evacuation in the event of a natural disaster, thereby supporting
goals and policies in the Safety Element.
Air quality is addressed in this Element, but most policies that would address air quality
issues are included in the Land Use, Circulation, Community Character, Open Space,
                                       SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              2

GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
Public Facilities, and Conservation Elements. The Land Use Element describes how land
use patterns will be used to reduce automobile travel, reducing emissions. Community
Design Element and Energy Element policies on energy efficiency also have the potential
to reduce emissions and improve air quality. Low impact development and natural
drainage policies in the Conservation and Open Space Element describe the steps that the
City will take to maintain and improve water quality.
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS AND SOIL CONDITIONS
Policies related to geologic hazards and soil conditions relevant to Gridley are primarily
linked to seismic hazards, which, in turn, are primarily causes by earthquakes. The State
of California has identified five primary issues of critical seismic concern to be addressed
in the Safety Element:
     1. Surface ruptures;
     2. Ground shaking;
     3. Ground failure;
     4. Tsunamis; and
     5. Seiches.
All of these hazards have the potential to cause loss of life or damage to property.
Earthquakes, the primary cause of seismic hazards in Gridley, occur on fault lines in the
earth’s crust. They are the primary agent for seismic activity and vary in intensity,
location, magnitude, and duration, etc. Their effects may be felt either locally or
regionally. An earthquake occurs when there is a rupture of rock or breakage of earth
material on opposite sides of a fault as a result of accumulation of stress in the material.
This movement or breakage releases energy which moves outward from the epicenter in
the form of seismic waves.
These seismic waves do not disperse in a uniform pattern. They travel at different rates of
speed depending upon the type of material they are passing through. Generally, the more
solid or dense the material, the less susceptible it is to seismic waves. Conversely, the
alluvium of the Great Valley would be highly conductive to seismic wave passage due to
its loose unconsolidated nature.
Within the State of California, there are many faults that have been identified which have
the potential for earthquake activity. Identification has been mainly by two methods:
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              3

                                                          GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                           Safety Element
observing the resultant land forms or from historical records. However, most faults within
the state are considered to have had no recent activity.
An active fault is one that has moved in recent geologic time (within approximately the
past 10,000 years) and which is likely to move again in the relatively near future. In
California, these faults are designated under the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning
Act of 1972. An inactive fault is one which shows no evidence of movement in recent
geologic time and shows no evidence of movement in the relatively near future. The
nearest active fault to the Gridley Study Area is the Cleveland Hills Fault, located at Lake
Oroville.
FAULT DISPLACEMENT
Fault displacement occurs when the earth on one side of a fault line moves in relation to
the earth on the other side of the fault line. Displacement may be as little as several
inches to many feet. Movement may occur in several directions; If movement is some
distance below the earth’s surface, displacement may not be evident at the surface. No
known active faults are present in the Gridley Study Area, and Gridley is not threatened
by fault displacement.
SURFACE RUPTURE
Surface rupture is fault displacement that is manifested on the surface of the earth. Its
effects may also be felt below the surface with changes in water table or soil or rock
strata. Most, if not all, major California earthquakes have been accompanied by some
degree of surface rupture. Surface rupture is important to planning because structures
built across fault lines may be torn apart or otherwise destroyed when a surface rupture
occurs underneath or immediately adjacent to the structure. Since, no known active faults
are present in the Gridley Study Area, Gridley is not threatened by surface rupture.
GROUND SHAKING
Ground shaking is the oscillation or vibration of earth materials resulting from an
earthquake. It is the most commonly experienced earthquake phenomenon because it may
be felt at some distance from the epicenter. Ground shaking has the greatest impact on
areas underlaid by loose, water saturated, thick sediments such as those located within the
Gridley Study Area during the wet season.
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              4

GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
Damage from ground shaking is caused by the transmission of earthquake vibrations
from the ground into building structures. The resultant damage is related to structural
design, type of construction, and the intensity, period, and duration of the ground motion.
Ground shaking has been the dominant form of seismic activity affecting the Study Area.
The effects of ground motion are measured by the intensity of the motion felt (Modified
Mercalli Scale), whereas magnitude measures the amount of energy released when an
earthquake occurs. The Gridley vicinity is not believed to have experienced ground
shaking at a Modified Mercalli Scale level of VII or above, the level at which damage to
unreinforced masonry buildings would be expected, during the period of 1800 through
19961.
GROUND FAILURE
Ground failure occurs when the stresses in the ground exceed the resistance of earth
materials to deformation or rupture. Instability comes about when stresses are increased
by natural or man-made causes, such as by earthquakes, fills, and ground water
withdrawal. There are several types of ground failure:
1. Liquefaction – occurs when water in unconsolidated sand and other granular
    materials is subjected to pressure usually caused by ground motion. The earthquake
    induced deformation transforms a stable granular material into a fluid in which the
    solid particles are in a virtual state of suspension, similar to quicksand. The effect is
    that ground literally flows out from under building.
2. Lateral spreading – is the squeezing of soft, saturated clays, which results in a rapid
    or gradual loss of strength in the foundation materials, so that structures built upon
    them gradually settle or breakup as the soil flows out laterally.
3. Landslides –can occur on slopes that are virtually flat and in soil depths ranging
    from a few feet to several hundred feet. Slippage may also occur on subsurface
    inclines. Landslides do not necessarily require a steep slope on which to occur,
    particularly during earthquakes
4. Differential settlement – is the non-uniform compaction of loose granular soils that
    has water in it freed by liquefaction and forced to the surface. As the water is
    removed from the subsurface, the ground settles. Differential settlement may also
1
   California Division of Mines and Geology. 1996. Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Assessment for
   the State of California. California Department of Conservation, Sacramento, CA. In
   cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey, Washington, D.C.
                                         SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                5

                                                            GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                            Safety Element
    occur through simple compaction of areas underlaid by sand or infill areas in former
    sloughs and streams.
5. Subsidence – occurs usually in areas where there has been withdrawal of subsurface
    fluids over a long period of time. Normally, subsidence covers extensive areas as a
    result of activity by man.
6. Erosion – is the wear and removal of material from one site and its deposition in
    another.
The liquefaction potential of soils in the Gridley area is generally moderate. Gridley is
generally at low risk for landsliding based on the low topographical relief in the area. The
risks posed by other hazards related to ground failure, such as differential settlement,
subsidence, and erosion, can be addressed through appropriate soil investigation prior to
construction, as specified in the City’s goals and policies.
OTHER SOIL LIMITATIONS
In addition to the seismic soil hazards described above (ground failure, ground shaking,
surface rupture, and fault displacement), soils may have other physical limitations which
affect their suitability for various uses, including urban development. Unstable soils (such
as soils on steep slopes) and expansive soils (soils which expand to occupy a larger
volume when wet) may require engineering or building techniques in order to ensure that
they do not cause damage to structures.
TSUNAMIS AND SEICHES
Tsunamis are commonly called “tidal waves.” Tsunamis are water waves with a long
distance from crest to crest, that are seismically or tectonically induced in the oceans.
Their principal impact is felt by coastal areas. Seiches are periodic oscillations of water
levels in basins that occur as the result of wind and weather changes, landslides, and
seismic activity. Seiches may occur in harbors, bays, rivers, or other bodies of water.
Gridley is not at risk for tsunamis or seiches based on its inland location and the absence
of nearby large bodies of water.
                                        SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                6

GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
 SAFETY GOAL 1:            To reduce risks to people and property from geologic hazards
                           and soils conditions.
 SAFETY POLICY 1.1         New development shall implement state and local building code
                           requirements, including those related to structural requirements and
                           seismic safety criteria in order to reduce risks associated with
                           seismic events and unstable and expansive soils.
 SAFETY POLICY 1.2         New developments that could be adversely affected by geological
                           and/or soil conditions shall include project features that minimize
                           these risks.
 SAFETY POLICY 1.3         The City will not allow new water well sites to be located in areas
                           where subsidence could occur as a result of water well operation, or
                           where the potential for subsidence could increase as a result of
                           operation of a water well.
 Safety                    The City will continue to enforce the most recent statewide
 Implementation            building code requirements.
 Strategy 1.1
 Safety                    The City will require geotechnical evaluation and
 Implementation            recommendations before development or construction of buildings
 Strategy 1.2              meant for public occupancy in geologic hazard areas may proceed.
                           Such evaluations will be required to focus on potential hazards
                           related to liquefaction, erosion, subsidence, seismic activity, and
                           other relevant geologic hazards and soil conditions for
                           development. New development would be required to incorporate
                           project features that avoid or minimize the identified hazards to the
                           satisfaction of the City.
FLOOD HAZARDS
Flooding is not foreseen as a significant hazard for Gridley properties. Federal
Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps prepared in 2008 do not
place the City or its Study Area into a 100-year floodplain. The City of Gridley is
approximately 1.3 miles west of the 100-year floodplain (as mapped by FEMA) of the
Feather River and the levees which exist there (Exhibit Safety-1).
When 200-year floodplain maps for the Gridley area become available from the
Department of Water Resources, they must be analyzed to determine whether any areas
planned for development under the General Plan are within the 200-year floodplain. If the
possibility of flooding does exist from flood levels occurring at intervals of 200 years or
                                       SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                7
                                                             GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                                Safety Element
less, then such measures as necessary must be taken to meet the State law requirements
for development in Flood Hazard Zones. Gridley and likely evacuation routes (SR 99, SR
70, and SR 162) are located in an area subject to inundation following partial or total
failure of Oroville Dam (Exhibit Safety-2).
Please refer to the Open Space Element and Public Facilities Elements, which discuss
drainageways and drainage infrastructure.
 SAFETY GOAL 2:           To reduce risks to people and property from flooding.
 SAFETY POLICY 2.1        The City will use the best available flood hazard information and
                          mapping from regional, state, and federal agencies and use this
                          information to inform land use and public facilities investment
                          decisions.
 SAFETY POLICY 2.2        The City will regulate development within floodplains in
                          accordance with state and federal requirements.
 SAFETY POLICY 2.3        New development shall provide an evaluation of potential flood
                          hazards and demonstrate compliance with state and federal flood
                          standards prior to approval.
 Safety                   The City will update the General Plan, if necessary, using data to
 Implementation           be made available by the Department of Water Resources and the
 Strategy 2.1             Central Valley Flood Protection Board. The City will update the
                          Land Use Element, Conservation and Open Space Element, Safety
                          Element, and other elements, if necessary, to ensure adequate flood
                          protection is provided for areas anticipated for urban development.
                          Policies and implementation measures in the General Plan related
                          to flood protection will integrate data from the State Plan of Flood
                          Control. For flood-related revisions to the Safety Element, the City
                          will consult with the Central Valley Flood Protection Board and
                          local flood protection agencies serving the Gridley vicinity,
                          consistent with State law.
                          Following flood-related updates to the General Plan, the City will
                          revise applicable development standards, including the Zoning
                          Code, for consistency on flood protection policies. Subdivision
                          approvals, development agreements, permits, and other City
                          entitlements will incorporate these revised City policies and
                          regulations. The City will regulate development per state and
                          federal law and according to the presence of 200-year flood
                          protection, or according to adequate progress towards providing
                          200-year flood protection.
                          The City will cooperate with Sutter Butte Flood Control Agency,
                          state, and federal agencies, if necessary, to fund on an equitable
                          basis the maximum level of flood protection that is practical, with a
                          goal of achieving at least 200-year flood protection.
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              8
 Safety-1
Floodplain

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
Exhibit Safety‐2. Dam Inundation Areas 
                                        SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              11

CITY OF GRIDLEY
2030 General Plan
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
A hazardous material is defined as a substance or combination of substances which,
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics,
may either (1) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase
in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating irreversible illness; or (2) pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health and safety, or the environment with improper
treatment, storage, transport, or disposal.
Hazardous waste is the subset of hazardous materials that has been abandoned, discarded,
or recycled and is not properly contained, including contaminated soil or groundwater
with concentrations of chemicals, infectious agents, or toxic elements sufficiently high to
increase human mortality or to destroy the ecological environment. Hazardous materials
and wastes can include those used or produced in industrial processes, as well as some
chemicals used for cleaning and other types of everyday use.
The transportation of hazardous wastes creates a risk of spillage or other release that
could injure persons or damage structures on lands near transportation routes. . The
transport of hazardous cargo occurs through Gridley along State Route (SR) 99 and the
Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR). A wide range of hazardous cargo is regularly
transported along these routes. Types of hazardous cargo regularly transported out of,
into, and through Gridley by freeway or railroad include flammable liquids, corrosive
materials, compressed and/or poisonous gases, explosives, flammable solids, and
irritating materials.
At the federal level, the principal agency regulating the generation, transport, and
disposal of hazardous substances is the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
under the authority of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). EPA has
delegated much of the RCRA requirements to the California Department of Toxic
Substances Control (DTSC). California has been granted primary oversight responsibility
by EPA to administer and enforce hazardous waste management programs. State
regulations have detailed planning and management requirements to ensure that
hazardous wastes are handled, stored, and disposed of properly to reduce risks to human
health and the environment. In addition to DTSC, the State Water Resources Control
Board (SWRCB), and the Integrated Waste Management Act also regulate the generation
and disposal of hazardous materials.
The U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT) regulates transportation of hazardous
materials between states. The USDOT Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) enforces
the Hazardous Materials Regulations, which are promulgated by the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration for rail transportation. Some state agencies
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
                                             12
GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
have the responsibility for enforcing federal and state regulations and responding to
hazardous materials transportation emergencies, which include the California Highway
Patrol (CHP) and the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). Together, these
agencies determine container types used and license hazardous-waste haulers for
transportation of hazardous waste on public roads.
The U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA),
is responsible at the federal level for ensuring worker safety. OSHA sets federal standards
for implementation of workplace training, exposure limits, and safety procedures for the
handling of hazardous substances (as well as other hazards). OSHA also establishes
criteria by which each state can implement its own health and safety program.
The Butte County Department of Public Health, Environmental Health Division is the
certified unified program agency (CUPA) for all cities and unincorporated areas in Butte
County. The CUPA conducts permitting and inspection of businesses that handle
hazardous materials or generate hazardous waste.
  SAFETY GOAL 3:            To protect people and resources from hazards posed by
                            hazardous materials, including their extraction, manufacture,
                            storage, use, disposal, and transport.
  SAFETY POLICY 3.1         The City will require that hazardous materials are used, stored,
                            transported, and disposed in a safe manner and in compliance with
                            local, State, and federal safety standards.
  SAFETY POLICY 3.3         The City will require buildings and sites proposed for development
                            to be investigated for hazardous materials or hazardous waste and
                            steps taken to protect public and environmental health, if necessary,
                            prior to project approval.
  SAFETY POLICY 3.4         The City will restrict the location of any uses or facilities that use
                            solvents or other toxic or hazardous materials to locate with safe
                            distance from residences, medical facilities, schools, commercial
                            uses, and employment uses, and/or prepare a hazardous substance
                            management plan to ensure against the possibility of
                            contamination.
  SAFETY POLICY 3.5         The City will limit the transport of hazardous materials to
                            designated routes, consistent with County, state, and federal
                            requirements.
  SAFETY POLICY 3.6         Developments proposed on farmland or former farmland shall
                            analyze and mitigate, if necessary and prior to occupation, residual
                            agricultural chemicals that may be present on-site.
                                        SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                13
                                                                GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                                    Safety Element
  SAFETY POLICY 3.7           The City will review development requests and require that any
                              airborne, waterborne, windborne, and other hazardous materials
                              issues are fully disclosed, analyzed, and mitigated to ensure against
                              any risk relative to any nearby planned or existing land uses and
                              their users.
  Safety                      The City will maintain and update a list of hazardous sites,
  Implementation              buildings, and uses in the Sphere of Influence or use databases that
  Strategy 3.1                track the location of hazardous materials sites, buildings, and
                              similar features. The City will use updated lists to evaluate and
                              condition development, as necessary, to protect environmental and
                              public health.
FIRE RISK
The City lies in an area of low wildfire risk, according to the Butte County Butte County
Multi-Jurisdictional All Hazard Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan.2
Fire hazard areas within the Study Area include brushy areas not under cultivation,
vacant lots or fields of the Study Area, buildings with inadequate electrical or, heating
systems, buildings with inadequate fire separation, and structures used for storage of
flammable or explosive materials. Fires within the Study Area are mainly the result of
faulty construction or carelessness.
See also the Public Facilities Element, which includes standards for water pressure for
fighting fires, fire sprinklers, fire suppression services, and related topics.
  SAFETY GOAL 4:              To reduce risks to people and structures from fires.
  SAFETY POLICY 4.1           The City will require setbacks, ignition resistant building materials,
                              or other measures to reduce exposure to potential wildfires in areas
                              designated for natural open space preservation, based on California
                              Department of Forestry and Fire Protection recommendations and
                              Maintenance of Defensible Space Measures, as appropriate.
  SAFETY POLICY 4.2           The City will consult with fire protection service providers in
                              reviewing development proposals. Development proposals will
                              include City conditions that respond to concerns of fire protection
                              service providers.
2
  Butte County. Multi-Jurisdictional All Hazard Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan. March 2007.
                                          SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                  14
GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
  Safety                   The City will prepare and maintain a list of buildings that could
  Implementation           represent fire hazards, including those that were constructed prior
  Strategy 4.1             to requirements for fire-resistant construction materials, sprinklers,
                           and other fire safety systems. The City will explore opportunities to
                           collaborate with property owners to retrofit such buildings, as
                           feasible, to reduce fire risk.
EMERGENCY ROUTES AND RESPONSE
No amount of planning or preparation can avoid all emergency situations. Gridley bears a
risk of being affected by a variety of natural and human-caused disasters. Citizens and
first responders must be prepared to react to such an emergency. Please refer to the Public
Facilities Element, which discusses fire suppression and emergency response, as well as
police services.
  SAFETY GOAL 5:           To minimize the loss of life and damage to property from
                           natural and human-caused hazards by ensuring adequate
                           emergency routes and response.
  SAFETY POLICY 5.1        New developments and City investments shall be consistent with
                           the information provided in the Butte County Multi-Jurisdictional
                           All Hazard Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan.
  SAFETY POLICY 5.2        The City will ensure the adequacy of disaster response and
                           coordination with Butte County and the ability of individuals to
                           survive disasters.
  SAFETY POLICY 5.3        The City will ensure that populations requiring special assistance
                           are included in disaster planning and preparedness.
  SAFETY POLICY 5.4        The City will identify and maintain, in consultation with the Butte
                           County Office of Emergency Services, evacuation routes and
                           operational plans for relevant local hazards (Exhibit Safety-3).
  SAFETY POLICY 5.5        The City will promote public education and awareness regarding
                           what to do, where to go, and how to evacuate in the event of a
                           catastrophic disaster, such as wildfires, earthquakes, or toxic
                           material spills.
  SAFETY POLICY 5.6        The City will require development and maintenance of a road
                           system that provides adequate access for emergency equipment.
                                       SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              15
                                                          GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                        Safety Element
Exhibit Safety‐3. Potential Evacuation Routes 
                                           SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                 16

GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
  Safety                       The City will, in consultation with the Butte County Office of
  Implementation               Emergency Services, implement and periodically update disaster
  Strategy 5.1                 plans, including the City's Emergency Operations Plan, to meet
                               federal, State, and local emergency requirements. Included in this
                               work will be the identification and planning for evacuation routes
                               for dam failure and flooding that may affect existing developed
                               areas of the City, as well as planned new growth areas.
AIR QUALITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Air pollution affects human health, harms the natural and the built environment, damages
crops, and changes the climate of the earth. Air pollution can have local, regional, and
global sources and effects.
The achievement of air quality goals for any community is mostly dependent on
implementation of policies that establish land use patterns, guidelines for development,
and transportation systems to allow for travel other than by vehicles. The location of
highways, railroads, industries, and other sources of air emissions in relation to houses,
schools, and other sensitive land uses is an important consideration in land use planning.
The General Plan addresses the City’s land use, transportation, and design policies, which
address local, regional, and global air quality challenges. Policies and implementations
strategies in the City’s Land Use, Community Character, Circulation, Open Space, and
Conservation Elements address air quality issues. This Safety Element includes other air
quality related policies that are not already indirectly addressed in the Land Use,
Circulation, Community Character, or other elements.
Toxic air contaminants (TACs) are airborne substances that can cause acute (short-term)
and chronic (long-term) health problems, including cancer. TACs include variety of
substances from many different sources, such as gasoline stations, highways and
railroads, dry cleaners, industrial operations, power plants, and painting operations. The
effects of TACs are mostly experienced locally (close to the source).
Particulate matter (dust) and ozone (“smog”) can also have adverse human health effects.
The Gridley area exceeds California ambient air quality standards for concentrations of
these pollutants, and is classified as nonattainment for ozone and particulate matter of
less than 2.5 and 10 micrometers in diameter (PM2.5 and PM10).3
3
    Please refer to the California Air Resources Board web site for additional information:
    http://www.arb.ca.gov/desig/adm/adm.htm.
                                          SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                   17

                                                                GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                                  Safety Element
In addition, emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) could have catastrophic impacts
related to flooding, habitat suitability, agriculture, and the economy. The primary GHGs
of concern include carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and
fluorinated compounds. GHGs emitted from locations around the world contribute
globally to climate change.
The California Global Warming Solutions Act (AB 32) was passed in September 2006.
AB 32 requires that statewide Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions must be reduced to
1990 levels by 2020, which represents about a 25% reduction relative to current levels.
Future planning efforts that do not encourage reductions in GHG emissions would
conflict with AB 32, impeding California’s ability to comply with the policy. Binding
and enforceable General Plan goals and policies which reduce GHG emissions are one
outcome of AB 32.
Since transportation is the largest source of ozone precursors in the region and of GHGs
in California, land use and transportation planning to reduce the amount of vehicular
travel is a fundamental focus for jurisdictions that have air quality goals.4 A variety of
land use, transportation, and design approaches, when used together, can substantially
reduce vehicular travel (and therefore improve air quality):5
     9    Connectivity. A finely-connected transportation network shortens trip lengths
          and allows land use to be placed closer in proximity and along direct routes. A
          roadway network requires users to travel long distances to destinations that are
          relatively close by increases trip lengths and creates obstacles for walking,
          bicycling, and transit access. Please refer to the Circulation Element for the
          City’s approach to connectivity.
     9    Compactness. Compact development, by its nature, can increase the efficiency
          of infrastructure, enable travel other than by car, and reduce trip lengths. If
          communities can place the same amount of development in a smaller area closer
          together, GHG emissions would be reduced concurrently due to less travel by car
          and avoid unnecessary conversion of open space. Please refer to the Land Use
          Element for the City’s approach to compact growth.
     9    Diversity. Multiple land uses placed in proximity around higher-activity land
          uses can accommodate travel through means other than by car. Please refer to the
          Circulation Element for the City’s approach to diversity in land use.
4
    Please refer to the California Air Resources Board web sites:
    http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/data/data.htm and
    http://www.arb.ca.gov/aqd/almanac/almanac08/almanac2008all.pdf for more information on
    the sources of air pollution.
5
    Please refer to the California Air Pollution Control Officer’s Association web site for more
    information: http://www.capcoa.org/.
                                          SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                  18

GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
    9   Facilities. Safe and convenient bike lanes, pedestrian pathways, transit shelters,
        and other facilities that are incorporated into a comprehensive transportation
        network can also encourage more travel by other means, thereby reducing air
        pollution and GHG emission. Please refer to the Circulation Element for the
        City’s approach to transportation facilities planning.
    9   Redevelopment. One way to avoid GHG emissions is to facilitate more efficient
        and economic use of the lands in already-developed portions of a community.
        Reinvestment in existing neighborhoods and retrofit of existing buildings is GHG
        efficient, and can even result in a net reduction in GHG emissions. Please refer to
        the Land Use Element for the City’s approach to infill development.
    9   Housing and Employment. By planning for and placing jobs and housing closer
        to one another, communities can reduce work-related trips. The most effective
        local strategies seek to attract businesses and industries that are a good match for
        the current and anticipated labor force and to accommodate a variety of housing
        types that meet the needs of that labor force. This concept is known as “jobs-
        housing balance.” Please refer to the Land Use Element and Housing Element for
        the City’s approach to matching jobs and housing.
The above-described components of the City’s air quality strategy are addressed in other
Elements of the General Plan (see Land Use, Circulation, and Community Character, in
particular).
Another means of addressing global climate change and other air pollution is promoting
energy efficiency and use of renewable (and low emission) sources of energy. Please see
the Energy section of this Conservation Element for goals and policies on energy
conservation and efficiency.
 SAFETY GOAL 6:             To maintain or improve local, regional, and global air quality
                            and meet accepted standards for controlling airborne
                            pollution.
 SAFETY POLICY 6.1          The City will require projects to reduce operational emissions from
                            vehicles, heating and cooling, lighting, equipment use, and other
                            proposed new sources.
 SAFETY POLICY 6.2          New developments shall implement applicable emission control
                            measures recommended by the Butte County Air Quality
                            Management District for construction, grading, excavation, and
                            demolition.
 SAFETY POLICY 6.3          Government offices and other public and civic uses in Gridley
                            should be located in or near downtown or toward the center of
                            neighborhoods to allow easy access via transit, walking, and
                            bicycling.
                                       SAFETY ELEMENT
                                               19

                                                     GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                         Safety Element
SAFETY POLICY 6.4 The City will include the use of low-emission vehicles and
                  equipment, use of locally-produced and/or recycled construction
                  materials, recovering demolition materials for reuse, or otherwise
                  diverting from a landfill, or other best air quality management
                  practices as one of its rating and ranking criteria in bidding for
                  contracted work.
SAFETY POLICY 6.5 The City will encourage the local solid waste disposal provider to
                  use low-emissions vehicles and other equipment.
SAFETY POLICY 6.6 The City will increase the use of low-maintenance, drought-tolerant
                  landscaping and low-emissions landscape maintenance equipment
                  in City parks and other City-maintained landscaped areas and open
                  space.
SAFETY POLICY 6.7 The City’s vehicle fleet will be updated over time with more fuel-
                  efficient, low-emission vehicles.
Safety            As funding is available, and as fleet-turnover warrants, the City
Implementation    will replace its vehicle fleet with low-emission vehicles and will
Strategy 6.1      purchase low-emission landscape maintenance equipment.
SAFETY GOAL 7:    To minimize harmful exposure to and hazardous air pollutants.
SAFETY POLICY 7.1 New development of sensitive uses, such as residences and schools,
                  shall be located a safe distance from existing sources of air
                  pollutant emissions, such as Highway 99, to reduce adverse public
                  health effects.
SAFETY POLICY 7.2 The City will ensure that new industrial, manufacturing, and
                  processing facilities that may produce toxic or hazardous air
                  pollutants are located at an adequate distance from residential areas
                  and other sensitive receptors, considering weather patterns, the
                  quantity and toxicity of pollutants emitted, and other relevant
                  parameters.
SAFETY POLICY 7.3 The City will communicate with the Butte County Air Quality
                  Management District to identify sources of toxic air contaminants
                  and determine the need for health risk assessments prior to
                  approval of proposed development.
SAFETY POLICY 7.4 The City will consult with local businesses and other agencies to
                  monitor and provide a rapid response and communication with the
                  public in the event of emergency involving air pollution.
                              SAFETY ELEMENT
                                      20

GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
 Safety                When new development involving sensitive receptors, such as
 Implementation        residential development, is proposed in areas exposed to air
 Strategy 7.1          pollutant emissions, such as Highway 99, or when uses are
                       proposed that may produce hazardous air contaminants, the City
                       will require screening level analysis, and if necessary, more
                       detailed health risk analysis to disclose potential impacts. The City
                       will consult with the Butte County Air Quality Management
                       District on analytical methods, mitigation strategies, and
                       significance criteria to use within the context of California
                       Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) documents, with the objective
                       of avoiding or mitigating significant impacts.
 Safety                Following adoption of the General Plan, the City will revise its
 Implementation        Emergency Response Plan, as necessary, to address potential air
 Strategy 7.2          pollution related emergencies. The City will communicate with
                       local businesses and other agencies regarding response and
                       communication protocols, and will ensure City staff is trained to
                       properly respond to such emergencies.
 SAFETY GOAL 8:        To ensure local land use, transportation, infrastructure, and
                       environmental planning is consistent with California’s
                       greenhouse gas reduction objectives.
 SAFETY POLICY 8.1     The City and new developments will implement Land Use,
                       Circulation, Community Character, Public Facilities, Conservation,
                       Open Space, and other policies, which were developed in part to
                       reduce air pollution.
 SAFETY POLICY 8.2     The City, in consultation with Butte County Association of
                       Governments, the Butte County Air Quality Management District,
                       and California Air Resources Board, and other relevant agencies,
                       will attempt to orient its plans, policies, and regulations to take best
                       advantage of regional and statewide AB 32-related infrastructure
                       investment and other programs.
 SAFETY POLICY 8.3     The City will proactively communicate with Butte County
                       Association of Governments to implement local transit projects,
                       transit-oriented projects, and other plans and projects intended to
                       reduce greenhouse gas and other air pollutant emissions.
 SAFETY                After adoption of the 2030 General Plan, the City will develop a
 IMPLEMENTATION        climate action plan and greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction program.
                       Gridley’s GHG reduction program will achieve a minimum 24%
 STRATEGY 8.1          reduction in GHG emissions relative to the projected levels by
                       2020. Since GHG emissions are estimated for 2030, this reduction
                       would be a pro-rata share of 2030 General Plan buildout. Please
                       refer to the approach outlined below.
                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
                                           21

                                                                            GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                                            Safety Element
This statewide    GRIDLEY’S GHG REDUCTION STANDARD
context for GHG
emissions is      The GHG reduction program will be structured to comply with the intent of The
important for     California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32), as appropriate, within
understanding     Gridley. The City’s GHG reduction standard represents Gridley’s “fair share” of
local government  statewide GHG reduction, consistent with legislation and regulations with AB 32 (i.e.,
responsibility.   reduce statewide GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2020). Given the California context
When California   established by AB 32, Gridley would need to accommodate an increase in population and
established a     employment in a manner that would not hinder the state’s ability to achieve the goals of
quantified        lower emissions overall.
objective for
GHG reductions    The statewide 1990 and projected 2020 GHG inventory can be parsed out to display only
(achieve 1990     the GHG emission sectors that are applicable to Gridley. The state GHG inventory is
levels by 2020),
                  comprehensive, and includes GHG emissions attributable to industrial processes and
the state did not
                  many other emissions sources over which local governments such as Gridley have little
envision that it
                  or no control. When considering only the land use-related emissions sectors (e.g.,
would achieve
these reductions  transportation, electricity, natural gas, domestic waste water treatment) from the State’s
through limits on GHG emissions inventory, projected 2020 emissions levels would need to be reduced by
population or     approximately 24% to meet the emissions limits established in 1990 by those sectors.
economic          Similarly, the emission sectors considered in Gridley’s GHG reduction strategy will be
growth. Rather,   limited to those sectors over which the City could have influence – either through
the state would   entitlement authority, public investments, incentives, or other feasible means. When
need to grow in a making the comparison between Gridley’s GHG efficiency and that required by the state
more GHG          – the City can remove from both sides of the equation GHG sources that are beyond local
efficient manner  control.
so that, despite
adding            The total GHG emissions resulting from buildout of the General Plan is estimated and
substantial       presented at a programmatic level in the City’s General Plan EIR (under separate cover).
population and    Since Gridley’s General Plan includes various methods to reduce vehicle miles traveled
employment        and other sources of GHG emissions, the emissions reduction target for Gridley would be
between 2006      relatively lower that a situation where the General Plan did not fully anticipate and plan
and 2020, the
                  to reduce climate change impacts in the context of the City’s long-range land use and
state could still
                  transportation planning.
see an overall
reduction in the
total amount of
GHGs. The
framework of AB
32, therefore,
requires
development to
be more GHG
efficient.
                                                         SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                               22

GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
FUTURE REGULATIONS
Future regulations would have the effect of reducing GHG emissions associated with
General Plan implementation.6 If mobile-source emissions regulations are implemented,
this would reduce emissions associated with the General Plan, along with mobile sources
throughout California. Other regulatory measures identified under the Scoping Plan could
reduce emissions associated with the General Plan (as compared with what is estimated
in the General Plan EIR). The effect of future regulations should be taken into account
through implementation of this program. Gridley’s GHG reduction standard (currently
24% from projected emissions by 2020) may need to be revised occasionally as new
legislation or regulations become effective.
GENERAL PLAN POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES
Policies included in other Elements of the 2030 General Plan have GHG-reducing effects.
Policies in the Circulation, Land Use, Conservation and Open Space, Public Utilities,
Services, and Facilities, and Community Character Elements are designed to reduce GHG
emissions. Please see the General Plan Appendix B for a listing of Gridley General Plan
policies and implementation strategies that would have GHG reduction benefits. The
GHG benefits of these policies are estimated at a programmatic level in the General Plan
EIR.
With emerging transportation modeling tools, it may become necessary to re-analyze the
full benefits of Gridley’s General Plan policies relative to the GHG reduction standard.7
The City may add policies or implementation strategies to the General Plan or specific
plans to achieve further GHG reduction benefit, compared to that which was estimated in
the 2030 General Plan EIR.
6
    For example, the California Air Resources Board AB 32 Scoping Plan identifies expected
    GHG emissions reductions from regulations, such as those that would reduce emissions from
    vehicles (e.g., AB 1493, Executive Order S-1-07 [i.e., the Low Carbon Fuel Standard]) and
    utilities (e.g., SB 107).
7
    The General Plan and EIR used the Butte County Association of Governments (BCAG)
    Regional Travel Demand Forecasting Model. To provide forecasts for the 2030 General Plan,
    the traffic modified the model’s roadway link network and disaggregated the model’s Traffic
    Analysis Zones (TAZ’s) then existing streets in Gridley were added to the model. The BCAG
    model is not an “activity based” model and does not provide forecasts for non-vehicular trip
    mode shares. A post-processor was not available to allow transportation modeling to be
    sensitive to the travel demand-reducing elements of the 2030 General Plan (density, land use
    mix, community design, roadway connectivity, quality of pedestrian/bicycle system, etc).
    Regional land use-transportation studies suggest that traditional transportation models may
    overestimate travel demand where travel demand measures are present, including land use and
    transportation planning strategies, urban design concepts, and related measures. For more
    information, please refer to Bartholomew and Ewing, “Land Use-Transportation Scenarios and
    Future Vehicle Travel and Land Consumption,” Journal of the American Planning
    Association, Volume 75, No. 1, Winter 2009.
                                          SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                 23

                                                             GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                                                             Safety Element
GHG REDUCTION IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES, PLANS, AND
PROJECTS
In addition to policies included in the General Plan and future regulations, additional
measures may be necessary to achieve the City’s goal of local consistency with AB 32.
The City will identify additional plans, policies, projects, mitigation measures, and
regulations that are necessary to reduce GHG emissions and achieve Gridley’s GHG
reduction standard. The City will consider regulatory changes, infrastructure investment
strategies, incentives, contributions to (or local use of) carbon off-set programs, and other
measures, as appropriate. Each additional program should be enforceable, include a
timeline, describe financing mechanisms, and assign responsibility to relevant agencies
and departments.
Since transportation is the largest sector contributing to GHG emissions both locally and
at the statewide level, land use/transportation projects that manage travel demand are
crucial to achieving AB 32 objectives. The City will consider planning and development
projects that increase housing/employment density, place homes in closer proximity with
destinations, increase accessibility to transit, or otherwise decrease vehicle miles traveled
(per household, per capita, per job). The City will consider actions that are consistent
with, and implement the General Plan, such as:
     9   Downtown infill and redevelopment plans and projects;
     9   Highway 99 corridor infill and redevelopment plans and projects;
     9   Affordable housing projects or other higher-density housing and mixed-use
         projects near existing or planned future transit stops;
     9   Bicycle and pedestrian master plans and infrastructure projects; and,
     9   Other plans and projects consistent with the General Plan that would promote
         GHG efficiency.
The City could consider financing programs for installation and use of renewable energy
infrastructure in new and/or existing development, green building codes to further
increase energy efficiency in new buildings, incentive programs to assist existing
property owners in making energy efficiency upgrades, travel demand management
programs for new nonresidential projects, and other mechanisms that would reduce GHG
emissions at General Plan buildout.
                                       SAFETY ELEMENT
                                               24

GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
Safety Element
MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE OF THE GHG REDUCTION
PROGRAM
The City will identify periodic check-in points for monitoring the effectiveness of
policies, programs, and other measures relative to the GHG emission reduction target.
The first such check-in year shall be no later than 2015.
During check-in points, the City will modify policies and measures, as necessary, to
achieve the goals of this implementation strategy (i.e., 24% reduction relative to
projected GHG emissions identified in the General Plan EIR). The City will monitor
changes in the regulatory and technological environments, as well as grant and other
funding programs that could be used to fund different components of this implementation
strategy. The City will monitor relevant local, regional, state, and federal legislation
related to GHG emissions, land use planning, and environmental review, and will make
changes to its GHG reduction strategy accordingly. The City may need to revise its
emissions reduction target as new information becomes available as a result of a
Sustainable Communities Strategy, Alternative Planning Strategy, or other guidance from
the State of California or the Regional Transportation Planning process outlined in Senate
Bill 375 (signed September 2008).8
FUNDING FOR GHG REDUCTION PROGRAM AND FOR
IMPLEMENTATION PROJECTS
Local governments, such as Gridley, will rely on state funding for GHG-efficient
transportation systems and other local applications of the state’s GHG reduction strategy.
Local governments will rely on state funding to improve existing buildings and provide
more energy- and GHG-efficient sources of electricity. Gridley and other local
governments and regional planning agencies will also rely on the state for funding of
more sophisticated transportation modeling that is sensitive to GHG-efficient land use,
urban design, and transportation planning strategies.
As noted above, the City will pursue a broad range of planning and infrastructure
projects. To support these efforts, the City will proactively track, and apply for grants
from the State Department of Housing and Community Development, ARB, BCAG,
Caltrans, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and other organizations that may offer
greenhouse-gas-related grant programs.
8
  SB 375 aligns regional transportation planning efforts, regional GHG reduction targets, and land
  use and housing allocation. SB 375 requires Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) to
  adopt a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) or Alternative Planning Strategy (APS), which
  will prescribe land use allocation in that MPO’s Regional Transportation Plan (RTP). ARB, in
  consultation with MPOs, will provide each affected region with reduction targets for GHGs
  emitted by passenger cars and light trucks.
                                          SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                25

                           GENERAL PLAN POLICY DOCUMENT
                                         Safety Element
This page intentionally blank.
      SAFETY ELEMENT
              26
