CORCORAN GENERAL PLAN 2025
     Policies Statement
            Adopted March 19, 2007

          CITY OF CORCORAN
                General Plan 2025
                 Policies Statement
           City Council               Planning Commission
         Dick Haile, Mayor           Dennis Tristao, Chairman
       Raymond Lerma, Vice-            Jesse Venegas, Vice-
               Mayor                         Chairman
           Toni Baltierra                   Al Kessler
          Jim Wadsworth                    David Cortez
          Larry Hanshew                    Frank Stiger
                                          Richard Garcia
                                         Jackson Weaver
                      Advisory Committee
          Mark Cartwright                   Dick Haile
             Jay Salyer                  Raymond Lerma
          Michael Boyett                  Dennis Tristao
          Ron Shanoian                     Frank Stiger
            Erik Hansen                    Evan Raynor
          Larry Hanshew                     Rich Merlo
             Pat Felder                    Susan Minor
                          City of Corcoran
                          1033 Chittenden
                     Corcoran, California 93212
                           (559) 992-2151
                           Prepared by:
                       James S. Alcorn, AICP
                     5110 West Cypress Avenue
                      Visalia, California 93278
                           (559) 733-0440
                    Adopted March 19, 2007
050350

TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                           Page
Introduction .................................................................................. I-1
Chapter 1.0 Land Use Element ..................................................1-1
Chapter 2.0 Circulation Element ................................................2-1
Chapter 3.0 - Noise Element ......................................................3-1
Chapter 4.0 - Safety Element .....................................................4-1
Chapter 5.0 - Open Space, Conservation
and Recreation Element .............................................................5-1
Chapter 6.0 - Air Quality Element ...............................................6-1
Chapter 7.0 - Community Design Element .................................7-1
Chapter 8.0 - Public Services and
Facilities Element .......................................................................8-1
Chapter 9.0 - Housing Element (reformat only) ..........................9-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                      Page
List of Figures
2-1 Overall Conceptual Circulation Plan .................................... 2-6
2-2 Street Standards .................................................................. 2-9
2-3 Truck Routes ...................................................................... 2-15
List of Tables
2-1 Permitted Trafﬁc Calming Measures .................................... 2-7
Land Use and Circulation Map
Map Pocket (inside back cover)

INTRODUCTIO

                                                                         Introduction
INTRODUCTION
California state law requires each city and county to adopt a General Plan “for the physical
development of the county or city, and any land outside its boundaries which bears relation to its
planning” (§65300). The California Supreme Court has called the General Plan the “constitution
for future development.” Corcoran’s General Plan expresses the community’s development
goals and embodies public policy relative to the distribution of future land uses, both public and
private. State law specifies that each General Plan address seven issue areas (“elements”): land
use, circulation, open space, conservation, housing, safety and noise. Additional elements may
be added as a local option.
The Corcoran General Plan provides comprehensive planning for the future. It encompasses
what the City is now, what it intends to be, and provides the overall framework of how to
achieve this future condition. Estimates are made about future population, household types, and
employment, so that plans for land use, circulation and public facilities can be made to meet
future needs. The General Plan represents an agreement on the fundamental values and a vision
that is shared by the residents and the business community of Corcoran and the surrounding area
of interest. Its purpose is to provide decision makers and City staff with direction for
confronting present issues, as an aid in coordinating planning issues with other governmental
agencies, and for navigating the future.
    The Land Use Element provides the central policy context on which to base all land use
    decision making in Corcoran. It is through the implementation of the goals, objectives, and
    policies that the future land use pattern of Corcoran will continue to be shaped.
    The Housing Element looks at the current and future need for housing units, the capacity in
    the City for additional units, the types of households that will need some form of assistance
    or special housing, and ways to perpetuate existing housing. Corcoran’s Housing Element
    was adopted in 2004 with the other incorporated cities in Kings County.
    Transportation routes, design standards for streets, and current and future traffic levels on
    City streets are among the issues covered in the Circulation Element of the General Plan.
General Plan 2025                                                             Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  I-1

                                                                                       Introduction
    Conservation issues include strategies for an orderly transition from agriculture to urban
    uses, groundwater recharge, conservation of ground water resources, and commitment to
    conservation of agricultural lands through efficient development.
    Open space and recreation issues include discussion of parks and recreation resources,
    targeted growth of these facilities, and targeting open space to function in a multi-use
    capacity.
    Existing and future noise from traffic, rail and other activities are issues discussed in the
    Noise Element.
    The Safety Element of the General Plan analyzes conditions in the City and surrounding area
    that may be hazardous to those who live and work there, such as flood inundation, fire and
    hazardous materials.
Each of these issue areas have goals, objectives, and policies designed to provide a safe and
pleasant environment in the future. Corcoran’s General Plan contains not only the seven
mandatory elements required by state law, but also several optional elements. These include:
Public Services and Facilities, Community Design, and Air Quality. Each General Plan chapter
covers an aspect of the City’s growth and development. Components of each section are
interrelated and therefore must be consistent with each other. Taken together, they provide the
guidance for all aspects of planning for the future.
Having adopted the General Plan, the City assumes the responsibility to implement it, to report
on its continuous status, and to communicate with citizens and other agencies regarding the
Plan’s policies.
Organization of the General Plan
This General Plan is an update, expansion and reorganization of the 1997 General Plan.
Significant changes to the 1997 General Plan have occurred; including expanding the boundaries
of the Sphere of Influence (SOI) to Nevada Avenue to the north and to the Tulare County
boundary to the east, an updated circulation system; and a new Planning Area beyond the SOI.
The Planning Area encompasses the City limits and SOI, and unincorporated territory bearing a
relation to the City’s planning.
The Corcoran General Plan consists of three separate documents – a General Plan Background
Report, the General Plan Policies Statement, and the Environmental Impact Report (EIR) and
technical appendices. The General Plan Policies document contains eight (8) chapters. The
focus of each element consists of goals, objectives and policies associated with the major issue
areas. Some of the elements contain related background information required by State law. The
EIR presents three alternatives and documents how the proposed plan will impact the
environment as compared to the alternative plans. The technical appendices contain technical
reports and background information which provide a more detailed analysis.
General Plan 2025                                                          Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 I-2

                                                                                        Introduction
Context
The Corcoran General Plan Planning Area is located within southeast Kings County,
approximately 17 miles south of Hanford and 14 miles southwest of Tulare. The Corcoran
General Plan covers a 26.5 square mile Planning Area which encompasses the City of Corcoran
and unincorporated Kings County, inclusive of the City’s SOI. All lands outside of the City’s
boundary are regulated by the Kings County General Plan and zoning designations. However,
State law requires that cities plan for areas outside of their immediate jurisdiction, if the areas
have a direct relationship to planning needs. The SOI also establishes the area in which
annexations may be permitted.
The Corcoran Planning Area consists of three distinct geographical areas: The City, which
represents the incorporated City within the City limit boundaries; the SOI which is slightly larger
than the City’s previous SOI; and the Planning Area, which includes unincorporated Kings
County lands outside of the City’s SOI.
Intent of the Plan
This General Plan was developed through a cooperative effort involving the City Council and
Planning Commission, City staff and their consultants, a General Plan Advisory Committee, and
interested citizens who participated in a “visioning workshop.” The General Plan Update
process disclosed that expansion of employment, recreation and industrial opportunities and
more higher-end housing are concerns which have been instrumental in shaping the plan.
The Planning Commission and City Council adopted Planning Principles on October 26, 2005
which helped to guide the development of the General Plan and asked that a General Plan
Advisory Committee (GPAC) review the policies appropriate to implement these principles and
to develop a land use plan. The Planning Principles are as follows:
    Corcoran’s friendly, small town atmosphere should be preserved by ensuring diverse,
    appropriate scale retail services; citizen participation in decision making; quality of public
    schools and adequacy of public services.
    Additional services and facilities should be planned so that Corcoran provides a full range of
    medical, office, retail, convenience and entertainment services that are needed by residents.
    The role of the downtown as a focal point for the community should be preserved. Adequate
    expansion area should be planned so that it will grow in proportion to the rest of the
    community. Sites for more retail, entertainment, specialty stores and medical services should
    be identified.
    The commercial opportunities afforded by Highways 43 and 137 should be capitalized on.
    Development in the community should be compact and contiguous to existing developed
    areas. New development should “square off” existing developed areas.
General Plan 2025                                                            Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  I-3

                                                                                         Introduction
    The City’s Sphere of Influence and growth policies should ensure that the community is
    physically distinct from others and contains an agricultural buffer area.
    Traffic conflicts should be resolved, including connectivity between neighborhoods, access
    to industrial areas, critical intersections and railroad crossings. Growth should be allocated
    with accessibility constraints in mind.
    Local streets and minor collector streets should be used to provide connectivity between
    neighborhoods while limiting cross-town trips through neighborhoods. Collector and local
    roads should be designed to provide good, safe connectivity between neighborhoods, services
    and facilities.
    The major gateways into Corcoran should be aesthetic and inviting to both travelers and
    residents. This shall be accomplished with appropriate signage, landscaping and general
    clean-up of the area.
Administering the General Plan Program
Once adopted, the General Plan does not remain static. State law provides direction on how
cities can maintain the plan as a contemporary policy guide. Government Code section 65400
[b] directs the Community Development Department to report annually to the City Council on
the status of the plan and progress in its implementation.
Over time it may be necessary to re-evaluate the goals, objectives and polices and modify them
due to changes in the environment, regional considerations, and the economy. Up to four general
plan amendments per year for each mandatory element are permitted by State law. It is required
that any decision on a general plan amendment be supported by findings of fact.
General Plan Requirements
While they allow considerable flexibility, state planning laws do establish some requirements for
the issues that general plans must address. The California Government Code establishes both the
content of general plans and rules for their adoption and subsequent amendment. Together, state
law and judicial decisions establish three overall guidelines for general plans.
    The General Plan must be comprehensive. This requirement has two aspects. First, the
    General Plan must be geographically comprehensive. That is, it must apply throughout the
    entire incorporated area and it should include other areas that the City determines are relevant
    to its planning. Second, the General Plan must address the full range of issues that affects the
    City’s physical development.
    The General Plan must be internally consistent. This requirement means that the General
    Plan must fully integrate its separate parts and relate them to each other without conflict.
    The internal consistency requirement has five dimensions: equal status among elements,
General Plan 2025                                                             Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                   I-4

                                                                                        Introduction
    consistency between elements, consistency within elements, area plan consistency and text
    and diagram consistency.
    The General Plan must be long-range. Since the General Plan affects the welfare of
    current and future generations, state law requires that the plan take a long-term perspective
    (§65300). The General Plan projects conditions and needs into the future as a basis for
    determining objectives. It also establishes long-term policies for day-to-day decision-making
    based upon those objectives.
General Plan 2025                                                           Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  I-5


      CHAPTER 1.0
LAND USE ELEMENT

                                                          Land Use Element
1.0      LAND USE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Land Use Element is a guide to future land use within Corcoran and affects many of the
issues addressed in the other General Plan elements. The Land Use Element identifies the type
and location of future land uses within the City. The specific land uses and their location within
the community in turn affect the remaining General Plan elements. For example, the location and
type of land uses outlined in the Land Use Element affect the circulation system that is identified
in the Circulation Element, and the land uses identified in the Land Use Element also reflect the
community’s goals for its future form and character, as outlined in the Community Design
Element. In addition to land uses, the Land Use Element also addresses how growth will occur,
with special attention given to public services and facilities and economic development.
PURPOSE OF THE LAND USE ELEMENT
As a city, state law requires that Corcoran prepare and adopt a General Plan as a tool to manage
growth and development. The Land Use Element is one of the seven mandatory elements of the
General Plan.
The purpose of the Land Use Element is to describe present and planned land uses and their
relationship to the community’s long-range goals for the future. The Land Use Element identifies
the proposed general distribution, location, and extent of land uses such as residential,
commercial, industrial, and public/quasi public. The element consists of text and a map
(reference map pocket) that outline the future land uses within the City and how these uses are
integrated with the other General Plan elements and policies. The Land Use Map is a particularly
important feature of the element since it shows the location, and types of development within the
City. The element also describes the intensity or density of development planned for the
community. The general location of future growth is also defined in the element.
The Land Use Element of the Corcoran General Plan represents the City’s desire for long-range
changes and enhancements of land uses. Finally, the goals, objectives and policies contained in
this element establish the framework for future land use planning and decision making in
Corcoran.
General Plan                                                                Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                1-1

                                                                                Land Use Element
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE LAND USE ELEMENT
The Land Use Element complies with the requirements of the General Plan Land Use Element
mandated in Government Code Section 65302(a). The element is comprised of five sections: the
Introduction, Purpose of the Land Use Element, Scope and Content of the Land Use Element,
Goals, Objectives, and Policies and Standards, and Land Use Map. In the Goals, Objectives, and
Policies section, major land use issues are identified and related goals and policies are
established to address these issues. The goals, which are overall statements of community
desires, are comprised of broad statements of purpose and direction. Policies serve as guides for
reviewing development proposals, planning facilities to accommodate anticipated growth, and
accomplishing community economic development strategies. To achieve the goals, objectives
and policies, a logical, organized land use pattern is established with standards for future
community development. The Land Use Map graphically identifies the planned land uses within
Corcoran.
GOAL 1:
Preserve and enhance Corcoran’s unique character and achieve an optimal balance of residential,
commercial, industrial, and open space land uses.
Community Identity
OBJECTIVES
A. Strive to keep Corcoran separate and distinct from
    nearby communities.
B. Maintain and enhance Corcoran’s physical diversity,
    visual qualities and small-town characteristics.
C. Maintain the core area (Whitley Avenue from Letts
    to Otis) as the City’s geographic center.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    1.1. The City will have design review standards developed for structures, landscaping and
           related development to facilitate compatibility with surrounding uses and the overall
           character of the community.
    1.2. Gateways to Corcoran and the downtown shall be designated and identified by well-
           designed, landscaped entrances to enhance access corridors. Land uses in the vicinity
           of Gateways should be of high quality design which reflects favorably on the image of
           the community.
    1.3. Emphasize pedestrian amenities in the downtown area including landscaped open space
           areas, street furniture, lighting and signage.
General Plan                                                              Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                              1-2

                                                                                 Land Use Element
    1.4. Further develop existing gateways and at some future time develop scenic entryways
           (gateways) and roadway corridors into the City through special setback and landscape
           standards, entry signage, open space and park development, and/or land use
           designations. These corridors shall also have enhanced landscape standards. Gateways
           and entryways to be considered should include:
           Current Gateways:
            North:                                South:
            SR43/Sante Fe                         SR43/Whitley
           Future Gateways:
            North:                                South:
            SR43/Nevada Avenue                    SR43/Plymouth
            East:                                 West:
            SR 137/SR43                           Whitley Avenue/7th Avenue
Residential Land Use
OBJECTIVES
A. Ensure adequate land area is available for
    future housing needs.
B. Provide new residential areas that offer a
    variety of housing densities, types, sizes,
    costs and locations to meet projected demand
    throughout the community.
C. The zoning map identifies locations for
    Multi-Family developments, which are
    accessible      to    transportation    routes,
    commercial areas, schools, and recreation facilities.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    1.5. The City shall encourage the development of middle and upper price range housing to
           increase housing opportunities for all economic segments of the community.
General Plan                                                                Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                               1-3
                                                                                      Land Use Element
    1.6. Give priority consideration to infill development of vacant and underutilized land
           within the City limits through expedited permit processing. Consideration shall be
           given to financially assisting such development through special infrastructure financing
           programs.
    1.7. Consider annexations which are consistent with the extension of public services and
           facilities and other City policies and plans. The City shall maintain at least a 10-year
           supply of zoned land in the City for all residential land use types, and a minimum five-
           year supply of “ready to go” zoned land served by infrastructure. Designate an
           adequate amount of residential land in the General Plan for a 30-year supply of single-
           family and multifamily land uses.
    1.8. Encourage the use of site development techniques which ensure that a good mix of
           housing types is provided through such methods as inclusion of duplexes on corner lots
           in low-density areas where they can be made to be compatible with surrounding
           development.
   1.9.    Plan and coordinate residential development in close proximity to planned urban
           facilities and services such as schools, parks, sanitary sewer, water, storm drainage,
           circulation network, transportation facilities and commercial centers.
   1.10. Promote comprehensively planned and high quality building and site design for multi-
           family developments with the following criteria:
               Exterior Elevations-Use design features such as offsets, balconies, projections,
               landscaping or similar elements to preclude large expanses of uninterrupted
               building surfaces.
               Building, Parking, Walkway Separation-Provide privacy, light, air, and access to
               dwellings within the development by ensuring adequate distances among buildings,
               parking lots, driveways, and walkways.
               Open Space, Landscaping, and Screening-Designate private open space exclusive of
               required setbacks, right-of-way, and easements within each development for the use
               of residents. Open space, landscaping and screening should provide outdoor space
               for the residents and mitigate negative impacts related to land use compatibility
               between the development and adjacent land uses, noise, lighting, parking (screening
               and shading), on-site traffic circulation, and preservation of natural features.
               Energy Efficiency-Encourage the following measures: 1) appropriate landscaping
               materials to provide shade in the summer and protection from the weather in winter;
               2) eaves, canopies, awnings, along south and west elevations; 3) secured bicycle
               storage areas with lock-up capabilities.
   1.11. Encourage the distribution of low, moderate, and above moderate income housing
           throughout the community.
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                   1-4

                                                                                     Land Use Element
   1.12. Encourage development of housing for seniors and other special populations (i.e.,
           developmentally disabled and physically handicapped). Locational criteria for these
           development proposals, at a minimum, should include proximity to health care,
           recreation/cultural, and/or commercial facilities; and, aesthetic quality of area,
           including noise impact compatibility, and open space.
   1.13. In order to avoid over concentration of multifamily dwelling units, they should be
           spread throughout the community, integrated as part of overall neighborhood planning,
           and be in concentrations consistent with Policy 1.21.
   1.14. Encourage planned unit developments (PD) according to the following criteria:
               For mixed-use developments which include a Convenience Center or a
               Neighborhood Center, the minimum site area shall be 20 acres. Sites less than 20
               acres may be considered upon recommendation of the Planning Commission.
               Common usable open space, exclusive of right-of-way and required setbacks, shall
               be encouraged to the greatest extent possible for recreation and open space
               purposes.
               Existing natural features shall be preserved and enhanced consistent with the
               Conservation, Open Space, Parks and Recreation Element.
               Density shall not exceed the underlying zoning provisions. Density increases may
               be granted in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance such as density bonuses or for
               infill projects, or for affordable housing.
   1.15. For residential areas adjacent to roadways and other noise-sources. (i.e., railroads,
           airport, industry) which require setbacks and/or special soundproofing to reduce
           negative noise-related impacts, as identified in the Noise Element. Mitigation measures
           shall include the following:
               The performance standards of the City’s Noise Element.
               Noise mitigation “packages” including the use of setbacks to ensure that the exterior
               noise levels at the closest building façade do not exceed 65 dB Ldn and interior
               noise exposure of 45 dB Ldn or below.
               For multi-family development, site design techniques shall be used to reduce the
               need for supplemental noise mitigation requirements. Also, investigate the
               feasibility of requiring greater setbacks for multi-family residential development
               along arterials and collectors as an alternative to walls and fences.
   1.16. Encourage design measures to buffer residential development from non-residential land
           uses. These measures should, at a minimum, include setbacks; roadways; community
           waterways; landscaping; and landforms such as berming, fences, and walls.
General Plan                                                                    Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                   1-5

                                                                                    Land Use Element
   1.17. Encourage higher density residential development near employment centers,
           commercial development and parks.
   1.18. Provide for the continued viability of existing single-family areas in the downtown of
           the community and encourage medium and high-density residential development in the
           central business district where such uses do not conflict with existing neighborhoods.
   1.19. Require special site development standards for proposed non-residential or more
           intensive land uses adjacent to established residential areas to minimize negative
           impacts on abutting properties.
   1.20. Very Low Density Residential areas (Estate Residential) shall be designed to provide
           opportunities for large lot residential dwellings, up to 2 units per acre. One half-acre
           lot shall be allowed in this zone through the approval of a conditional use permit if the
           City determines that the size or shape of the site limits the development of a standard
           size subdivision or the approval of 1/2-acre parcels would facilitate infill development.
           Estate Residential development (6 persons per acre - up to 2 dwelling units per gross
           acre) shall be directed to areas where:
             All urban services (i.e. storm drainage, schools, sidewalks, lighting) may not be
             required;
             Adjacent to long-term agricultural areas where more intensive future urban
             development is unlikely because of public safety conflicts such as the airport
             protection area;
             Boundaries between dissimilar land uses (i.e., industrial to residential and agriculture
             to residential) exist;
             The viability of large-scale agriculture may ultimately be threatened due to the
             encroachment of non-agricultural uses, and which do not warrant designation to a
             higher density.
             Subject to the following minimum conditions:
             a. Developments will not be permitted to have farm animals.
             b. Full road, sewer, and water improvements shall be installed.
             c. Development setbacks and buffering will ensure that there will be no conflicts
                 with adjacent rural residential uses.
   1.21. The low density residential category (up to 20 persons per acre – 4.5 to 7.5 dwelling
           units per net acre) provides for a land use pattern of predominantly single-family
           development as permitted in the R-1 district. This designation also provides for
           innovation designs which utilize clustering, duplexes or half-plexes on corner lots, zero
           lot line, or planned development features. Lot sized generally range from 4,500 –
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  1-6

                                                                                    Land Use Element
           7,500 square feet. Developments of up to 10 units per acre are permitted and
           encouraged for infill parcels, in specific plan or master plan areas, and where it will
           address unmet housing needs.
   1.22. Promote Medium Density Residential development (up to 40 persons per acre - 10 to
           15 dwelling units per net acre) which typically consists of duplex, triplex and four-plex
           development for in-fill or new development at Local/Collector and/or
           Collector/Collector intersections to a maximum of 50 units in one contiguous
           development on sites ranging from 3.5 to 5 acres. Medium Density Residential
           developments on sites less than 3.5 acres at Arterial/Collector intersections may also be
           considered. Medium density residential developments may also be used in infill areas
           where they can be made to be consistent with adjacent properties through the Planned
           Development (PD) process and contract zoning.
   1.23. Locate High Density Residential development (up to 58 persons per acre - 15 to 29
           dwelling units per net acre) throughout the City at Arterial and Collector locations
           according to the following criteria:
               Arterial intersections - 100-unit maximum on sites ranging from 3.5 to 5 acres.
               Arterial/collector intersections - 75-unit maximum on sites ranging from 2 to 5
               acres.
               Mid-block arterials - 50-unit maximum on sites ranging from 1 to 3 acres.
               Downtown - at in-fill locations, which do not jeopardize the viability of existing
               single-family areas.
               High-density residential developments may also be used in in-fill areas where they
               can be made to be consistent with adjacent properties through the PD process and
               conditional zoning. Consistency and compatibility with adjacent properties shall be
               evaluated based on issues including but not limited to: adjacent zoning, adjacent
               land use, proposed building mass, and the adequacy of public facilities available to
               the site.
               Densities in excess of 20 units/acre will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis and
               may be approved through the PD process where measurable community benefit is
               demonstrated and where infrastructure including mass transit facilities is available
               (or can be made available) to accommodate impacts of increased density.
   1.24. The City shall work with the Redevelopment Agency in implementing the
           Redevelopment Plan, especially in terms of downtown parking improvements,
           infrastructure improvements, street improvements, and business recruitment.
   1.25. Substandard structures outside the City limits should be considered for redevelopment
           and developed as provided in the Redevelopment Plan.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 1-7
                                                                                   Land Use Element
   1.26. The City shall encourage redevelopment of underutilized and vacant structures and
           property within the City limits by both private and public entities.
Commercial Land Use
OBJECTIVES
A. Ensure the continued viability of Corcoran’s existing commercial areas.
B. Designate appropriate and sufficient commercial land for Corcoran’s needs to the year 2025
    and beyond with appropriate phasing.
C. Investigate and implement methods of accelerating the project review process for
    commercial and industrial development proposals which generate employment opportunities.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   1.27. Ensure that future commercial development is concentrated in shopping districts and
           pedestrian/transportation nodes to discourage expansion of new strip commercial
           development in inappropriate areas.
   1.28. It shall be a priority of the City to develop commercial land on the north and south
           sides of the community along Whitley Avenue.
   1.29. In order to accommodate modern shopping center formats, the depth of new
           commercial areas shall be at least 500 feet. The depth of existing commercial
           development along Whitley Avenue and other commercial areas may be extended on a
           case-by-case basis if the extension increases the feasibility of commercial development
           and the proposed action will not create land use conflicts or reduce viability of adjacent
           residential properties.
   1.30. Encourage Convenience Commercial development in residential areas that serve the
           needs of the area and include site development standards which minimize negative
           impacts on adjacent properties.
   1.31. Development standards for the interface between commercial or office uses and
           residential uses shall be as follows:
               A landscaped setback of at least ten feet wide containing deciduous and evergreen
               trees shall be planted and maintained along the property line between commercial or
               office uses and residential properties that have a common property line.
               A masonry wall eight feet in height shall be erected along the property line where
               commercial and office uses have a common property line with residentially
               designated properties.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  1-8

                                                                                      Land Use Element
               A masonry wall three and one-half feet in height or landscape berm shall be erected
               along the front setback line, parallel to, and ten feet from the local streets abutting
               planned residential uses.
               All commercial loading and storage areas shall be screened from view of adjoining
               residential property by a combination of landscape planting and a masonry wall.
               Loading areas shall be enclosed and be located so that there are no noise impacts to
               adjacent residential properties. All storage shall be within an enclosed structure.
               Roof-mounted and detached mechanical equipment shall be acoustically baffled to
               prevent noise from the equipment from exceeding 55dB (A) measured at the nearest
               residential property line.
   1.32. In order to encourage the integration of Neighborhood Commercial uses into
           neighborhoods, designs should de-emphasize the usage of walls as buffers where they
           create barriers to pedestrian access. Continuous block walls shall be discouraged,
           while pedestrian access points, offsets, landscaping pockets and openings shall be
           encouraged no less than every 500 feet.
   1.33. In order to promote non-vehicular modes of transportation, and to limit the unnecessary
           usage of Collectors and Arterials for vehicular access, commercial development shall
           provide direct pedestrian and vehicular access to adjoining residential areas through
           Minor Collectors, Local Streets and/or through pedestrian access points.
   1.34. Designate Convenience Centers for personal and convenience goods and services for
           nearby residential areas. Such centers may be in new, in-fill, and/or consolidated
           existing strip commercial developments and at a scale which is compatible with
           surrounding residences, at Collector and Arterial intersections. Special site design
           standards shall be imposed on these facilities including high quality architecture,
           landscaping, signage and lighting to ensure that they are aesthetically pleasing.
           Convenience Centers may be approved by a planned development permit on the corner
           of arterial/collector intersections on sites of three acres or less, and at least at one-half
           mile away from neighborhood shopping centers. Where possible, such centers are to be
           developed as part of specific plans or master plans.
   1.35. Designate Neighborhood Centers for shopping centers with a major grocery store as an
           anchor and supporting businesses which serve one square mile residential area.
           Location shall be at one corner of arterial/arterial or arterial/collector intersections on
           sites of up to 15 acres in area. Centers shall be located no closer than approximately
           one mile from other General Plan-designated neighborhood centers, from existing
           Grocery stores, or from General Plan-designated community centers.
           The center’s scale and site design must be compatible with the surrounding residential
           area with an emphasis on access, circulation, parking, signage, noise attenuation, and
           landscaping. Where possible, these facilities should be planned and integrated into
           neighborhoods as part of a specific plan or master plan.
General Plan                                                                     Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                     1-9

                                                                                   Land Use Element
   1.36. Preserve and enhance the Central Business District (CBD) as the community’s historic
           services center. Promote a mix of retail commercial, specialty retail, professional/
           administrative office, personal services, professional services, public and community
           facilities and urban residential uses.
   1.37. Visitor-serving commercial areas are to be promoted along the Whitley Avenue
           corridor for tourists and travelers uses. Development in these areas shall be in
           compliance with the goals, policies and development standards of the Community
           Design Element to promote the Whitley Avenue corridor as a scenic entrance to the
           community.
   1.38. Encourage Historic Preservation in the Business Façade Program to preserve distinctive
           structures and areas proposed for conversion in the Central Business District where
           adequate parking can be provided.
Industrial Land Use
OBJECTIVE
A. Promote industrial sites which are functional, have adequate public services, and have access
    to major streets and railroads.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   1.39. Promote a mix of industrial uses that provide the City with a sound, diverse industrial
           base.
   1.40. Provide adequate land for a wide range of industrial uses. Heavy industrial uses
           (warehousing) and higher intensity uses not compatible with residential development
           should be located in the industrial area east of SR43 and south of Waukena Avenue and
           light industrial uses should be located in the industrial area north of Whitley Avenue
           between the Sweet Canal and SR43. In order to increase the capture rate of industries in
           the community, such areas should be master planned to expedite processing of
           applications, and aggressively marketed to targeted industries.
   1.41. Industrial development should not create significant off-site circulation, noise, dust,
           odor, visual, and hazardous materials impacts that cannot be adequately mitigated.
   1.42. Have a specific plan prepared for the industrial area to provide for an adequate mix of
           parcel sizes, identification of needed infrastructure, transportation routes and
           development of guidelines for future annexations.
   1.43. In order to achieve a high-quality natural environment, it shall be the policy of the City
           to encourage industries which demonstrate minimum air and water quality impacts and
           to discourage air and water quality impacts which cannot be offset.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                               1-10

                                                                                   Land Use Element
   1.44. The City of Corcoran will contact Tulare County to explore the possibility of
           expanding Corcoran’s City limits into the County for viable industrial land near SR 43
           and the railroad.
   1.45. New school sites shall be located at least 1,000 feet from the outer boundary of an
           existing industrial property or industrial zoned property.
Public and Quasi-Public Land Use
A. Provide sites for adequate public facilities to serve projected growth.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   1.46. Update the water, wastewater and storm drainage master plans, and any other specific
           or master plans related to infrastructure development on a periodic basis.
   1.47. Monitor the need for law enforcement, fire and other emergency services personnel as
           the City grows.
   1.48. Continue to implement a recycling and source reduction program to promote recycling.
   1.49. Continue to plan and provide efficient public safety and leisure/cultural facilities and
           services for the community.
   1.50. In considering development proposals which have the potential to affect school
           capacity, the City will continue to refer such proposals to the Corcoran Joint Unified
           School District for review and comment to ensure that adequate school facilities are
           implemented to serve proposed developments. Developers should mitigate impacts to
           schools in accordance School District plans.
Institutional Land Use
OBJECTIVES
A. The City shall coordinate the location of
    school sites in the community with the
    school district in an effort to assist the
    school district in providing school facilities
    at the optimum locations and in a timely
    manner.
B. Provide public transportation access and
    recreation opportunities near schools.
C. Promote schools as focal points for
    neighborhood areas and as planning
    elements for new growth areas.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                               1-11

                                                                                      Land Use Element
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   1.51. Coordinate school location and site design with the school district according to the
           following guidelines to ensure that adequate facilities are available:
Elementary Schools
Description: Facilities for 500 to 750 students in grades K through 5.
Location: Interior residential areas at a collector/local intersection. Additional street frontage is
desired for transition area to adjacent residences. Abuts neighborhood park with adjacent
development backing or siding onto school. Maximize pedestrian and bicycle access and on/off
circulation.
Service Area: 1/2-mile radius to serve a population of 5,000 to 8,000.
Site Area: 15 to 20 acres.
Facilities: Approximately 20 classrooms, administration building, library, multi-purpose
building (lunches, recreation, and community meetings), multi-purpose recreation/open space
with hard-court play areas and equipment, off-street parking, bus loading/unloading area, and
bicycle storage area. Security fencing separates buildings from play areas. Public use of play
areas is encouraged.
Middle Schools
Description: Facilities for 700 to 1,000 students in grades 6 through 8.
Location: Residential areas with central location for surrounding elementary schools at
collector/collector or collector/local intersections. Additional local street frontage desired for
transition to adjacent residential areas. Maximize pedestrian and bicycle access and on/off-site
circulation.
Service Area: Approximately six elementary schools.
Site Area: 25 to 30 acres.
Facilities: Approximately 30 classrooms and labs; administrative center, library/media center;
multi-use buildings, (cafeteria, band, chorus, shops, labs); athletic facilities for football, baseball,
track; off-street parking; bus loading/unloading area; and bicycle storage area. Security fencing
separates buildings from athletic fields. Public use of athletic fields is encouraged.
High Schools
Description: Facilities for 1,000 to 1,400 students in grades 9 through 12.
General Plan                                                                    Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                   1-12
                                                                                    Land Use Element
Location: Arterial-collector intersection with additional frontage on two other streets.
Service Area: Coincides with district service boundaries.
Site Area: 50 to 60 acres.
Facilities: Approximately 40 classrooms and labs; library/media center; administration building;
gym; cafeteria; standard outdoor athletic facilities; off-street parking, bus loading/unloading;
bicycle storage area. Security fencing separates buildings from athletic fields/facilities. Public
use of athletic areas is encouraged.
   1.52. Provide adequate locations and planning for at least five elementary, two middle and
           two high schools in the community. A full range of K-12 facilities should be provided
           in the northern and southern areas of town in close proximity to existing and planned
           residential development.
   1.53. Discourage and restrict commercial development that conflicts with school facilities.
   1.54. Restrict development of High Density Residential complexes abutting school sites.
   1.55. Work with the school district and other area schools to develop and administer land use
           planning curriculum.
   1.56. The school district shall coordinate its school location, facility construction and phasing
           with the City’s development guidelines contained in the General Plan and the City’s
           Capital Improvement Program to ensure that school facilities are located in areas where
           there are planned and programmed streets, sewerage, storm drainage systems and other
           necessary infrastructure.
Growth Management
OBJECTIVES
A. Minimize urban sprawl and leap-frog development and provide for an orderly and efficient
     transition from rural to urban land uses.
B. Designate growth areas that can be served by logical infrastructure extensions.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   1.57. First priority shall be given to development of vacant, underdeveloped, and/or
           redevelopable land where urban services are or can be made available. Parcels shall be
           substantially contiguous to existing development.
   1.58. Identify and use natural and man-made edges, such as local roadways, as urban
           development limits for growth phasing lines.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                1-13

                                                                                  Land Use Element
   1.59. Utilize low density and rural residential land uses as a buffer and transition between
           long-term agricultural uses and higher density urban development.
   1.60. Encourage the use of parks and open space to enhance gateways to the City.
   1.61. Establish a Planning Area Boundary around the City consistent with Kings County
           LAFCo’s Guidelines. This area should represent a potential 50-year growth boundary
           with an additional appropriate buffer and/or greenbelt area extending an additional one-
           quarter to one-half mile. This area should include any “areas or communities of
           interest” that may affect the City.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                               1-14

         CHAPTER 2.0
CIRCULATION ELEMENT

                                                         Circulation Element
2.0      CIRCULATION ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
In the City of Corcoran, regional vehicular transportation is provided by State Highway 43 which
runs in a north to south direction on the eastern edge of town. State Highway 137, from the east,
turns into Whitley Avenue and runs through the center of town in an east to west direction.
Regional rail is available through the BN & SF railroad. Corcoran is served by a City transit
system.
PURPOSE OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The Circulation Element guides the continued development and improvement of the circulation
system to support existing and planned development, while the Land Use Element identifies the
City’s planned development pattern. The development of additional land in the future will
increase the demand for local and regional roadway improvements and construction. The
Circulation Element establishes acceptable roadway service levels and identifies improvements
required to maintain the service levels. The use of other modes of transportation such as transit,
walking, and bicycling is promoted to reduce the demand for transportation system
improvements and to improve air quality. The pedestrian and bicycling systems will also be used
to connect the various activities centers identified in the Land Use Element and promote a
pedestrian/bicycle friendly community.
The purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide a safe, efficient, and adequate circulation
system for the City. State planning law requires: “….a circulation element consisting of the
general location for proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other
local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use element plan.” To meet this
purpose, the Circulation Element addresses the circulation improvements needed to provide
adequate capacity for future land uses. The Element establishes a hierarchy of transportation
routes with typical development standards described for each roadway category. Reference the
map pocket for the General Plan Circulation Map.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 2-1

                                                                                 Circulation Element
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The state General Plan Guidelines recommend that the circulation policies and plans should:
    Coordinate the transportation and circulation system with planned land uses;
    Promote the safe and efficient transport of goods and the safe and effective movement of all
    segments of the population;
    Make efficient use of existing transportation facilities; and
    Protect environmental quality and promote the wise and equitable use of economic and
    natural resources.
The Guidelines indicate that the Circulation Element should address all facets of circulation
including streets and highways, transportation corridors, public transit, railroads, bicycle and
pedestrian facilities, and commercial, general, and military airports. The Corcoran Circulation
Element fulfills state requirements with a plan to provide effective circulation facilities
supporting desired community development. Along with circulation, public utilities must be
addressed in the General Plan. Instead of addressing utilities within the Circulation Element, the
Corcoran General Plan contains a Public Services and Facilities Element that discusses the
provision of utilities and public services/facilities.
This element contains goals, objectives, and policies and standards to improve overall circulation
in Corcoran. For vehicular transportation, a hierarchical roadway network is established with
designated roadway types and design standards. The roadway type is linked to anticipated traffic
levels, and acceptable levels of service are established to determine when capacity improvements
are necessary. Because local circulation is linked with the regional system, the element also
focuses on participation in regional programs to alleviate traffic congestion and construct
capacity improvements. Alternative transportation modes are also emphasized in this element to
reduce dependency on the automobile and thereby improve environmental quality.
GOAL
To design and maintain a fully integrated local network that provides for safe and convenient
circulation using a variety of transportation modes.
OBJECTIVES
A. Maintain a roadway level of service (LOS) of C with a peak hour LOS of D or better on
    Local streets, Minor Collectors, Collectors and Arterial streets.
B. Enhance the availability and accessibility of alternative modes of transportation, such as
    walking, bicycling, carpools, buses and rail.
General Plan                                                                Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 2-2
                                                                                    Circulation Element
C. Improve neighborhood livability by ensuring that streets are related to other aspects of the
    community that enhance and contribute to Corcoran’s small town charm, provide safe and
    pleasant conditions for residents, and have adequate emergency access.
D. Design streets that promote safe and pleasant conditions for residents, pedestrians, bicyclists,
    and motorists on neighborhood streets, while preserving access for emergency vehicles,
    buses, and other users.
E. Eliminate truck conflicts with commercial and residential areas in the community.
F. Designate land uses around the public and private airports that are compatible with the
    health, safety, environmental, and economic concerns of the community; and in conjunction
    with the KCALUP.
General Circulation and Street System
    2.1    Periodically evaluate the adequacy of traffic
           impact fees for providing sufficient funding
           for circulation network improvements
           necessitated by planned future growth.
    2.2    Incorporate features such as bus shelters,
           bicycle storage, bicycle racks and park and
           ride lots into the design of public and private
           development projects.
    2.3    Designate a network of bicycle routes providing safe passage throughout the City;
           establish linkages between schools, parks and the designated bikeway.
    2.4    Encourage bicycle storage facilities as a condition of approval for multi-family
           residential development projects containing 10 or more units and for all commercial
           and public development proposals.
    2.5    Provide additional landscaping, including street trees, along existing roadways. Utilize
           reclaimed water where feasible to irrigate roadway landscaping.
    2.6    The City will budget for traffic improvements in the Capital Improvement Program
           each fiscal year.
    2.7    Over-design of streets including streets that are too wide for projected traffic volumes
           shall be avoided to save lives, property and money. Street shall be designed and
           constructed to promote energy efficiency.
    2.8    In the interest of reducing housing production costs and City maintenance costs, street
           widths should be minimized. Where appropriate, private streets and other design
           features, to reduce street construction costs shall be incorporated into new subdivisions.
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                    2-3

                                                                                   Circulation Element
   2.9     Lighting and Landscape Districts and other mechanisms shall be required, when
           needed, for the maintenance and operation of new appurtenances to residential streets.
   2.10    In new residential subdivisions, to the maximum extent possible, Local streets should
           be aligned in an east-west orientation.
   2.11    All new Local streets and Minor Collectors shall have a minimum planting strip of 6
           feet in width. Within the planting strip, the maximum spacing between trees shall be 25
           feet on center.
   2.12    Local residential streets shall be kept at a curb to curb width of 32 - 36 feet and
           provided with shade to prevent excessive heat build-up.
   2.13    Design the street network with multiple connections and relatively direct routes for
           pedestrians, bicyclists as well as motorists.
   2.14    Residential streets shall be designed with sidewalks on both sides. Sidewalks shall be a
           minimum width of six feet to provide enough room for two pedestrians to walk side by
           side. Sidewalks and bike lanes shall be shaded by trees for pedestrian comfort.
   2.15    Provide pedestrians and bicyclists with shortcuts and alternatives to travel along high
           volume streets by designing pedestrian and bicycle pass-through pathways at cul-de-sac
           bulbs adjacent to Arterial roadways.
   2.16    Through-streets and Collectors or Arterials should be no more than over a half-mile
           apart.
   2.17    Short streets, trees, on-street parking, tee intersections, use of terminating vistas and
           traffic calming devices should be used to limit vehicle speed.
   2.18    Use traffic calming measures to keep speeds on local streets down to 25 mph. (See
           Table 2-1)
   2.19    Streets shall be designed in accordance with projected traffic volumes and city-adopted
           level of service standards. Oversized streets shall be discouraged.
   2.20    Connectivity shall be encouraged and provided which permits vehicular and non-
           vehicular circulation within a neighborhood without exclusive reliance on perimeter
           Collectors and Arterials.
   2.21    The right-of-way for the circulation system shall be developed and dedicated to the
           appropriate extent when development or division of property occurs.
   2.22    Street widening and right-of-way acquisition in existing developed areas shall be
           undertaken when required for obvious safety reasons, such as trends towards higher
           accident rates or marked decline in overall levels of service.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                   2-4
                                                                                     Circulation Element
   2.23    Minor Collectors shall be used to provide connectivity within neighborhoods as shown
           in Figure 2-1. These streets shall have offsets, and/or other traffic calming features, in
           conformance with Table 2-1, to discourage through-traffic. They should also be
           designed to avoid four way intersections, when possible.
   2.24    Minor Collector streets shall provide access to traffic generating land uses such as
           schools, hospitals, shopping and recreation areas.
   2.25    Arterials shall be designated to provide cross-town, through-town, and inter-city traffic.
           Frequent drive approaches shall be discouraged, where possible, to facilitate traffic
           flow and reduce potential traffic conflicts and hazards.
   2.26    Direct access (driveways) to individual dwelling units from Arterials shall be
           prohibited. Direct access to Collector streets with projected traffic volumes at full
           build-out in excess of 2,000 average daily trips, shall also be prohibited.
   2.27    Overnight truck (tractor-trailer) parking shall be prohibited in residential areas, or other
           areas that are deemed inappropriate.
   2.28    Traffic calming features may be used in accordance with Table 2-1. Passive traffic
           calming features such as road curvature and width, narrowings, street offsets and other
           built-in features are preferred over roadway obstructions such as speed humps or tables,
           chicanes, barriers, diverters, or traffic islands.
   2.29    Minor Collectors and Local streets shall not carry an unreasonable level of through
           traffic. If it is determined that a Local street or Minor Collector is carrying an
           unacceptable level of through traffic, the City may take appropriate means to reduce
           traffic through creation of one-way traffic flow, installation of traffic diversion devices,
           and/or any other means deemed to be acceptable under the Vehicle Code of the State of
           California. For the purposes of this policy an unreasonable level of traffic may be
           deemed to exist when traffic exists that is 25 percent in excess of the volume that
           would be expected from land uses directly served by these streets.
   2.30    When a roadway to be built is on the boundary with another parcel, the project
           applicant who is developing the first half of the property will pay for 2/3 of the
           roadway. A Reimbursement Agreement will be formulated for the adjacent property
           owner when the project applicant develops the adjacent property and completes the rest
           of the roadway (remaining 1/3). The first 2/3 of the roadway includes sidewalk, curb
           and gutter, parking and two travel lanes.
   2.31    A cul-de-sac shall be constructed on all permanent dead-end streets. Cul-de-sacs are
           discouraged in commercial and industrial developments. Cul-de-sac lengths shall not
           exceed 600 feet. Temporary cul-de-sacs may be permitted on streets planned for
           extension.
General Plan                                                                    Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                     2-5
                                                               Circulation Element
                                Figure 2-1
                  Overall Conceptual Circulation Plan
                 (Illustrative Only, Refer to Policies for
                          Precise Requirements)
General Plan                                               Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                               2-6
                                                                                                                           Circulation Element
                                                                 Table 2-1
                                          Permitted Traffic Calming Measures
                                              Functional Classifications                                         Subdivision Streets
                             Interstates                                                                       Minor
                                                                       Minor        Local      Collector                       Local          Other
                              Freeways     Arterials   Collectors                                             Collector
                                                                      Collectors   Roads        Streets                       Streets      Restrictions
                            Expressways                                                                        Streets
Volume Control
Measures
                                                                                 Only on an                                  >500 vpd
Full Closure
                                Not Recommended                                   exception      Not Recommended            >25% non-
Half Closure
                                                                                    basis                                   local traffic
Diagonal Diverter                                                                <5,000 vpd                                  >500 vpd
Median Barriers                 Not Recommended                                  >25% non-       Not Recommended            >25% non-
Forced Turn Islands                                                              local traffic                              local traffic
Vertical Speed
Control Measures
                                                                                                                                          Not on primary
                                                                                 Only on an
                                                                                                     Daily volumes <3,000 vpd               emergency
Speed Humps                     Not Recommended                                   exception
                                                                                                       Posted speed <30 mph                routes or bus
                                                                                    basis
                                                                                                                                              routes
Speed Tables                                                                                                                              Not on primary
                                                                                                     Daily volumes <5,000 vpd
Raised Crosswalks               Not Recommended                                                                                             emergency
                                                                                                       Posted speed <35 mph
Raised Intersections                                                                                                                          routes
Horizontal Speed
Control Measures
                                                                                                                                          Not on primary
                                                                                 Only on an
                                                                                                     Daily volumes <5,000 vpd               emergency
Mini-traffic Circles            Not Recommended                                   exception
                                                                                                       Posted speed <35 mph                routes or bus
                                                                                    basis
                                                                                                                                              routes
                                                                                               Combined approaches daily volumes
Roundabouts                     Not Recommended                                                              <5,000 vpd
                                                                                                      Posted Speed < 35 mph
                                                                                                    Daily volumes <10,000 vpd
Lateral Shifts                  Not Recommended
                                                                                                       Posted speed <35 mph
                                                                                                     Daily volumes <5,000 vpd
Chicanes                        Not Recommended
                                                                                                       Posted speed <35 mph
                                                                                                     Daily volumes <5,000 vpd
Realigned Intersections         Not Recommended
                                                                                                       Posted speed <35 mph
Narrowings
Bulbouts                                                                                             Daily volumes <1000 vpd
Two-Lane Chokers                Not Recommended                                                        Posted speed <35 mph
Center Islands
                                                                                                Subject to limitations of component
Combined Measures               Not Recommended
                                                                                                              measures
Note:          Subject to Approval by City Engineer
Arterial Streets
   2.32         Arterial streets shall be built at a typical separation of one (1) mile with a typical right-
                of-way of 116-124 feet (includes median, landscape strip, and sidewalk as shown in
                Figures 2-1 and 2-2.
General Plan                                                                                                      Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                                                                    2-7
                                                                                    Circulation Element
   2.33    Arterial Street Standards.
           a. Driveway access to major activity centers shall be located away from adjacent
              intersections of a Collector or Arterial street in a manner to avoid traffic conflicts.
           b. The distance between driveways along commercially developed Arterials shall be
              limited in order to provide adequate ingress/egress and merging and weaving
              operations.
           c. Where possible, driveways to major activity centers shall be located on adjacent
              Collector streets rather than on Arterial streets.
           d. Driveways along Arterials to single-family residential property shall be prohibited;
              these properties shall receive access from Local streets or Minor Collectors.
           e. If driveways must be provided near intersections for special commercial facilities
              (such as service stations) these driveways shall not be serviced by median breaks
              and shall be located far enough from the intersecting right-of-way in order to
              provide safe traffic operations.
           f. Median breaks shall provide access to Collector streets and to major activity centers
              and shall be located adequate distance away from adjacent intersections of an
              Arterial or Collector Street.
           g. Arterial streets shall include landscaping in accordance with Figure 2-2.
           h. To ensure that the transportation system is so planned to minimize social and
              economic disruptions to the neighborhoods, Arterial streets shall skirt residential
              areas.
Collector Streets
   2.34    Collector streets shall be built at a typical separation of one mile (typically between
           adjacent Arterial streets), with a typical right-of-way of 90-108 feet as shown in
           Figures 2-1 and 2-2.
   2.35    Collector Street Standards
           a. Driveway access to major activity centers shall be located an adequate distance
              from adjacent Collector or Arterial street intersections.
           b. The distance between driveways and intersecting local streets shall be limited in
              order to provide adequate ingress and egress.
           c. Driveways to residential property along Collectors shall be consolidated whenever
              possible.
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                    2-8
                                      Circulation Element
                    Figure 2-2
                 Street Standards
General Plan                      Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                      2-9
                                                                                   Circulation Element
           d. d.If driveways must be provided near intersections for facilities (such as service
               stations) these driveways shall not be serviced by median breaks and shall be
               located far enough from the intersecting right-of-way in order to provide safe traffic
               operations.
           e. Medians on Collectors shall be raised concrete where left turn control is needed, or
               painted median, or two-way left turn pockets where otherwise appropriate.
           f. Collectors shall include landscaping in conformance with Figure 2-2.
   2.36    Streets shall be designed for a level of traffic that will not cause a detrimental impact
           on adjacent land uses.
   2.37    Unnecessary cross-traffic conflicts shall be eliminated to improve the traffic flow along
           Arterials and Collectors. Raised medians shall be installed as required to restrict unsafe
           turning movements.
   2.38    Collector streets shall be up to four lanes for through traffic and may include an
           optional median for left turn access to local streets and adjacent land uses. On street
           parking may be provided where street capacity does not require left turns or four
           through lanes.
   2.39    Arterials and Collectors in areas of existing development shall be built to standards
           consistent with a policy of reducing impacts on adjacent properties.
   2.40    Where possible, Arterials and Collectors should form 4-leg, right-angle intersections;
           jog, offset and skewed intersections of major streets in near proximity shall be avoided
           where possible.
   2.41    Sidewalks, paths and appropriate crosswalks shall be located in order to facilitate
           access to all schools and other areas with significant pedestrian traffic. Whenever
           feasible, pedestrian paths shall be developed to allow for unobstructed pedestrian flow
           from within a neighborhood.
   2.42    Where Arterial and Collector streets are required, residential development shall be
           oriented away (side-on or rear-on) from such streets, and properly buffered so that the
           traffic carrying capacity of the street will be preserved and the residential environment
           be protected from the adverse effects of the street.
   2.43    Adequate access shall be provided to high intensity land use areas such as employment
           centers, shopping areas, and recreation facilities.
   2.44    Due to the traffic congestion which results from numerous points of ingress and egress
           along commercial streets, future commercial developments or modifications to existing
           developments shall be master planned with limited points of ingress and egress onto a
           major street.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  2-10
                                                                                    Circulation Element
   2.45    Left-hand movements into and out of commercial areas shall be minimized and existing
           points of ingress and egress shall be consolidated whenever possible.
Minor Collectors
   2.46    Minor Collectors shall be used to provide access within a neighborhood, and to major
           activity centers in a safe and efficient manner as shown in Figure 2-1.
   2.47    Minor Collectors Standards
           a. Minor Collectors shall be designed to connect neighborhoods and neighborhood
               access to schools, parks or other facilities without exclusive reliance on Arterials or
               Collectors as shown in Figure 2-1.
           b. Minor Collectors shall be 56-60 feet in accordance with Figure 2-2.
           c. Minor Collector offsets shall be provided at least every 1,320 lineal feet (1/4 mile)
               of roadway, with such offsets between 125 to 200 feet. Streets shall be designed
               with gentle curves to achieve a 25 mph design speed. Other traffic calming features
               shall be provided in accordance with Table 2-1, if necessary to achieve the desired
               design speed.
Local Streets
   2.48    Local Streets shall be designed in accordance with adopted standards and right-of-way
           widths in conformance with Figure 2-2.
           a. 56-60 foot Local streets (32-26 feet curb to curb) may be used in cul-de-sacs or on
               Local streets that will have traffic volumes that do not exceed 750 ADT.
           b. Local street lengths should be short, preferably not exceeding 500 feet, or they shall
               be designed with gentle curves and changes in grade to limit the sight line to 500
               feet.
           c. A majority of streets should be curved or terminate so that no street vista is longer
               than 500 feet.
           d. Traffic calming features such as curb extensions, traffic circles and medians may be
               used to encourage slower traffic speeds, in accordance with Table 2-1.
           e. Local streets should be aligned to form three-way intersections when possible, in
               order to create inherent right-of-way assignment and to reduce accidents without the
               use of traffic controls.
           f. Curb cuts for driveways to individual residential lots shall be prohibited along
               Arterial streets. Curb cuts shall be limited to intersections with other streets or
               access drives to parking areas for commercial, civic or multifamily uses. Clear sight
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                   2-11
                                                                                  Circulation Element
               triangles shall be maintained at intersections, unless controlled by traffic signal
               devices.
           g. Pedestrian accessibility from adjacent residential neighborhoods shall be provided
               by the usage of through-block connections or other accessibility methods. These
               street linkages may include access roads, open ended cul de sacs, pedestrian paths,
               or other such facilities for pedestrian and bike access, and emergency access, where
               necessary. Such a linkage shall be made to abutting Collector or Arterials no less
               frequently than every 600 feet.
   2.49    The Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or other applicable City codes and
           ordinances shall be amended to include standards to address the policies and objectives
           of the Circulation Element.
Parking and Onsite Circulation
   2.50    Parking standards will be evaluated to ensure that parking requirements are satisfied
           within walking distance of development, and so that Arterial and Collector streets do
           not separate parking from the parking demand generator.
   2.51    Soften the impact of expansive parking areas in all land use designations through
           landscaping and tree plantings as prescribed in the City Zoning Ordinance.
   2.52    Maintain street tree lines and landscaped buffers between parking surfaces and street
           right-of-ways.
   2.53    Facilitate and encourage adequate parking throughout the community including all
           commercial areas.
   2.54    All new development, except as designated in the Downtown, shall provide adequate
           on-site parking for the on-site uses.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Modes
   2.55    In existing developed areas where sidewalks do not exist, the City shall continue to
           support existing programs and pursue new programs for sidewalk construction.
           Bicycle accidents shall continue to be monitored and bicycle paths and lanes shall be
           established upon need.
   2.56    Provide safe, aesthetic, and pleasant space for pedestrians.
   2.57    Widen sidewalks above the minimum established Improvement Standards where
           intensive commercial, recreation, or institutional activity is present and where
           residential densities are high.
   2.58    Partially or wholly close certain streets which are not required for traffic so that they
           can be used for pedestrian circulation, and open space use.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 2-12
                                                                                    Circulation Element
   2.59    Ensure convenient and safe pedestrian crossings.
   2.60    Pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided on Local streets and Minor Collectors
           to enable pedestrians to have access through a neighborhood, to shopping areas, to
           transit stops, schools and other such facilities.
   2.61    Locate sidewalks, pedestrian paths, and appropriate crosswalks to facilitate access to all
           schools and other areas with significant pedestrian traffic. Whenever feasible,
           pedestrian paths shall be developed to allow for unobstructed pedestrian flow from
           within a neighborhood.
   2.62    Require, where security walls or fences are proposed for residential developments
           along Arterial or Collector streets, that pedestrian access be provided between the
           Arterial or Collector and the subdivision to allow access to transit vehicles operating on
           an Arterial or Collector Street.
   2.63    Promote safe, convenient, and accessible pedestrian access ways within the community
           except where there is no demonstrated need, such as industrial and rural residential
           areas.
   2.64    Encourage the inclusion of green belts and common open space for pedestrian use
           within residential development areas.
   2.65    Require that Collector streets which are identified to function as links for the bicycle
           transportation system be provided with Class II bikeways (bike lanes) or show an
           alternative route. Arterial streets shall provide for a Class I or Class II bike routes. In
           such cases, the City shall accommodate cyclists on these identified streets by widening
           the street or eliminating on-street parking wherever possible.
    2.66 Design bicycle and pedestrian paths so that interaction with vehicular traffic is
           minimized.
    2.67 Require the provision for safe bicycle circulation in all new developments, including
           bicycle parking facilities and internal bicycle and pedestrian routes.
    2.68 Provide for the safe and convenient use of the bicycle as a means of transportation and
           recreation.
    2.69 Eliminate hazards on designated bikeways.
    2.70 Prevent bicycle accidents through promoting bicycle safety education and improved
           traffic enforcement related to bicycle use.
    2.71 Provide adequate and secure bicycle storage facilities at all governmental, commercial,
           parks, and residential locations throughout the City.
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                   2-13
                                                                                   Circulation Element
Transit and Rail
   2.72    Ensure choices among modes of travel and give priority to each mode when and where
           it is most appropriate.
   2.73    Continue to provide incentives for the use of public transit.
   2.74    Improve the speed and efficiency of mass transit in the City and enhance the current
           status of the existing rail system including connections to rail passenger service.
   2.75    The transportation facilities are interdependent, and efforts shall be made to ensure an
           efficient system by coordination of local and regional efforts. The regional and local
           transit links must be closely related and synchronized to provide maximum efficiency
           and transfers.
   2.76    Coordinate the City’s transit system with regional transit services.
   2.77    Arterials and Collectors will be designed to allow transit vehicles to pull out of traffic.
           This policy may be implemented with either a continuous parking lane with bus stops,
           or with special bus pull-out lanes.
   2.78    Give a high priority to public transportation systems which are responsive to the needs
           of commuters, the elderly, handicapped and disadvantaged.
Truck Routes
   2.79    The City’s Truck Routes shall be limited to those Arterials as shown in Figure 2-3.
           Truck Routes on City Local, Collector and Minor Collector streets shall be prohibited.
   2.80    Discourage truck traffic along Whitley Avenue (in the downtown area) in order to
           facilitate and encourage pedestrian access to downtown.
   2.81    Established truck routes shall be maintained. New truck routes should be limited to
           Arterials and Collectors.
   2.82    The city will continue to encourage the construction of the City’s Arterial Street system
           as part of the countywide network, and to seek non-local funding for its construction.
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  2-14

                                  Circulation Element
                 TRUCK ROUTES             Figure
                                            2-3
General Plan                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                 2-15
                                                                                  Circulation Element
Airport Facilities
   2.83    Residential development within the southeasterly approach zone is to be restricted
           within a horizontal distance extending approximately 3,000 to 4,000 feet southeast of
           the end of the runway.
   2.84    The city shall require the dedication of aviation easements as a condition of approving
           any development within the Airport Approach Zone.
   2.85    Incompatible land uses which would diminish the existing operation and the future
           expansion of the Corcoran Airport shall be prohibited.
   2.86    The Land Use Element of the Corcoran General Plan and the Corcoran Zoning
           Ordinance shall be used to restrict potentially hazardous land uses from being
           established within Compatibility Zones A & B1/B2 as defined by the Kings County
           Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
           Compatibility Zone A is the area nearest the airport runway where the probability of an
           accident and the impact of noise are the greatest. The following restrictions would
           apply in Compatibility Zone A:
               No new residential construction;
               No new schools, churches, or other facilities accommodating large groups of
               people;
               Height limitations of structures shall be in conformance with Federal Aviation
               Administration regulations; and
               No new structures shall be built within 300 feet of the center line of the runway or
               1,000 feet from the ends of the runway.
           Compatibility Zone B1/B2 is the area immediately adjacent to Zone A, where the
           probability of an accident is lower than in Zone A and where there may be
           unacceptable noise levels. The following restrictions apply in Compatibility Zone
           B1/B2:
               Creation of new residential lots will be prohibited;
               New single family residential construction may be allowed on existing lots on a
               case-by-case basis after evaluation for potential hazards;
               No new schools, churches, or other facilities accommodating large groups of people
               may be constructed;
   2.87    The City will have a Comprehensive Airport Land Use Plan (CALUP) for the private
           airstrip on the east side of town. The CALUP will establish procedures and criteria by
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 2-16
                                                                         Circulation Element
           which the City can address compatibility issues when making planning decisions
           regarding the airstrip and the land uses around it.
General Plan                                                         Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                        2-17

   CHAPTER 3.0
NOISE ELEMENT

                                                                   Noise Element
3.0      NOISE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
Noise levels within the community of Corcoran affect the quality of life of people living and
working in the City. The most significant noise levels within the community are associated with
the railroad lines and roadways, though noise impacts from the two airfields to the east and west
of the community are also notable. High noise levels associated with these and other activities
can create stress and irritation. The Noise Element addresses the physiological, psychological
and economic effects of noise by providing effective strategies to reduce excessive noise and
limit community exposure to loud noise sources.
PURPOSE OF THE NOISE ELEMENT
Government Code § 65302 (F) states that a City’s General Plan must include “A noise element
which shall identify and appraise noise problems in the community. The noise element shall
recognize the guidelines established by the Office of Noise Control in the State Department of
Health Services and shall analyze and quantify, to the extent practicable, as determined by the
legislative body, current and projected noise levels for all of the following sources:
    1. Highways and freeways
    2. Primary arterials and major local streets.
    3. Passenger and freight on-line railroad operations and ground rapid transit systems.
    4. Commercial, general aviation, heliport, helistop, and military airport operations, aircraft
         overflights, jet engine test stands, and all other ground facilities and maintenance
         functions related to airport operation.
    5. Local industrial plants, including, but not limited to, railroad classification yards.
    6. Other ground stationary noise sources identified by local agencies as contributing to the
         community noise environment.”
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 3-1

                                                                                       Noise Element
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE NOISE ELEMENT
The State of California recognizes the relationship between noise and noise-sensitive uses and
has adopted State Guidelines for Noise Elements. This Noise Element satisfies the requirements
of State planning law and is a mandated component of the General Plan. Government Code
Section 65302 (f) establishes the required components of the Noise Element. The Element also
complies with California Health and Safety Code Section 56050.1 guidelines for Noise
Elements.
Future noise conditions from short- and long-term growth are quantified and identified as noise
exposure contours. This noise information serves as the basis for developing guidelines for
identifying compatible land uses; identifying the proper distribution of land uses on the General
Plan Land Use Map; and establishing proper development standards.
The Noise Element comprises four sections: the Introduction; Purpose of the Noise Element;
Scope and Content of the Noise Element; and the Goals, Objectives and Policies. In the Goals,
Objectives, and Policies section, major issues pertaining to noise sources are identified and
related policies are established. The objectives are statements of the City’s desires and comprise
broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies and standards serve as guides for
reducing or avoiding adverse noise impacts on the population.
OBJECTIVES
A. To protect the citizens of the City from the harmful and annoying effects of exposure to
    excessive noise.
B. To protect the economic base of the City by preventing incompatible land uses from
    encroaching upon existing or planned noise-producing uses.
C. To preserve the tranquility of residential areas by preventing noise producing uses from
    encroaching upon existing or planned noise-sensitive uses.
D. To educate the citizens of the City concerning the effects of exposure to excessive noise and
    the methods available for minimizing such exposure.
E. To emphasize the reduction of noise impacts through careful site planning and project design,
    giving second preference to the use of noise barriers and/or structural features to buildings
    containing noise-sensitive land uses.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    3.1    Areas shall be recognized as noise impacted if exposed to existing or projected future
           noise levels at the exterior of buildings in excess of 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL).
    3.2    Noise sensitive land uses should be discouraged in noise impacted areas unless
           effective mitigation measures are incorporated into the specific design of such projects
           to reduce exterior noise levels to 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL), and to 45 dB Ldn (or CNEL)
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 3-2

                                                                                        Noise Element
           or less within interior living spaces. Noise sensitive land uses include hospitals,
           residences, schools, churches, and other uses of a similar nature as determined by the
           Planning Director.
    3.3    Industrial, commercial or other noise generating land uses should be discouraged if
           resulting noise levels will exceed 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL) at the boundary areas of
           planned or zoned noise sensitive land uses. Noise sensitive land uses should not be
           located near roadways or railways that exceed 65 dB(A).
    3.4    The City shall enforce applicable State Noise Insulation Standards (California
           Administrative Code, Title 24) and Uniform Building Code (UBC noise requirements).
    3.5    New equipment and vehicles purchased by the City should comply with noise level
           performance standards consistent with the best available noise reduction technology.
    3.6    The preferred method of noise control used is thoughtful site design. Secondarily, noise
           control should be achieved through the use of artificial noise barriers. Site and building
           design guidelines may include:
           a. Noise sensitive land uses should not front onto the primary noise source. Where this
               is not possible, the narrow portion of the building should face the primary noise
               source, and the interior layout should locate the most sensitive areas away from the
               noise source by placing garages, storage facilities, carports or other such areas
               nearest the noise source.
           b. Site design should permit noise to pass around or through a development. This can
               be achieved by placing the narrow or convex portion of the structure toward the
               primary noise source.
           c. Commercial and industrial structures should be designed so that any noise
               generated from the interior of the building is focused away from noise sensitive
               land uses.
           d. Two-story residential construction should be avoided, where possible, immediately
               adjacent to arterials or collectors unless an adequate combination of noise
               attenuation procedures are used to reduce noise to a level consistent with Policy 3.2
               herein.
           e. When possible, residential cul-de-sacs should be perpendicular to adjacent arterials
               or collectors.
           f. Loading and unloading activities for commercial uses should be conducted in an
               enclosed loading dock, preferably with a positive seal between the loading dock and
               trucks.
    3.7    The City shall review all relevant development plans, programs and proposals to ensure
           their conformance with the policy framework outlined in this Noise Element.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  3-3
                                                                                       Noise Element
    3.8    Prior to the approval of a proposed development in a noise impacted area as defined in
           3.1, or the development of an industrial, commercial or other noise generating land use
           in or near an area containing existing or planned noise sensitive land uses, an acoustical
           analysis may be required if any of the following findings are made:
           a. The existing or projected future noise exposure at the exterior of buildings which
               will contain noise sensitive uses or within proposed outdoor activity areas (patios,
               decks, backyards, pool areas, recreation areas, etc.) exceeds 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL).
           b. Interior residential noise levels resulting from offsite noise are estimated to exceed
               45 dB(A).
    3.9    When noise studies are necessary they should:
           a. Be the responsibility of the applicant.
           b. Be prepared by an individual or firm with demonstrable experience in the fields of
               environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
           c. Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods
               and locations to adequately describe local conditions.
           d. Include estimated noise levels in terms of day-night weighted levels (Ldn or CNEL)
               for existing and projected future conditions, with a comparison made to the adopted
               policies of the Noise Element.
           e. Include recommendations for appropriate mitigation measures to achieve
               compliance with the adopted policies and standards of the Noise Element.
           f. Include estimates of noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have
               been implemented. If compliance with the adopted standards and policies of the
               Noise Element will not be achieved, a rationale for acceptance of the project must
               be provided.
           g. Be prepared as early in the project review or permitting process as possible, so that
               noise mitigation measures may be an integral part of the project design, rather than
               an afterthought.
   3.10    Noise created by temporary activities necessary to provide construction or required
           services should be permitted for the shortest duration possible and limited to time
           periods that will have the least possible adverse impact on surrounding land uses.
   3.11    All projects within the impact area of the Corcoran Airport to the west of the
           community, as shown in the Kings County Airport Land Use Plan, and the equivalent
           impact area around the Salyer Farms Airport to the east, will be evaluated for potential
           noise impacts from aircraft overflights based on the standards in the Kings County
           Airport Land Use Plan.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  3-4
    CHAPTER 4.0
SAFETY ELEMENT

                                                                 Safety Element
4.0      SAFETY ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The quality of life in Corcoran is directly impacted by the sense of security of its residents and
businesses. In order to provide a safe and enjoyable environment for residents, it is important to
address the issues of crime, violence, and other human caused hazards, and to prepare a response
to uncontrollable natural hazards. The Safety Element establishes objectives and policies and
standards to ensure that there is an adequate, coordinated, and expedient response to public
safety concerns.
PURPOSE OF THE SAFETY ELEMENT
The purpose of the Safety Element is to identify and address those features or characteristics
existing in or near Corcoran that represent a potential hazard to the community’s citizens, sites,
structures, public facilities, and infrastructure. The Safety Element establishes policies to
minimize the danger to residents, workers, and visitors, while identifying actions needed to
manage crisis situations such as earthquakes, fires, and floods. The Element also focuses on
preventing criminal activity and violence before they occur. Additionally, the Safety Element
contains specific policies to regulate existing and proposed development in hazard-prone areas.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE SAFETY ELEMENT
The Safety Element satisfies the requirements of state planning law and is a mandated
component of the General Plan. Government Code section 65302 (g) sets forth a list of hazards
that the Element must cover, if they pertain to conditions in the City. These hazards are:
 Seismically induced conditions including ground shaking, surface rupture, ground failure,
    tsunami, and seiche:
 Slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides;
 Subsidence and other geologic hazards;
 Flooding;
General Plan                                                                Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                               4-1

                                                                                    Safety Element
 Wildland and urban fires; and
 Evacuation routes.
The Safety Element contains four sections: the Introduction; Purpose of the Safety Element;
Scope and Content of the Safety Element; and Objectives, Policies and Standards. In the
Objectives, Policies and Standards section, major issues pertaining to hazardous conditions and
safety are identified, and related policies established. The policies serve as guidelines for
reducing the risks associated with humans, including criminal activity and natural hazards. The
policies also serve to direct and maximize community emergency preparedness.
Emergency Planning and Response
OBJECTIVES
A. Reduce the potential for loss of life and property resulting from natural and man-made
    hazards to a minimum.
B. Coordinate responses in the event of a local or regional natural or man-made disaster.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    4.1    The City will maintain its emergency preparedness, including evacuation procedures, to
           address potential natural and man-made hazards. These procedures shall be developed
           in coordination with Kings County’s emergency operations plans.
    4.2    All buildings shall conform to state standards set forth in the Uniform Code for the
           Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code contained in the most current edition of the
           Uniform Building Code.
    4.3    The City of Corcoran shall conduct joint training exercises between local fire and law
           enforcement personnel to develop coordinated action in fire suppression, traffic and
           crowd control.
    4.4    The City may coordinate fire protection services with Kings County and neighboring
           communities, including the maintenance of mutual aid and agreements with Tulare
           County, the Cities of Hanford and Lemoore and the California State Prison - Corcoran.
    4.5    The City shall establish a network of streets that permits emergency vehicle access to
           any individual property that is no more than one minute from designated Arterial,
           Collector or Minor Collector roadways. Streets should comply with the State fire code
           for emergency vehicle access.
    4.6    The City shall continue to monitor the need for additional public safety facilities such
           as fire equipment, auxiliary police and fire stations, etc, as the demand for services
           increases. The City may consider the adoption of developer impact fees to ensure that
General Plan                                                                Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                4-2

                                                                                       Safety Element
           public safety services continue to be funded as population increases and as new
           neighborhoods are constructed at a greater distance from centralized facilities.
Fire Protection
OBJECTIVE
A. An effective and well-trained Fire Department that will protect the community from fire
    dangers.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    4.7    The City’s fire service response goal shall be five minutes from “tone-out” to arrival on
           scene.
    4.8    The City shall maintain a reliable water supply system that meets the fire protection
           needs of the community.
    4.9    The City shall enforce the municipal code as it pertains to the abatement of fire hazards
           related to existing buildings, structures, and weed control.
   4.10    The City shall support local, state and federal programs designed to inform and educate
           the public concerning fire prevention and suppression.
   4.11    The City will coordinate with Kings County, other local communities, and the
           California State Prison – Corcoran in the provision of fire protection services to ensure
           the maximum level of protection for all residences, commercial establishments and
           industries within the planning area.
   4.12    The City will encourage installation of fire safety devices in all residences and require
           such installation at the time of original construction, remodeling or expansion.
   4.13    The City will establish five minutes or two miles travel distance as the maximum
           response time or travel distance from the nearest fire station. Outside of this response
           range, built-in fire protection systems (i.e. sprinklers) shall be required in all new
           buildings.
   4.14    The City will encourage the community to become involved in promoting state and
           federal fire protection programs in school and civic functions.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  4-3

                                                                                    Safety Element
Flooding
OBJECTIVE
A. Protect the lives and property of residents from the hazards of flooding.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   4.15    Consistent with Federal standards, the City shall implement FEMA regulations and
           design guidelines to address 100-year flood events, and require adequate storm
           drainage facilities to prevent flooding within the community.
   4.16    The City will update the storm drain master plan every few years to include planned
           growth areas and require that development conform to it.
   4.17    The City will continue to participate with the Cross Creek Flood Control District to
           ensure the levees protecting Corcoran from Tulare Lake flooding are adequately
           monitored.
   4.18    In the event that levee monitoring indicates that additional construction, repair,
           rehabilitation, or improvements to the Tulare Lake levees is needed, the City of
           Corcoran may establish appropriate development fees to help fund the cost of
           protecting new development placed into the area protected by the levee system.
Aircraft Overflight Hazards
OBJECTIVE
A. Protect hazardous conflicts between uses on the ground and airport operations at the
    Corcoran Airport and at the Salyer Farms Airport. Conflicts may increase hazards to
    aviation, or increase hazards to ground base populations in the event of an aircraft
    emergency.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   4.19    The City shall implement the building and land use restrictions and policies of the
           Kings County Airport Land Use Plan.
   4.20    To the extent feasible, the building and land use restrictions which apply to the
           Corcoran Airport, and described in the Kings County Airport Land Use Plan shall also
           be implemented with regard to the Salyer Farms Airport.
General Plan                                                               Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                               4-4
                                                                                         Safety Element
Public Safety Standard
OBJECTIVE
A. Adopt and implement safety standards for varying hazards.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   4.21    Environmental Impact Reports should be required on all projects in areas of extreme
           hazard as defined herein (a project is defined within the California Environmental
           Quality Act).
   4.22    It is the policy of the City to require that water supply systems be related to the size and
           configuration of land developments. Standards as set forth in the current subdivision
           ordinance shall be maintained and improved as necessary.
   4.23    Development proposals shall take into consideration required fire standards,
           particularly in regard to critical facilities.
   4.24    It is the policy of the City to maintain adequate street width and connectivity in the
           circulation system to enable prompt response and emergency access. Street widths
           shall conform to the State fire code which requires 20-feet of clear travel way on public
           roads or fire lanes. Development shall also conform with the following connectivity
           guidelines:
           a. Access to arterials, collectors or minor collectors should be provided at least every
                500 feet,
           b. Provide at least 250 street intersections per square mile to ensure a grid network of
                connectivity. Pedestrian cul-de-sac connections to public streets shall be counted as
                intersections if accessible by emergency vehicles.
   4.25    The street network shall be designed so that it does not pose undue hazards due to
           excessive vehicle speeds, excessive through traffic in residential neighborhoods or
           street design that is in substantial excess of future projected traffic volumes.
           Residential streets should be designed to limit speeds on local streets to 20 mph, and a
           minor collector to 25 mph through the usage of traffic calming devices, street width,
           and other methods approved by the City Engineer.
   4.26    Existing traffic conflicts should be resolved, including connectivity between
           neighborhoods, access to industrial areas and critical intersections, and
           railroad/roadway conflicts.
   4.27    The city shall continue to implement the seismic safety requirements of the latest
           adopted Building Codes as they apply to new construction, remodeling, retrofitting, etc.
   4.28    Development adjacent to hazardous facilities such as irrigation canals, detention basins,
           drainage facilities, railroad rights-of-way, state highways, etc., shall be designed to
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                    4-5
                                                                                      Safety Element
           offer appropriate protections though fencing, restrictions to access or other appropriate
           means.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 4-6
                  CHAPTER 5.0
OPEN SPACE, CONSERVATION AND
         RECREATION ELEMENT

                           Open Space, Conservation and
                                                                           Recreation
5.0      OPEN SPACE, CONSERVATION AND RECREATION ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
Some of the most valuable assets of Corcoran include its agricultural land, parks, historical and
architectural resources. The Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element focuses on the
protection and enhancement of open space, natural and recreational resources to ensure a high
quality living environment in Corcoran.
PURPOSE OF THE OPEN SPACE, CONSERVATION AND RECREATION ELEMENT
The Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element meets the state requirements for
Conservation and Open Space Elements as defined in Sections 65302(d) and 65301(e) of the
Government Code. According to these requirements, the Conservation Element must contain
goals and policies to protect and maintain natural resources such as water, soils, wildlife, and
minerals, and prevent wasteful resource exploitation, degradation, and destruction. The Open
Space Element must contain goals and policies to manage open space areas, including
undeveloped lands and outdoor recreation areas. Specifically, the Open Space Element must
address several open space categories such as those used for the preservation of natural resources
and managed production of resources, as well as open space maintained for public health and
safety reasons. This last category of open space is addressed in the Safety Element. Because the
subjects required to be addressed under the Conservation Element and Open Space Element
overlap substantially, the two elements, and the Recreation Element have been combined for this
Plan.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE OPEN SPACE, CONSERVATION AND RECREATION ELEMENT
The Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element expresses community policies to protect
environmental, open space and recreational resources. Resources addressed in this element
include: water resources; agricultural resources; cultural resources; ecological and biological
resources; mineral resources; and parks and recreational facilities. Because everyday activities in
Corcoran affect air quality outside City boundaries and regional activities affect air quality
within Corcoran, regional air quality issues are also addressed in this element.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                5-1
                                                              Open Space, Conservation and Recreation
The Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element is comprised of four sections: the
Introduction; Purpose of the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element; Scope and
Content of the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element; and the Objectives, Policies
and Standards. In the Objectives, Policies and Standards section, community open space needs
and resource management issues are identified and corresponding policies are established. The
objectives, which are overall statements of the City desires, are comprised of broad statements of
purpose and direction. The policies serve as guidelines for planning and maintaining recreational
facilities, enhancing the natural amenities of Corcoran and minimizing the environmental effects
of planned development.
Natural Resources
OBJECTIVES
A. Protect natural resources including groundwater, soils, and air quality, to meet the needs of
    present and future generations.
B. Ensure that environmental hazards including potential flooding and impacts from agricultural
    practices are adequately addressed in the development process within the City and the
    Corcoran Planning Area.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    5.1    The City of Corcoran shall work cooperatively with other local agencies to expand
           programs that enhance groundwater recharge in order to maintain the groundwater
           supply, including the installation of retention/detention ponds in new growth areas.
    5.2    No urban intensity development shall be approved in the City unless the development
           is, or can be served by the City sewer system.
    5.3    The City shall continue to participate in programs to encourage, and, in some instances
           to require, ongoing water conservation practices.
    5.4    The City shall adopt and implement an Urban Water Management Plan and shall
           maintain a current Water Master Plan.
    5.5    To assist the City in meeting the clean air quality requirements of the federal and state
           Clean Air Acts, the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District will be consulted
           to provide community planning guidance to help reduce potential air quality impacts.
           In conformance with State legislation, an Air Quality Element shall be developed based
           on the Air District’s Air Quality Guidelines for General Plans.
    5.6    The City shall continue to promote biological diversity and the use of plant species
           compatible with the bio-region in landscaping, open spaces and in other areas as
           appropriate.
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  5-2

                                                               Open Space, Conservation and Recreation
    5.7    New construction activities shall comply with the standard and optional PM-10 control
           measures as set forth by the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District’s
           Regulation VIII and Guide for Assessing and Mitigating Air Quality Impacts.
    5.8    To protect human health, the City’s water resources will be monitored on a regular
           basis to test for bacteriological and toxic chemical components.
    5.9    The City will actively pursue grants and other funding sources to ensure the continued
           ability to provide safe, clean drinking water to all of its inhabitants.
   5.10    The Land Use Element shall identify greenbelt areas on lands outside of the City in
           order to maximize farmland, open space, and wildlife habitat preservation. Property
           owners and Kings County will be encouraged to retain such land in agricultural and/or
           open space uses, with natural or manmade features to transition from urban to non-
           urban uses.
   5.11    The City shall continue to initiate and/or support local and regional recycling programs,
           and transfer station-based solid waste sorting programs.
   5.12    The City shall adopt and implement standards requiring shade trees along new
           residential and commercial streets and developments.
Recreation
OBJECTIVES
A. Provide adequate recreational facilities to accommodate residents and visitors.
B. Provide or cooperate in the provision of, a range of leisure, recreation, and cultural programs
    and facilities that are accessible and affordable to all segments of the community.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   5.13    The City may provide parks at a minimum ratio of 5.0 acres of park per 1,000
           population when feasible. Lighting and Landscape Districts shall be used to ensure that
           the park facilities are adequately maintained.
   5.14    Parks shall be developed as growth and fiscal resources warrant, which respond to the
           needs of the City’s diverse population.
   5.15    The City, in partnership with schools, developers, the County and others, will develop
           and maintain parklands in accordance with the Parks Master Plan. The City Council
           shall continue to monitor the provision of parkland and will implement development
           impact fees and/or park set-asides and in-lieu fees to ensure that parks development
           keeps pace with residential growth.
General Plan                                                                     Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                    5-3

                                                             Open Space, Conservation and Recreation
   5.16    The City will maximize opportunity for joint use of public land and facilities such as
           schools, stormwater ponding basins and other recreation areas under public jurisdiction
           suitable for recreation.
Open Space
OBJECTIVES
A. Create and preserve an open space system in the Corcoran planning area.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   5.17    The City will create and protect open space for the preservation of natural resources.
   5.18    The City will create and preserve open space for outdoor recreation.
   5.19    The City will preserve and protect agricultural use on lands in and surrounding the
           Corcoran planning area for open space purposes and for the managed production of
           resources.
   5.20    The City will create and maintain open space for public health and safety in areas
           which require special management or regulation.
Cultural Resources
OBJECTIVES
A. Preserve important links to Corcoran’s heritage, including historical and pre-historical
    resources.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   5.21    The City shall consult with the Central California Information Center at California
           State University, Bakersfield for advice regarding any project that could have an impact
           on cultural resources. Special consideration shall be paid to areas identified in the
           General Plan and elsewhere as likely to contain relics of the areas pre-historic past.
   5.22    It shall be the policy of the City to avoid impacts to cultural resources where feasible,
           preserving such resources in place. Where the implementation of this policy is not
           feasible, the City shall consult with an appropriate professional (historian, archeologist,
           etc.) to study the site and recommend appropriate measures to ensure the educational
           and cultural value are preserved.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  5-4

        CHAPTER 6.0
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT

                                                       Air Quality Element
6.0      AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Air Quality Element is intended to protect the public’s health and welfare by implementing
measures that allow the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District (SJVAPCD) to attain
Federal and State air quality standards that will move toward a sustainable level of air quality.
To achieve this goal, the Element sets forth a number of policies and standards to reduce current
pollution emissions and to require new development to include measures to comply with air
quality standards. In addition, this Element contains provisions to address new air quality
requirements.
California Government Code Section 65303 enables a county or city to adopt “any other
elements or address any other subjects, which, in the judgment of the legislative body, relate to
the physical development of the county or city.” The City of Corcoran has adopted the Air
Quality Element to help the community meet ambient air quality standards established by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the California Air Resources Board (ARB).
PURPOSE OF THE AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
The purpose of the Air Quality Element is to identify air quality problem areas and implement
policies and standards to address those problem areas. Without the implementation and
maintenance of appropriate air quality standards, threats to public health and a declining quality
of life may result. The Air Quality Element, although not mandated by state planning law, has
been included in Corcoran’s General Plan to ensure a healthy environment through the
management of our air resources.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
The Air Quality Element includes goals, objectives and policies for minimizing the number and
length of vehicle trips, transportation alternatives, and for requiring area and stationary source
projects that generate significant amounts of air pollutants to incorporate air quality mitigation in
their design.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  6-1

                                                                                  Air Quality Element
GOAL
To protect the health and welfare of Corcoran residents by promoting development that is
compatible with air quality standards.
OBJECTIVES
A. Develop consistent and accurate procedures for evaluating the air quality impacts of
    new projects.
B. As part of the development review process, develop mitigation measures to minimize
    stationary and area source emissions.
C. Develop transportation systems that minimize vehicle delay and air pollution.
D. Develop consistent and accurate procedures for mitigating transportation emissions
    from new and existing projects.
E. Encourage alternative modes of transportation including pedestrian, bicycle, and
    transit usage.
F. Conserve energy and reduce air emissions by encouraging energy efficient building
    designs and transportation systems.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    6.1    The City shall coordinate with other local and regional jurisdictions, including the
           SJVAPCD and the California ARB, in the development of regional and county clean
           air plans and incorporate the relevant provisions of those plans into City planning and
           project review procedures. The City shall also cooperate with the SJVAPCD and ARB
           in:
           a. Enforcing the provisions of the California and Federal Clean Air Acts, state and
               regional policies, and established standards for air quality.
           b. Encouraging economy clean fuel for city vehicle fleets, when feasible.
           c. Developing consistent procedures for evaluating project-specific and cumulative air
               quality impacts of projects.
    6.2    During development review, the City shall require area and stationary source projects
           that generate significant amounts of air pollutants to incorporate air quality mitigation
           in their design, including:
           a. The use of best available and economically feasible control technology for
               stationary industrial sources;
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  6-2
                                                                                   Air Quality Element
           b. The use of EPA-certified wood stoves in new residential units, to the extent wood
               stoves are permitted under SJVAPCD regulations;
           c. The use of new and replacement fuel storage tanks at refueling stations that are
               clean fuel compatible, if technically and economically feasible;
           d. The promotion of energy efficient designs, including provisions for solar access,
               building siting to maximize natural heating and cooling, and landscaping to aid
               passive cooling and to protect from winter winds.
    6.3    The City shall develop and implement strategies to minimize the number and length of
           vehicle trips, which may include:
           a. Promoting commercial/industrial project proponent sponsorship of van pools or
               club buses;
           b. Encouraging commercial/industrial project day care and employee services at the
               employment site;
           c. Encouraging the provision of transit, especially for employment-intensive uses of
               200 or more employees;
           d. Providing incentives for the use of transportation alternatives;
           e. Providing expansion and improvement of public transportation services and
               facilities.
    6.4    The City shall encourage transportation alternatives to motor vehicles by developing
           infrastructure amenable to such alternatives by doing the following:
           a. Right-of-way requirements for bike lanes in the planning of new arterial and
               collector streets and in street improvement projects, pedestrian connectivity to cul-
               de-sacs from collectors and arterials;
           b. Require that new development be designed to promote pedestrian and bicycle
               access and circulation in conformance with the United States Green Building
               Council LEED – Neighborhood Development Guidelines;
           c. Provide safe and secure bicycle parking facilities at major activity centers, such as
               public facilities, employment sites, and shopping and office centers.
    6.5    The City shall encourage land use development to be located and designed to conserve
           air quality and minimize direct and indirect emissions of air contaminants by doing the
           following:
           a. Locate air pollution point sources, such as manufacturing and extracting facilities in
               areas designated for industrial development and separated from residential areas and
               sensitive receptors (e.g., homes, schools, and hospitals);
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                   6-3

                                                                                  Air Quality Element
           b. Establish buffer zones (e.g., setbacks, landscaping) within residential and other
              sensitive receptor site plans to separate those uses from highways, arterials,
              hazardous material locations and other sources of air pollution or odor;
           c. Ensure the jobs/housing/balance when making land use decisions;
           d. Provide for mixed-use development through land use and zoning to reduce the
              length and frequency of vehicle trips. Optimally, locate residences so that they are
              within ½ mile of at least four non-residential uses which typically serve residential
              uses such as neighborhood and convenience commercial areas, offices, major
              employment centers, schools, parks, public facilities, and places of worship;
           e. Accommodate a portion of the projected population and economic growth of the
              City in areas having the potential for revitalization;
           f. Locate public facilities (libraries, parks, schools, community centers, etc.) with
              consideration of transit and other transportation opportunities;
           g. Encourage small neighborhood-serving commercial uses within or adjacent to
              residential neighborhoods when such areas are aesthetically compatible with
              adjacent areas; do not create conflicts with neighborhood schools, minimize traffic,
              noise, and lighting impacts; encourage and accommodate pedestrian and bicycle
              access; and, are occupied by commercial uses that have a neighborhood-scale
              market area rather than a community-wide market area. Provide pedestrian
              connection to reduce walking distances to ¼ mile or less;
           h. Encourage a development pattern that is contiguous with existing developed areas
              of the City.
           i. Promote the use of trees and plants in travelway landscaping and residences.
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  6-4

              CHAPTER 7.0
COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                                        Community Design
                                                                                  Element
7.0      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Community Design Element brings together the physical elements and design features of
Corcoran thereby establishing a strong sense of place and local identity. The unique
characteristics that define the community are protected and encouraged in this element.
Residential, commercial and industrial design as well as landscaping, streetscape, focal points,
boundaries and vistas are addressed.
PURPOSE OF THE COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
The Community Design Element addresses the conservation and enhancement of the visual
quality of the Corcoran environment. New development and redevelopment create pressure on
the natural and historic resources in Corcoran that form the community’s unique character. The
Community Design Element helps to preserve and improve the quality of life in Corcoran by
addressing: the protection of natural resources; the preservation and enhancement of the
historical character of the community; the harmonious incorporation of new development into
existing public and private development; and the maintenance of the community’s “small-town,
rural atmosphere.”
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
The Community Design Element is not a State-mandated element, but is an important component
of the Corcoran General Plan. The Element comprises four sections: Introduction; the Purpose of
the Community Design Element; the Scope and Content of the Community Design Element; and
Objectives, Policies and Standards. In the Objectives, Policies and Standards section, major
issues related to the preservation and enhancement of the character of the community are
identified and related policies and standards are established to address these issues.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                7-1

                                                                              Community Design Element
Gateways/Streetscape Design
OBJECTIVES
A. Improve the appearance of city streets.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    7.1    Promote a city-wide street tree planting
           program which enhances the appearance
           of the street and is scaled in relationship
           to the function of the roadway. Tree
           wells shall be located and designed to
           ensure adequate sight distance for traffic   A pedestrian/bike trail with attractive lighting and
           and pedestrian safety.                       landscaping is an asset to the community.
    7.2    The undergrounding of utilities along the City’s main corridors is a priority. In
           developing areas, new development projects shall place all new utility lines
           underground. The City will also explore a range of options for undergrounding utilities
           in existing developed areas.
    7.3    Ensure all signs are compatible with the overall streetscape design including the
           redesign/removal of signs, which are disruptive elements.
    7.4    Outdoor advertising billboards shall not be allowed within the City limits.
    7.5    Establish coordinated, distinctive and high quality signage, accent plantings and paving
           materials for entries into the City.
Residential Development
OBJECTIVES
A. Improve the appearance and condition of
    existing residential areas.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    7.6    Pursue removal of vehicles on
           residential     property,     which     are
           abandoned, unregistered or in a state of
           disrepair. Existing City codes pertaining
           to abandoned vehicles shall be enforced.
                                                              Modern subdivision with shade trees.
    7.7    Review the adequacy of existing Zoning Code enforcement procedures pertaining to
           property maintenance.
General Plan                                                                      Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                           7-2

                                                                                Community Design Element
    7.8    Encourage the planting of street trees in existing residential neighborhoods. Specific
           policies will also be included for street trees in new residential, commercial and
           industrial development.
    7.9    Encourage growth patterns that will promote livable neighborhood development
           principles including the following:
           a. Providing compact development so that vehicle use is reduced to the extent
               practicable, and so that vehicle trips are shorter.
           b. City neighborhoods (one square mile area) should have a mix of land uses including
               housing, schools, small shops and neighborhood shopping centers. Residential uses
               should be clustered within walking distance of commercial and service facilities.
           c. Neighborhoods should be designed as suburban “villages” with connectivity
               consistent with the circulation element’s policies.
OBJECTIVES
A. Promote high quality new residential neighborhoods.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   7.10    Encourage innovative site planning and
           housing design, including the use of
           Specific Plans to allow flexibility in zoning
           standards where the highest design values
           are proposed.
   7.11    Require site plan review procedures for all
           single     and     multi-family     residential
           development, including provisions for
           building setbacks, lot coverage, parking,
           access and circulation, outdoor lighting,
           signage, architecture and landscaping.
                                                              Single Family residential with street trees, porch,
   7.12    Require the planting of street trees in            varied front yard setback and aesthetic
           parkways.
   7.13    The following techniques should be used in the design of single and multi-family
           residential development:
           a. Varying front yard setbacks within the same structure, except where doing so would
               overemphasize the appearance of garages;
           b. Staggered and/or reversed unit plans to provide variability in the outward
               appearance of the building(s);
General Plan                                                                       Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                            7-3

                                                                          Community Design Element
           c. Building materials and design that ensure consistency with adjacent land uses and
                structures;
           d. Adequate open space and landscaping;
           e. Dense landscaping adjacent to buildings;
           f. Encourage a variety of orientations to the buildings to avoid monotony; and,
           g. Limitation on second story views to adjacent property.
   7.14    Parking areas in multi-family residential projects should be visible from the units they
           serve and be located behind the building where possible. Long rows of garages or
           parking spaces should be avoided.
   7.15    Landscaped planters should be provided on an average of every ten spaces and should,
           where possible, align with building entrances.
   7.16    Second story views to adjacent land areas should be controlled through the use of
           increased setbacks, dense tree plantings, enhanced fence requirements or other means.
   7.17    Encourage residential developments to plant and maintain adequate and attractive front
           yard landscaping.
   7.18    The City shall periodically evaluate existing residential setback requirements to
           consider increasing landscaping and improving general neighborhood aesthetics.
           Reduced setbacks may be appropriate in neighborhoods designed with a strong
           pedestrian focus and amenities to encourage neighborhood interaction. Such amenities
           may include front porches, canopy trees over the street, recessed or rear facing garages
           etc.
   7.19    The City shall encourage the development of a broad and balanced range of housing at
           all price levels. As noted in the housing element, the City has underserved the
           moderate and above moderate housing market. Estate residential land use designation
           shall be used to encourage and preserve such housing types.
   7.20    Strengthen the City’s sense of history by identifying and preserving historic residential
           structures throughout the community.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                7-4

                                                                               Community Design Element
Commercial Development
OBJECTIVES
A. Ensure that all commercial and industrial
    development is attractive and of high-quality
    design, to enhance the image of the city.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   7.21    Continue site plan review procedures
           for all commercial and industrial
           development, including provisions for
           building setbacks, lot coverage,
           parking, access and circulation,
                                                        Example of Retail uses with parking in the rear,
           outdoor lighting, signage, and               varying roof planes and aesthetic landscaping.
           landscaping.
   7.22    Promote rehabilitation of appropriate commercial sites and investigate funding
           opportunities for rehabilitation/remodeling of small businesses.
   7.23    Strengthen the City’s sense of history by preserving, when possible, historic structures
           throughout the community.
   7.24    Buildings on a site should be linked visually through architectural style, colors and
           materials, signage, landscaping, design details such as light fixtures, and the use of
           arcades, trellises or other open structures.
   7.25    The height and scale of new development should be compatible with that of
           surrounding buildings where an established pattern or character is apparent. New
           development should provide a transition from the height of adjacent structures to the
           maximum height of new development.
   7.26    Commercial Development adjacent to the residentially designated properties shall
           comply with policy 1.29 of the Land Use Element.
   7.27    Tall dominating structures should be broken up by creating horizontal emphasis
           through the use of trim, awnings, eaves or other ornamentation, and by using a
           combination of complementary colors.
   7.28    All roof equipment shall be screened from a horizontal line of sight. Screening should
           be an integral part of the roof design and not appear as a “tacked on” afterthought. For
           flat roofs, a screen enclosure behind the parapet wall may be used if it is made to
           appear as an integral part of the structure’s design. Ground or interior-mounted
           mechanical equipment (with appropriate screening) is encouraged as an alternative to
           roof-mounting.
General Plan                                                                       Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                         7-5

                                                                          Community Design Element
   7.29    Structures in pedestrian-oriented areas should provide continuous storefronts at the
           ground level front elevation.
   7.30    Entries should be protected from the elements and should create a focus or sense of
           entry for the building. Wall recesses, roof overhangs, canopies, arches, signs, and
           similar architectural features should be integral elements of building design calling
           attention to the importance of the entry.
   7.31    Vertical mixed use projects, where residential uses are located above commercial or
           office uses, or office uses located above commercial uses, are encouraged.
   7.32    Buildings shall be designed with a precise concept for adequate signage. Signs shall be
           integrated into the design of buildings and should be part of the architecture. All
           signage shall be compatible with the building and site design relative to colors,
           materials and placement, and shall respect established architectural and/or historical
           character. Areas intended for signage shall be identified on development plans.
   7.33    Monument-type signs are preferred over tall pole signs for business identification,
           wherever possible. Where several tenants occupy the same site, individual wall
           mounted signs are appropriate in combination with a monument sign identifying the
           development. Custom signs, which are unique and creative, are encouraged, provided
           that the style of the sign complements the style and design of the building. The City
           will encourage the preservation of historic signs that are in themselves architectural
           features.
   7.34    The planting of street trees is encouraged for all existing and new commercial and
           industrial development.
   7.35    Buildings, landscaping, parking and other development features should be arranged in a
           manner that is compatible with the size, scale and appearance of nearby development.
   7.36    Landscaped areas should be clustered on a site to maximize their effect on the public
           view.
   7.37    Landscaping should be used to define areas such as entrances to buildings and parking
           lots, define edges of various land uses, provide transition between neighboring
           properties (buffering), and provide screening for outdoor storage, loading and
           equipment areas.
   7.38    Landscaping should be in scale with adjacent buildings and be of appropriate size at
           maturity to accomplish its intended purpose.
   7.39    Areas of a site not utilized for parking, circulation, storage or other uses, shall be
           landscaped.
   7.40    Parking lots shall not overwhelm views of a site and shall incorporate landscaping for
           all areas not used for vehicle storage, access or circulation.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                7-6
                                                                            Community Design Element
   7.41    Site planning should emphasize a strong relationship to the adjoining street(s) and
           encourage pedestrian circulation and access. Pedestrian access shall be separate from
           vehicular access, where feasible.
   7.42    Site plans shall provide safe and well-defined pedestrian connections from buildings to
           parking areas, from buildings to the adjoining street(s), and among buildings on the
           same site. Pedestrian connections between commercial development and surrounding
           residential neighborhoods should also be provided, where they are consistent with the
           security and similar concerns.
   7.43    Buildings, sidewalks, and parking lots should be located to minimize conflicts between
           pedestrian and vehicular circulation on a site.
   7.44    Loading and trash facilities shall be located where they may be adequately screened
           from view (generally at the rear of the structures, away from the street).
   7.45    Long expanses of fence shall be offset and architecturally designed to prevent
           monotony, and shall include landscaped pockets and limited openings.
   7.46    Priority should be given to development in the downtown area.
   Industrial Development
   7.47    The City shall encourage the rehabilitation of appropriate industrial sites and
           investigate funding opportunities for rehabilitation/remodeling of small businesses.
   7.48    Site design for new industrial development shall consider the following:
           a. Controlled site access;
           b. Service, storage, and loading areas located at the rear or side of buildings;
           c. Screening of storage and outdoor work areas and equipment;
           d. Landscaping, signage and other features to emphasize the main entrance;
           e. Landscaping for all areas not developed for parking, storage, buildings, etc.
   7.49    Design elements which are undesirable and should be avoided include:
           a. Large, blank, flat wall surfaces;
           b. Exposed, untreated precision block walls;
           c. Chain link fence and barbed wire;
           d. False fronts;
           e. “Stuck on” mansard roofs;
General Plan                                                                   Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  7-7

                                                                          Community Design Element
           f. Materials with high maintenance (such as stained wood, shingles or light gauge
               metal siding)
           g. Mirror window glazing
           h. Loading doors facing the street; and
           i. Exposed roof drains.
   7.50    Where industrial development abuts non-industrial uses, appropriate buffering
           techniques shall be employed such as setbacks, screening, landscaping, or some
           combination of these.
   7.51    An industrial site shall accommodate all of its required parking on-site without the use
           of on-street parking.
   7.52    On-site circulation shall be designed to provide safe and efficient access for delivery
           vehicles, visitors and employees, and pedestrians.
   7.53    Loading and delivery areas shall be clearly marked with directional signage where
           multiple access points are provided.
   7.54    Loading areas shall be designed to accommodate trucks without them having to back
           onto or otherwise use the adjoining street when feasible.
   7.55    When security fencing is required, it should be a combination of solid pillars, or short
           solid wall segments, and wrought iron grillwork and not include barbed wire.
General Plan                                                                Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                7-8
         CHAPTER 8.0
PUBLIC SERVICES AND
 FACILITIES ELEMENT

                                 Public Services and Facilities
                                                                                 Element
8.0      PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Public Services and Facilities Element addresses the community need for public services
and facilities. The City is currently well served with infrastructure, and with master plans in
place to guide capital spending to make improvements as necessary. Future development of the
remaining vacant land within the City will require expansion of public services and facilities to
meet the increase in demand for service. Planning for this future increase in demand will ensure
that the needs of future residents for public services and infrastructure are met, while avoiding
adverse impacts to the existing community.
PURPOSE OF THE PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
The purpose of the Public Services & Facilities Element is to ensure that sufficient levels of
public services are provided as Corcoran develops. Working in conjunction with the Land Use
Element, the Public Services & Facilities Element plans for the needed expansion and funding of
public services and infrastructure to coincide with new development.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
The Public Services & Facilities Element is not a state-mandated element. The issues addressed
within this Element closely relate to the Land Use Element. The Element is comprised of four
sections: the Introduction; Purpose of the Public Services & Facilities Element; Scope and
Content of the Public Services & Facilities Element; and the Objectives, Policies and Standards.
In the Objectives, Policies and Standards section, major issues related to the provision of public
services and facilities are identified and related policies and standards are established to address
these issues. The objectives, which are overall statements of the community’s desires, are
comprised of broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies and standards serve as
guides for infrastructure and facility improvements to provide sufficient levels of service.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 8-1

                                                                   Public Services and Facilities Element
Public Facility Improvement
OBJECTIVES
A. It is the policy of the City that new growth shall provide adequate means of funding the
    expansion of services and facilities necessary to support increasing development. Fees may
    be established to pay for both needed facilities, and incremental demands on existing
    facilities.
B. A master plan for the development and funding of necessary services and utilities (including
    but not limited to storm drainage, water and sanitary facilities) shall be developed and
    adopted. Funding can be through the formation of an assessment district(s), entering into
    deferral agreements or direct developer funding of improvements. Distribution of cost for
    improvements shall be done in a fair and equitable manner.
C. Facilities and services shall be consistent with the General Plan land use goals and objectives.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    8.1    All applications for annexation and development shall include an infrastructure and
           public services assessment, to be completed by the applicant, to determine
           infrastructure needs, feasibility, timing, and financing.
    8.2    The City of Corcoran shall prepare and implement City-wide infrastructure master
           plans which carry out adopted land use goals, objectives and policies and federal and
           State regulations. These master plans shall be implemented through various funding
           mechanisms including assessment district, property owner’s associations, user fees,
           development impact fees, mitigation payments, reimbursement agreements and/or other
           mechanisms which provide for equitable distribution of development and maintenance
           costs.
    8.3    The City shall require the extension and construction of infrastructure to proposed
           developments according to adopted elements and master plans. The City shall use
           reimbursement agreements or other financing techniques to reimburse developers for
           the cost of any infrastructure oversizing which may be required.
    8.4    Urban growth management planning shall be coordinated with public and private
           utilities.
    8.5    Storm water runoff drainage structures shall be designed to limit erosion.
    8.6    Developers shall be responsible for the construction of adequate connections to existing
           and planned infrastructure facilities. In some cases, off-site improvements may be
           required to provide a point of connection to master planned facilities which are not yet
           in place.
General Plan                                                                    Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                      8-2

                                                                   Public Services and Facilities Element
    8.7    To make the best use of funds, growth shall be encouraged in areas where it is possible
           to develop facilities incrementally.
    8.8    New development shall demonstrate that adequate sewerage capacity and sewage
           treatment capacity exist prior to development or that conditions of project approval will
           ensure adequate capacity will be created as part of the project prior to the issuance of
           building permits. Conditions may include installation of necessary facilities or other
           methods acceptable to the City.
   8.9     New municipal water wells should be located so that they will not conflict with planned
           residential neighborhoods. They should have design, screening, landscaping and
           architectural improvements which make them compatible with adjacent land uses.
   8.10    The City shall require industrial sewage pretreatment for dischargers that have high
           biological treatment demands or other highly concentrated constituents. Water
           conservation measures should also be encouraged for industrial, commercial and
           residential uses to preserve hydraulic capacity at the treatment plant and to reduce
           impacts to the sewerage system.
   8.11    The City shall require the connection of existing and new business, residents and
           industries to the City’s water and sewer system. The City shall establish fees, which
           enable it to recover the costs of such connection.
   8.12    Conditions of approval shall be implemented with each development to assure that the
           necessary water production, distribution and/or treatment facility is in place prior to
           issuance of a building permit.
   8.13    Conditions of approval shall be implemented with each development to assure that the
           necessary sewer collection facility is in place and/or wastewater treatment plant
           capacity is available prior to issuance of a building permit.
   8.14    The City shall monitor treatment plant operations and consider the related effects of
           land use changes when evaluating plan amendments.
Local Government Facilities and Services
OBJECTIVE
A. Provide high quality government facilities and services to the general public.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
   8.15    The City shall continue to maintain innovative solid waste service and programs.
   8.16    The City’s Capital Improvement Program shall be adequate to meet future growth and
           development needs in conformity with the goals, policies and objectives of the General
           Plan.
General Plan                                                                    Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                      8-3


     CHAPTER 9.0
HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                           Housing Element
NOTE: The City of Corcoran Housing Element was adopted in 2004 and found
to be in compliance with HCD. The policies section has been reformatted only
and included in this report.
9.0      HOUSING ELEMENT
    9.1    CODE ENFORCEMENT
    Code enforcement is an important means to preserve public heath and safety and ensure that
    the character and quality of residential neighborhoods and housing is maintained. The City’s
    Code Enforcement staff under the Community Development Department will work to enforce
    state and local regulations. In conjunction with code enforcement activities, City staff
    provides information to homeowners regarding the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program.
    Objective: Continue to work with the community code violations. Refer property owners to
    the Housing Rehabilitation Program.
    Responsible Agency: Code Enforcement Staff
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: Ongoing
    9.2     PAINT PROGRAMS
    The City offers assistance to low and moderate income homeowners for exterior or interior
    painting in three related programs. The City’s Paint Program covers the cost of paint only.
    Under the Senior/Handicapped Paint Program, the City provides low and moderate income
    seniors and people with disabilities with paint, paint supplies, and supervision. Labor is
    usually provided by youths under a program supervised by the Kings County Office of
    Education. Low and moderate income households residing in the Corcoran Fringe are
    assisted through the Kings County Paint Program for the Corcoran Fringe.
    Objective: City Paint Program: 20-25 annually
                 Senior/Handicapped Paint Program: 10 homes annually
    Kings County Paint Program: 5-10 homes annually-as funding permits
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Job Training Office, Kings
    County Planning Department, and Kings County Office of Education
    Funding: CDBG
    Timeline: Ongoing
General Plan                                                               Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                              9-1

                                                                                 Housing Element
    9.3     HOUSING REHABILITATION PROGRAM
    The City will continue providing rehabilitation loans to lower income households through the
    Housing Rehabilitation Program. Initiated in 1981, the Housing Rehabilitation Program
    provides loans for up to $75,000 for most housing repairs, demolition/reconstruction, energy
    conservation improvements, and handicapped accessibility devices. In 2002, the Program
    received $600,000 in HOME funds which should fund up to 12 loans in 2003. Health and
    safety grants of up to $1,500 are provided to correct minor repairs or improve handicap
    accessibility for very low and low income households.
    Objective: Provide 12-15 loans annually and 10-15 grants annually. Continue to market the
    program through broachers at the public counter. Conduct outreach to major employers (e.g.,
    hospital, school district, and prisons) regarding the program.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: HOME; CDBG.
    Timeline: Ongoing
    9.4     PRESERVATION OF AT-RISK AFFORDABLE HOUSING
    The City continues to work with interested agencies and community organizations to preserve
    at-risk units by monitoring their status, providing technical and/or financial assistance in
    return for extended affordability controls, and ensuring proper tenant notification prior to
    project conversion. Corcoran has 350 units of affordable housing for very low, low, and
    moderate income households created through various City, state, and federal programs. None
    of the housing projects are at-risk for conversion to market rate.
    Objective: Continue to monitor at-risk units.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: Ongoing
    9.5     ADEQUATE SITES
    The City will facilitate construction of new housing to accommodate projected employment
    and population growth and to meet the needs of existing residents. To that end, the Housing
    Element identifies “adequate” sites to accommodate the City’s share of the region’s housing
    needs allocation identified as 854 units (205 very low, 171 low, 137 moderate, and 341 above
    moderate) from 2001-2008. Adequate sites are those with sufficient development and density
    standards, water and sewer services, and adequate infrastructure.
    Objective: Maintain appropriate land use designations to provide adequate sites appropriate
    for new housing to meet Corcoran’s housing needs allocation of 854 units.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
General Plan                                                               Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                              9-2

                                                                                     Housing Element
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: Ongoing
    9.6     DENSITY BONUS PROGRAM
    Corcoran allows a density bonus only in conjunction with a planned unit development. In
    accordance with State law, if a developer allocates at least 20 percent of the units in a housing
    project for lower income households, 10 percent for very low-income households, 50 percent
    for qualifying residents such as senior citizens, or at least 20 percent of condominium units
    for moderate income households, the City must grant a density bonus of 25 percent, along
    with one additional regulatory concession, or provide other incentives of equivalent financial
    value based on the land cost per dwelling unit.
    Objective: Adopt a density bonus ordinance to facilitate affordable housing.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: End of 2005
    9.7     REGULATORY AND FINANCIAL INCENTIVES
    The City also facilitates the development of affordable housing through a number of tools
    including density bonuses, minimal fee requirements (no impact fees), and PUD development
    standards. The “Villa”, a 31 unit housing development, was developed under a PUD that
    permitted narrow lots and reduced setbacks. However, multi-family housing in excess of five
    units requires a conditional use permit. The City will continue to provide regulatory and
    financial assistance to facilitate and encourage the development of housing affordable to very
    low, low, and moderate income households.
    Objective: Continue to defer/reduce fees and expedite processing for affordable housing.
    Annually evaluate conditional use applications for multi-family residential projects to
    determine the impact on the timing, cost, and supply of multi-family housing. If the process
    constrains multi-family development, adopt mitigation, which could include eliminating the
    conditional use process, within 6 months.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: Annually evaluate the impact of the conditional use process as part of the general
    plan progress report required under Government Code Section 65400.
    9.8     FIRST TIME HOMEBUYER PROGRAM
    The City provides housing assistance to new homebuyers through its First Time Homebuyer
    Program. Up to $30,000 in housing assistance in the form of a low interest second mortgage
    loans is provided to qualified very low and low income homebuyers. While the Program is
    currently funded by HOME, a revolving fund has been set up that utilizes repayments of prior
    Agency-assisted second mortgage loans to fund new loans.
General Plan                                                                 Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  9-3

                                                                                     Housing Element
    Objective: Offer 10-12 loans per year. Conduct outreach to major employers (e.g., hospital,
    school district, and prisons) regarding the availability of the program.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: HOME and revolving loan fund
    Timeline: Ongoing
    9.9     RDA CLOSING COSTS ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (in development)
    The RDA Closing Costs Assistance Program is designed to assist moderate income families
    to purchase a home. This program is designed to assist families that do not qualify for the
    HOME-funded First Time Homebuyer Program. The objective of the program is to assist
    households up to $5,000 with the closing costs of purchasing a new home. The City will
    actively work with major employers in Corcoran, including prisons, and provide publications
    and advertisements, to ensure that they are aware of the program.
    Objective: Initiate new program and assist 10 households annually. Conduct outreach to
    major employers (e.g., hospital, school district, and prisons) regarding the program.
    Responsible Agency: RDA
    Funding: RDA Funds
    Timeline: Initiate program by 2004
    9.10    NEW CONSTRUCTION PROGRAM/INFILL LOTS (in development)
    The purpose of the New Construction Program is to provide financing to low, first-time
    homebuyers for construction of affordable housing. Thirty-year fixed rate home loans up to
    $85,000 will be provided with a five percent interest rate. Applicants must provide a
    minimum of $1,000 down payment and must attend a two-hour home ownership workshop.
    City funds are used to purchase infill lots in existing neighborhoods and finance the
    construction of affordable single-family residences.
    Objective: Initiate program and assist construction of five affordable single-family homes.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and RDA
    Funding: RDA Funds
    Timeline: Initiate program by 2004
    9.11    PURCHASE          AND        REHABILITATION           HOMEOWNERSHIP          PROGRAM
           (in development)
    The purpose of the Purchase and Rehabilitation Homeownership Program is to improve the
    condition of housing for families that live in substandard or overcrowded conditions and
    assist very low and low income families purchase quality homes. The City will provide a
    zero percent deferred loan to assist homebuyers purchase and rehabilitate a substandard
    home. Applicants must provide a $1,000 down payment and must attend a home ownership
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 9-4
                                                                                     Housing Element
    education workshop. The City will advertise the program in local newspapers and create
    English and Spanish flyers advertising the program.
    Objective: Initiate program. Conduct outreach to major employers (e.g., hospital, school
    district, and prisons) regarding the program.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and RDA
    Funding: RDA Funds and CDBG Funds
    Timeline: Initiate program by 2004
    9.12     SECTION 8 RENTAL VOUCHER
    Administered by the Kings County Housing Authority, Corcoran will continue to participate
    in the Section 8 rental assistance program. The Section 8 rental assistance program provides
    rental subsides to very low income households that spend more than 30 percent of their
    income on rent. The rent subsidy is the difference between 30 percent of the monthly income
    and the allowable rent determined by the federal government. Currently, 69 households in
    Corcoran receive Section 8 assistance.
    Objective: Assist the Housing Authority in promoting the Section 8 program.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, County Housing Authority
    Funding: HUD
    Timeline: Ongoing
    9.13     AFFORDABLE HOUSING ASSISTANCE
    The City promotes affordable housing through its many programs - home ownership
    assistance, rehabilitation assistance, new construction/infill, and closing costs programs. The
    City receives CDBG and HOME funds for much of its program activities. Affordable housing
    is being developed under existing zoning and development standards, although in some cases
    the City provides financial assistance and regulatory incentives for affordable projects. To
    continue supporting affordable housing production, the City will undertake several actions.
    Objective: Seek applicable grants under Proposition 46 and federal sources, provide an
    inventory of housing sites to interested developers, adopt a local density bonus ordinance, and
    continue to pursue housing production and rehabilitation with nonprofits.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: Local, state, and federal funds
    Timeline: Ongoing
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                 9-5
                                                                                      Housing Element
    9.14     EMERGENCY SHELTERS AND TRANSITIONAL HOUSING
    State law requires jurisdictions to provide adequate sites for a variety of housing types
    including emergency shelters and transitional housing. The Corcoran Zoning Ordinance
    conditionally permits transitional housing in several commercial zones, but does not directly
    address the siting of emergency shelters. Corcoran will conditionally permit emergency
    shelters in the C-S zone. This zone is appropriate given the types of residential uses allowed
    (SROs and transitional housing) and is near major thoroughfares, transit access, and service
    facilities. The conditional use permit will facilitate compatibility of such facilities with
    adjacent land uses and require the same findings as other special needs housing.
    Objective: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to permit emergency shelters in the C-S zone
    pursuant to a conditional use permit.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: Revise Ordinance by end of 2004
    9.15     FARMWORKER AND EMPLOYEE HOUSING
    The Corcoran Zoning Ordinance permits mobile homes, as farm employee housing and
    conditionally permits farm employee housing in excess of five units in the A-zone.
    Farmworkers receive the majority of homeownership and home rehabilitation loans each year
    and occupy a large share of assisted multi-family units in Corcoran. Corcoran also supported the
    development of the Whitely Avenue project. To further assist farmworker housing needs, the
    City will:
    Objectives:
    Amend the Zoning Code to incorporate Section 17021 of the Health and Safety Code
    Develop an inventory of suitable sites for farmworker housing
    Assist interested developers by identifying sites and supporting funding applications
    Provide, to the extent feasible, regulatory and financial incentives; and
    Ensure that zoning and development standards facilitate farmworker housing
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: Provide site inventory by 2004 and amend Zoning Code by 2005
    9.16     HOUSING FOR DISABLED PERSONS
    SB520, effective 2002, requires jurisdictions to analyze and remove potential constraints to
    housing for persons with disabilities. The City conducted an analysis of its zoning and land
    use processes, permitting processing procedures, and building codes to identify impediments.
    Several impediments were found with respect to permitting land uses. With respect to land
    uses, the City needs to amend the Zoning Code for residential care facilities, emergency
General Plan                                                                  Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                                  9-6
                                                                                  Housing Element
    shelters, and employee housing. The City Zoning Ordinance also contains an occupancy
    standard defining families by number of occupants.
    Objective: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to permit residential care facilities serving six or
    fewer persons and employee housing by right in residential zones, conditionally permit
    emergency shelters in the C-S zone, and revise the definition of a family. Continue to review
    City ordinances, policies, and practices and remove impediments when found.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and Corcoran City Council
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: 2004
    9.17    PROMOTE EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
    Corcoran currently refers fair housing complaints to HUD and the Tulare/Kings County
    Legal Aid Foundation. However, other communities within Kings County refer fair housing
    complaints to different agencies. Therefore, it may be confusing to residents to know the
    appropriate agency to handle fair housing complaints or issues.
    Objective: Corcoran will coordinate with Kings County to select a local fair housing agency
    to provide landlord/tenant mediation services and fair housing investigations. The City will
    develop a fair housing brochure in Spanish and English or acquire one from a local fair
    housing provider. To broadly disseminate information, the City will distribute the brochure at
    the City Hall, library, post office, and appropriate shopping areas.
    Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
    Funding: General Fund
    Timeline: Ongoing
General Plan                                                               Adopted March 19, 2007
City of Corcoran                                                                               9-7

2009 – 2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                          Kings County
                          City of Avenal
                       City of Corcoran
                        City of Hanford
                       City of Lemoore
                              June 2010


Acknowledgements
The 2009-2014 Kings County Housing Element update is a cooperative effort of Kings County and
the Cities of Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore. Coordination and administrative support was
generously provided by the Kings County Association of Governments.
County of Kings
         Board of Supervisors                           Planning Commission
         Richard Valle, Chair                           Mark Cartwright, Chair
         Tony Barba, Vice Chair                         Riley Jones, Vice Chair
         Richard Fagundes, Supervisor                   R.G. Trapnell, Commissioner
         Joe Neves, Supervisor                          Jim Gregory, Commissioner
         Tony Oliveira, Supervisor                      Louise Draxler, Commissioner
City of Avenal
         City Council                                   Planning Commission
         Harlin Casida, Mayor                           Michael Beil, Chair
         Jim Jepsen, Mayor Pro Tem                      Donna Elliott, Vice Chair
         Sid Craighead, Councilmember                   Jack Horton, Commissioner
         Dogberto Ovalle, Councilmember                 Donna Curty, Commissioner
         David Hedgecock, Councilmember                 Alvaro Preciado, Commissioner
City of Corcoran
         City Council                                   Planning Commission
         Ray Lerma, Mayor                               Dennis Tristao, Chair
         Toni Baltierra, Councilmember                  Richard Garcia, Commissioner
         Dick Haile, Councilmember                      David Cortez, Commissioner
         Larry Hanshew, Councilmember                   Jason Mustain, Commissioner
         Jim Wadsworth, Councilmember                   Troy Van Velson, Commissioner
                                                        Cecilio Barrera, Commissioner
                                                        Bob Bajwa, Commissioner
City of Hanford
         City Council                                   Planning Commission
         Dan Chin, Mayor                                Dennis Ham, Chair
         Sue Sorensen, Vice Mayor                       Jim Irwin, Vice Chair
         Joaquin Gonzales, Councilmember                Judy Beard, Commissioner
         David Thomas, Councilmember                    Danny Escobar, Commissioner
         David Ayres, Councilmember                     Neil Jennings, Commissioner
                                                        Mark Dawson, Commissioner
                                                        David Droker, Commissioner
City of Lemoore
         City Council                                   Planning Commission
         John Murray, Mayor                             Sharon Kendall, Chair
         Mary Hornsby, Mayor Pro Tem                    Lisa Elgin, Vice Chair
         John Plourde, Councilmember                    Bob Clement, Commissioner
         Willard Rodarmel, Councilmember                Jim Marvin, Commissioner
         Billy Siegel, Councilmember                    Dr. Ron Meade, Commissioner
                                                        Marshall Norgaard, Commissioner
                                                        Mel Ormonde, Commissioner
Kings County and Cities of                       i                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                 Housing Element
                                  Technical Steering Committee
Kings County Association of Governments
      Terri King, Executive Director
      Chris Lehn, Planner
County of Kings
      Greg Gatzka, Director – Community Development Agency
      Jeremy Kinney, Senior Planner
      Marcum Caldwell, Associate Planner
City of Avenal
      Steve Sopp, Community Development Director
City of Corcoran
      Susan Atkins, Community Development Director
      Jeri Grant, former Community Development Director (retired)
      Kevin Tromborg, Asst. Community Development Director/Building Official
City of Hanford
      Cathy Cain, Planning Manager
      Melody Haigh, Senior Planner
      Sandra Lerma-Martinez, Housing Specialist
      Lori Saldana, Housing Specialist
City of Lemoore
      Holly Smyth, Planning Director
      Brooke Austin, Housing Specialist
      Joseph Mendiola, Assistant Planner
Consultant assistance provided by:
         CONEXUS
         John Douglas, AICP, Principal
         Greg Konar, AICP
2009-2014                                       ii                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                   Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                         These Contents pages contain hyperlinks.
                                         Navigate to a section or page by clicking on the title
Contents                                 or the page number.
Chapter 1. Introduction ...............................................................................................................1-1
              A.      Planning Context ...............................................................................................1-1
              B.      Methodology.....................................................................................................1-3
              C.      Community Involvement...................................................................................1-5
Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment .......................................................................................2-1
              A.      Population and Household Characteristics........................................................2-1
              B.      Employment Trends ..........................................................................................2-7
              C.      Housing Characteristics ..................................................................................2-11
              D.      Special Needs Groups .....................................................................................2-19
              E.      Analysis of At Risk Housing .............................................................................2-27
              F.      Housing Growth Needs ..................................................................................2-30
Chapter 3. Resources and Opportunities .....................................................................................3-1
              A.      Land Resources .................................................................................................3-1
              B.      Financial and Administrative Resources ............................................................3-7
              C. Opportunities for Energy Conservation ...........................................................3-10
Chapter 4. Constraints.................................................................................................................4-1
              A.      Governmental Constraints ................................................................................4-1
              B.      Non-Governmental Constraints ......................................................................4-26
              C. Fair Housing....................................................................................................4-30
Chapter 5. Housing Plan ..............................................................................................................5-1
              A.      Goals and Policies .............................................................................................5-1
              B.      Housing Programs ............................................................................................5-4
              C. Quantified Objectives .....................................................................................5-49
Chapter 6. Glossary of Terms ......................................................................................................6-1
Appendix A – Evaluation of the Prior Housing Element
Appendix B – Land Inventory
Appendix C – Public Participation Summary
List of Tables
Table 2-1        Kings County Population Growth, 1990-2009 ....................................................... 2-1
Table 2-2        Age Characteristics of Householders ..................................................................... 2-2
Table 2-3        Race and Ethnicity .................................................................................................. 2-3
Table 2-4        Household Characteristics ..................................................................................... 2-4
Table 2-5        Housing Overcrowding by Tenure ......................................................................... 2-4
Table 2-6        Median Household Income .................................................................................... 2-5
Table 2-7        Household Income Distribution ............................................................................. 2-6
Table 2-8        Housing Overpayment by Tenure .......................................................................... 2-7
Table 2-9        Industry Employment Projections 2004-2014, Kings County ................................. 2-8
Table 2-10       Major Employers .................................................................................................... 2-9
Table 2-11       Occupations Held by Civilians ............................................................................. 2-10
Table 2-12       Commuting Patterns in Kings County .................................................................. 2-10
Kings County and Cities of                                   iii                                                              2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                                                  Housing Element

Table 2-13      Housing Units by Type .........................................................................................2-11
Table 2-14      Household Tenure and Vacancy Rates ..................................................................2-12
Table 2-15      Age of Housing Stock............................................................................................2-13
Table 2-16      Housing Conditions ..............................................................................................2-14
Table 2-17      Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs ................................................2-14
Table 2-18      Single-Family Home Sales Price Distribution, 2008–09 ........................................2-15
Table 2-19      Kings County New Home Prices 2008-2009.........................................................2-16
Table 2-20      Kings County New Home Listings 2009 ...............................................................2-17
Table 2-21      Rents for Recently-Built Apartments, 2009 ...........................................................2-18
Table 2-22      Senior Housing Needs in Kings County ................................................................2-19
Table 2-23      Female-Headed Households and Large Families ...................................................2-20
Table 2-24      Leading Agricultural Crops, Kings County .............................................................2-21
Table 2-25      Farmworkers by Jurisdiction .................................................................................2-22
Table 2-26      Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers, Kings County ...............................................2-22
Table 2-27      Disabilities by Age ................................................................................................2-24
Table 2-28      Homeless Persons ................................................................................................2-25
Table 2-29      Emergency Shelter Facilities ..................................................................................2-26
Table 2-30      Transitional and Supportive Housing Facilities ......................................................2-26
Table 2-31      At-Risk Housing Projects, 2009-2019 ...................................................................2-27
Table 2-32      Assisted Housing Units .........................................................................................2-28
Table 2-33      Market Value of At-Risk Projects ...........................................................................2-29
Table 2-34      Regional Housing Needs, 2007-2014 ...................................................................2-31
Table 3-1       Housing Development, 2007 - 2008.......................................................................3-2
Table 3-2       Remaining Regional Housing Needs, 2009-2014 ....................................................3-2
Table 3-3       Land Inventory Summary – City of Avenal ..............................................................3-3
Table 3-4       Land Inventory Summary – City of Corcoran ..........................................................3-4
Table 3-5       Land Inventory Summary – City of Hanford ............................................................3-4
Table 3-6       Land Inventory Summary – City of Lemoore ...........................................................3-6
Table 3-7       Land Inventory Summary – Kings County Unincorporated .....................................3-7
Table 3-8       Redevelopment LMI Fund Revenues, Expenditures and Planned Uses 2009-
                2014 .......................................................................................................................3-8
Table 4-1       General Plan Residential Land Use Categories ........................................................4-2
Table 4-2       Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, City of Avenal ..................4-3
Table 4-3       Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, City of Corcoran ..............4-4
Table 4-4       Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, City of Hanford ................4-4
Table 4-5       Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, City of Lemoore ...............4-5
Table 4-6       Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, Kings County ...................4-6
Table 4-7       Residential Development Standards......................................................................4-15
Table 4-8       Development Review Processing ..........................................................................4-19
Table 4-9       Residential Development Fees ..............................................................................4-23
Table 4-10      On-Site and Off-Site Improvements......................................................................4-24
Table 5-1       Quantified Objectives for 2009-2014 ...................................................................5-49
2009-2014                                                          iv                                           Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                               Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

Chapter 1. Introduction
  A. Planni ng Conte xt
Kings County is located within the agriculturally rich San Joaquin Valley, with Fresno County to the
north and west, Tulare County to the east, and Kern County to the south. Created in 1893, Kings
County was carved from the western portion of Tulare County and later added another 100 square
miles from Fresno County. The Kings River, from which the County derives its name, runs along the
northern edges and flows south towards the center of the County. Historically, this river flowed
farther south to what was once Tulare Lake. Now referred to as the Tulare Lake Basin, this area is
extensively used for agricultural crop production.
Kings County is comprised of four cities (Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford, and Lemoore), four
unincorporated community service areas (Armona, Home Garden, Kettleman City, and Stratford),
and a few other smaller community pockets. According to the California Department of Finance,
approximately 155,000 people lived in Kings County as of January 2009, with approximately 19,400
of those housed within the state prisons and Naval Air Station Lemoore. The Lemoore Naval Air
Station houses over 7,300 naval personnel and dependents in approximately 1,600 housing units,
while the Santa Rosa Rancheria is home to about 500 Tachi Yokut Indians on 1,535 acres of tribal
land.
Access through the County and to other major outside destinations is provided by a network of
highways and railroads. While Interstate 5 and State Route 99 provide routes to the Los Angeles and
San Francisco Bay metropolitan areas, State Route 41 connects the valley with the Central Coast and
Yosemite National Park. State Route 198 provides access to Sequoia National Park. The Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Railroad connects Kings County to Sacramento and Bakersfield while the San
Joaquin Valley Railroad connects to Huron to the west and Visalia and Porterville to the east. The
County’s transportation network has placed a key role in its economic development. Agriculture
remains the predominant landscape of Kings County, with approximately 84% of its land area used
for agriculture. While dairy products are the County’s leading commodity, the agricultural industry is
diversified with cotton, cattle, field crops, seeds, fruit & nuts, vegetables, apiary products, livestock &
poultry, and other related products also having a significant presence.
Kings County and Cities of                           1-1                                           2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element

Chapter 1. Introduction
                            Figure 1 – Regional Location Map
2009-2014               1-2                    Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                  Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                          B.     Methodology
  B. Methodol ogy
1.       Purpose and Statutory Authority
The Housing Element is mandated by §§65580-65589 of the California Government Code. State
Housing Element law requires that each city and county identify and analyze existing and projected
housing needs within their jurisdiction and prepare goals, policies, programs and quantified
objectives to further the development, improvement, and preservation of housing. To that end, state
law requires that the housing element:
         •      Identify adequate sites to facilitate and encourage the development, maintenance and
                improvement of housing for households of all economic levels, including persons with
                special needs;
         •      Remove, as legally feasible and appropriate, governmental constraints to the
                production, maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons of all income
                levels;
         •      Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of low- and
                moderate-income households;
         •      Conserve and improve the condition of housing and neighborhoods, including existing
                affordable housing;
         •      Promote equal housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex,
                marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability; and
         •      Preserve lower-income         publicly-assisted    housing     developments       within    each
                community.
The Housing Element is organized into the following major sections:
         •      Analysis of the demographic, housing, and special needs characteristics and trends in
                Kings County jurisdictions (Chapter 2).
         •      Analysis of land, financial, and organizational resources available to address the housing
                goals in Kings County (Chapter 3).
         •      Review of potential market, governmental, and environmental constraints that affect
                Kings County jurisdictions’ ability to address their housing needs (Chapter 4).
         •      The Housing Plan to address identified housing needs, including housing goals, policies
                and programs (Chapter 5).
         •      Evaluation of each jurisdiction’s accomplishments toward meeting the goals and
                objectives set forth in the previous Housing Element (Appendix A).
         •      A detailed land inventory of suitable sites for housing development (Appendix B).
Kings County and Cities of                            1-3                                              2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                             Housing Element

Chapter 1. Introduction
2.       Framework for the Joint Kings County Housing Element
In California, it is typical for each city or county to prepare and maintain its own general plan and
housing element. However, in Kings County the four cities and the County have chosen to
collectively prepare a joint Countywide housing element with administrative support from the Kings
County Association of Governments (KCAG). While unusual, this collaborative approach to the
housing element has a number of advantages, including the following:
         •     Over the past several decades, the trend in dealing with complex public policy issues
               has been toward a regional approach to problem-solving. Existing housing element law
               embodies this principle through the regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) process.
               Perhaps the most recent and far-reaching example of this regional approach is Senate
               Bill 375, the landmark global warming legislation. SB 375 establishes a framework for
               regional planning and “Sustainable Communities Strategies” intended to reduce
               greenhouse gas emissions through land use, housing and transportation policies.
         •     Housing markets are regional in nature and do not stop at jurisdictional boundaries.
               Coordinated regional strategies offer the potential to be more effective in addressing
               housing needs than when each jurisdiction operates individually.
         •     In difficult economic times such as these, economies of scale accruing from shared
               resources can result in significant cost savings to jurisdictions that jointly prepare
               housing elements.
3.       Data Sources
In preparing the Housing Element, various sources of information were consulted. The 2000
decennial Census was used as the primary source of demographic information. However, other
sources supplemented the Census data where available and relevant, including the following:
         •     Housing conditions surveys conducted by the jurisdictions;
         •     Population and housing data from the California Department of Finance (DOF);
         •     Employment data from the California Employment Development Department (EDD);
         •     Local economic data from the Kings County Economic Development Corporation;
         •     Housing market data from the Kings County Board of Realtors;
         •     Population and housing characteristics from Naval Air Station Lemoore;
         •     Point-in-time homeless data provided by Kings/Tulare Continuum of Care;
         •     Land use data based on the general plans and zoning ordinances of each jurisdiction;
               and
         •     Regional housing needs information prepared by the Kings County Association of
               Governments.
2009-2014                                           1-4                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                      Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                        C.   Community Involvement
4.       Relationship to the General Plans
State law requires that the Housing Element be consistent with other elements of jurisdictions’
general plans. Policies and programs set forth in this Housing Element are consistent with policies and
programs in other elements of the respective general plans. However, if during the implementation of
this Housing Element any inconsistencies with other portions of the General Plans are identified,
appropriate amendments to maintain internal consistency will be proposed. For example,
Government Code Sec. 65302.1 requires jurisdictions within the San Joaquin Valley to include in
appropriate elements of the General Plan analysis, policies and feasible implementation measures to
improve air quality. This Housing Element supports this provision of state law through its
identification of sites for development of a variety of housing types in appropriate locations consistent
with the regional growth forecast, regional housing needs plan, and regional transportation plans.
Recent changes to Government Code Sec. 65302 require amendments to the Safety and
Conservation elements to include analysis and policies regarding flood hazard and management
information upon the next revision of the Housing Element after January 1, 2009. If necessary,
amendments to this Housing Element will be processed concurrently in order to maintain consistency
between elements.
  C. Communi ty I nvolve ment
State law requires local governments to make a diligent effort to achieve public participation of all
economic segments of the community in the development of the housing element. To that end, each
jurisdiction has provided opportunities for residents, interested parties, and local officials to
participate in the update process and offer recommendations regarding housing needs and strategies
to address those needs.
The public participation process for this 2009-2014 Housing Element involved four major stages:
       1.    Public workshops and meetings in each of the four cities and the unincorporated County
             during the preparation of the Draft Housing Element;
       2.    Publication of the Draft Housing Element and subsequent review by the California
             Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD);
       3.    Revisions to the Housing Element to address comments from HCD and publication of a
             revised Draft Housing Element;
       4.    Public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council of each city and the
             Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors of Kings County prior to adoption of the final
             Housing Element.
For details regarding the public meetings and hearings, as well as a summary of issues raised during
the update process, please refer to Appendix C.
Kings County and Cities of                          1-5                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element


Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
The availability of decent and affordable housing for
residents is an important housing goal. To accomplish this
goal, a comprehensive assessment of housing needs
provides the basis for developing responsive policies and
programs. This chapter presents and analyzes demographic,
economic, and housing characteristics and their impact
upon housing needs in the cities of Avenal, Corcoran,
Hanford, and Lemoore and unincorporated Kings County.
The Housing Plan (Chapter 5) provides the policies and
strategies to address identified housing needs.
  A. Populati on and Household Cha racte risti cs
Housing needs in Kings County are largely determined by population and employment growth,
coupled with various demographic variables. Characteristics such as age, household size, occupation,
and income combine to influence the type of housing needed and its affordability.
1.       Population Trends
Kings County is comprised
of four incorporated cities Table 2-1
(Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford, Kings County Population Growth, 1990-2009
and Lemoore), four unincor-
                                                                 Total Population            Growth 1990-20092
porated community service
areas     (Armona,         Home                           Non-Group Quarters       Group
                                                                                           1
Garden, Kettleman City, and        Jurisdiction         1990     2000     2009    Quarters     Total        %
Stratford), and a few other Avenal                        5,505   7,973    9,108      6,763      3,603     65%
smaller community pockets.         Corcoran               8,309   9,539   13,067     12,826      4,758     57%
According to the California Hanford                     29,927 40,839 51,839            848     21,912     73%
Department of Finance, Lemoore                          13,606 19,710 24,816              2     11,210     82%
Kings County had a total Unincorporated                 32,122 31,271 33,354          2,120      1,232      4%
population of 154,743 in Kings County                   89,469 109,332 132,184       22,559     42,715     48%
2009; however, approxi- Notes:
mately 15% of that is 1. Group quarters in 2009 ( includes Avenal and Corcoran State Prisons and Naval Air
represented by persons in               Station Lemoore)
                                   2. Excluding group quarters population
group quarters (primarily the Sources: 1990 and 2000 Census; Cal. Dept. of Finance, E5 & E8 Population & Housing
state prisons at Avenal and Estimates, May 2009
Corcoran). Since 1990,
Kings County’s non-institutional population has increased by nearly 50%, as shown in Table 2-1.
Kings County and Cities of                               2-1                                            2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                             Housing Element

Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
During the past two decades, the cities have received most of the growth. Hanford and Lemoore
showed the highest growth, both in number of persons and percentage increase, although the
populations of Avenal and Corcoran also more than doubled during this period.
According to the California Department of Finance (DOF) 1, Kings County population is projected to
reach 250,000 by the year 2030, a gain of more than 60% over 2009 levels. Unlike previous
decades, however, the majority of population growth will be due to non-institutional population
growth.
2.        Age Characteristics
Although population growth strongly affects total demand for new housing, housing needs are also
influenced by age characteristics. Typically, different age groups have distinct lifestyles, family
characteristics, incomes, and housing preferences. As people move through each stage of life, their
housing needs and preferences also change. Age characteristics are therefore important in planning
for the changing housing needs of residents.
Coupled with housing prices, the homeownership rate is related to householder age.
Homeownership rates tend to increase with the age and income of the householder. Countywide in
2000, 87% of all householders aged 65 and older, 75% of households between age 55 and 64, and
67% of householders 45 to 54 owned a home. In contrast, approximately 55% of householders aged
34 to 64 and only 29% of householders aged 34 years and younger owned a home.
Housing needs often differ by age group. For instance, most young adults (under 34) are single or
starting families. Housing needs for younger adults are addressed through apartments or first-time
homeownership opportunities. Middle-aged residents (34-64) may already be homeowners, are
usually in the prime earning power of their careers, and thus tend to seek larger homes. Seniors often
own a home but, due to limited income or disabilities, may need assistance to remain in their homes.
As shown in Table 2-2,
Avenal and Lemoore had                  Table 2-2
the highest percent of                  Age  Characteristics of Householders
younger householders (age                                                    Percentage of Householders by Age Group
                                                           Number of
15-34). Each community in                 Jurisdiction     Households 15-34           34-44     45-54     55-64     65+
the County had approxi-
                                        Avenal                1,928          32%       27%       18%       10%      12%
mately the same percentage
                                        Corcoran              2,769          25%       25%       19%       13%      18%
of middle-age householders
                                        Hanford              13,931          26%       24%       19%       12%      19%
(34-64 years). Corcoran,
                                        Lemoore               6,450          32%       27%       19%       10%      12%
Hanford, and the unin-
                                        Unincorporated        9,340          28%       24%       18%       13%      18%
corporated County areas
                                        Kings County         34,418          28%       25%       19%       12%      17%
had the highest percentage
of seniors. While the large             Source: 2000 Census
percentage of householders between 15 and 34 years old suggests continued demand for new entry-
level housing, the aging of the baby boom generation combined with longer life expectancies will
result in a dramatic increase in the number of senior citizens in the coming decade.
1
    California, Department of Finance, Population Projections for California and Its Counties 2000-2050, 2007.
2009-2014                                                   2-2                                   Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                    A.    Population and Household Characteristics
3.       Race and Ethnicity
As shown in Table 2-3, the largest racial/ethnic groups in Kings County in 2000 were Hispanics (44%)
and Non-Hispanic Whites (43%). Asian, African American and other groups together comprised
about 13% of the County total.
Race/ethnic composition of residents varied considerably among Kings County jurisdictions. In Avenal
and Corcoran, Hispanics comprised the majority of residents, at 84% and 72%, respectively. Non-
Hispanic Whites comprised the largest group in Hanford (50%), Lemoore (49%) and the
unincorporated communities (46%).
        Table 2-3
        Race and Ethnicity
                                                        Race/Ethnicity of Population
                                           Non-
                              Non-Prison Hispanic                  African
        Jurisdiction          Population   White      Hispanic    American       Asian Other
        Avenal                   8,113      13%         84%           1%         <1%     2%
        Corcoran                 9,522      22%         72%           3%         <1%    <1%
        Hanford                 41,686      50%         39%           5%          3%     4%
        Lemoore                 19,712      49%         31%           7%          8%     5%
        Unincorporated          38,931      46%         41%           4%          3%     5%
        Kings County           111,587      43%         44%           5%          4%     4%
        Source: 2000 Census
4.       Household Type and Size
A household refers to the people occupying a home, such as a family, a single person, or unrelated
persons living together. Families often prefer single-family homes or condominiums to accommodate
children, while single persons generally occupy smaller apartments or condominiums. Single-person
households may include seniors living alone or young adults.
Table 2-4 displays household composition by community as reported by the 2000 Census. Families
comprised nearly 80% of all households within Kings County. Avenal had the highest proportion of
families (85.1%), followed by the unincorporated County areas (83.6%) and Corcoran (80.5%).
Countywide, the proportion of single households was approximately 17%. However, the percentage
of single households varied by location. The cities of Hanford (20.5%) and Lemoore (17.4%) had the
highest percentage of single-person households. “Other” households, which include unrelated
people living together, comprised about 5% of all households in the County.
As noted earlier, Kings County has a significant population of people living in group quarters who are
not counted as households. Avenal and Corcoran State Prisons are counted in the total population
figures, but are not counted as households. The same is true for persons living on-base at Naval Air
Station Lemoore.
Kings County and Cities of                         2-3                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                   Housing Element

Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
          Table 2-4
         Household Characteristics
                                                                      Percentage of Households
          Jurisdiction              Households   Average Size    Families      Singles       All Other
          Avenal                        1,928        4.14         85.1%        11.3%           3.6%
          Corcoran                      2,769        3.44         80.5%        15.9%           3.5%
          Hanford                      13,931        2.93         74.5%        20.5%           4.9%
          Lemoore                       6,450        3.06         76.4%        17.4%           6.2%
          Unincorporated                9,340        3.35         83.6%        12.8%           5.1%
          Kings County                 34,418        3.18         78.4%        16.9%           4.6%
          Source: 2000 Census
         a.        Overcrowding
Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the cost of housing. The U.S. Census
Bureau considers a household to be overcrowded when there is more than one person per room,
excluding bathrooms and kitchens; and to be severely overcrowded when there are more than 1.5
occupants per room. Overcrowded households are usually a reflection of the lack of affordable
housing.
Table 2-5 details the percentage of households that live in overcrowded situations. With an average
of 41%, Avenal had the highest overcrowding rate Countywide. At 25%, Corcoran also had a high
prevalence of overcrowding living situations. Hanford and Lemoore had the lowest overcrowding
rates (12%) of all jurisdictions in the County.
    Table 2-5
    Housing Overcrowding by Tenure
                                 Overcrowded Renters             Overcrowded Owners               % of All
                                No. of         % of All         No. of          % of All       Households
    Jurisdiction              Households       Renters        Households       Owners          Overcrowded
    Avenal                       949            45.4%             987            37.5%             41%
    Corcoran                    1,164           30.2%           1,558            20.5%             25%
    Hanford                     5,661           17.4%           8,252            7.5%              12%
    Lemoore                     2,987           16.7%           3,466            7.4%              12%
    Unincorporated              4,407           21.7%           4,987            11.9%             16%
    Kings County                15,168          21.2%           19,250           11.2%             16%
    Source: 2000 Census
2009-2014                                               2-4                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                            Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                    A.     Population and Household Characteristics
5.       Household Income
Along with housing prices and rents, household
income is the most important factor affecting         Table 2-6
housing opportunities within Kings County.            Median Household Income
Housing choices such as tenure (owning versus                            Median Household
renting), housing type, and location are              Jurisdiction            Income       % of County
dependent on household income. On the other           Avenal                 $ 29,710          83%
hand, however, household size and type often          Corcoran               $ 30,783          86%
affect the proportion of income that can be           Hanford                $ 37,582         105%
spent on housing. Table 2-6 shows the median          Lemoore                $ 40,314         113%
household income of each community as                 Unincorporated            N/A            N/A
reported in the 2000 Census.                          Kings County           $ 35,749           ---
                                                      Source: 2000 Census
The median household income for the entire
County was reported as $36,000. Hanford and Lemoore had the highest median household incomes
at approximately $37,600 and $40,300, respectively. This is likely due to the larger proportion of
these cities’ workforces with “white-collar” jobs.
Avenal and Corcoran had median households below the County average, at $29,700 and $30,800,
respectively. In both communities, a larger proportion of the workforce held “blue-collar” jobs such
as farming, construction, extraction, manufacturing, production, transportation, and material moving.
Although median household income is a common benchmark for comparison, the distribution of
household income also provides a useful measure of housing needs in a community. In housing
analysis, households are typically grouped into categories, expressed relative to the Area Median
Income (AMI) and adjusted for family size. Using State of California income thresholds, the income
groups analyzed were as follows:
         •      Extremely low income: Up to 30% of AMI
         •      Very low income: 31-50% of AMI
         •      Low income: 51-80% of AMI
         •      Moderate income: 81-120% of AMI
         •      Upper income: Above 120% of AMI
Table 2-7 estimates the number of households within each income category in each jurisdiction as
reported in HUD CHAS data based on the 2000 Census. In comparison to other cities, Avenal and
Corcoran had the highest percentage of extremely-low-, very-low- and low-income households,
comprising 54% and 52% of their households, respectively. Countywide, 43% of all households had
extremely-low, very-low and low incomes. Hanford and Lemoore had the highest proportion of
residents with moderate and above-moderate incomes.
In 2006 state law was amended (Assembly Bill 2634) to add the Extremely-Low-Income category to
the required analysis of household characteristics and housing growth needs. Due to their limited
incomes, these households have the greatest difficulty finding suitable housing at an affordable price.
Further discussion of housing costs and affordability, as well as housing growth needs by income
category is provided later in this chapter.
Kings County and Cities of                         2-5                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
     Table 2-7
     Household Income Distribution
                                                   Income Distribution
                                                                                      Mod/
                                                                                     Above
     Jurisdiction     Ex. Low       %      V. Low      %        Low         %         Mod.     %
     Avenal                251     13%         359    19%          411    22%            840     45%
     Corcoran              454     17%         381    14%          552    21%          1,290     48%
     Hanford             1,416     10%       1,822    13%        2,414    17%          8,254     59%
     Lemoore               606      9%         633    10%        1,088    17%          4,150     64%
     Unincorporated      1,082     11%       1,347    14%        2,072    22%          4,970     52%
     Kings County        3,809     11%       4,542    13%        6,537    19%         19,504     57%
     Source: HUD/CHAS based on 2000 Census
         a.       Housing Overpayment
State and federal housing law defines overpayment as a household paying more than 30% of gross
income for housing expenses. Housing overpayment is especially problematic for lower-income
households that have limited resources for other living expenses.
As shown in Table 2-8, a significant portion of lower-income households in each community
overpaid for housing according to HUD CHAS data (special tabulations based on the 2000 Census).
However, the overpayment rate varied by tenure and income level. More than half of all very-low-
and extremely-low-income households in all jurisdictions, both owners and renters, were reported to
be overpaying. Few households with moderate and above-moderate incomes faced overpayment –
often less than 10% of households.
2009-2014                                          2-6                               Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                      B.     Employment Trends
          Table 2-8
          Housing Overpayment by Tenure
                                         Renter Households                       Owner Households
          Jurisdiction/                                 Percent                                Percent
          Income Category          Households        Overpaying           Households          Overpaying
          Avenal
              Ex. Low                  190               80.5%                  61              68.9%
              Very Low                 237               67.9%                 122              62.3%
              Low                      177               21.5%                 234              22.6%
              Moderate & Above         306                None                 534              6.6%
              Totals                   910               38.7%                 951              21.7%
          Corcoran
              Ex. Low                  320               79.1%                 134              75.8%
              Very Low                 175               58.9%                 206              57.5%
              Low                      240               19.6%                 312              25.4%
              Moderate & Above         403                3.7%                 887              8.8%
              Totals                  1,138              36.7%                1,539             25.9%
          Hanford
              Ex. Low                 1,098              80.5%                 318              63.8%
              Very Low                1,234              75.0%                 588              52.6%
              Low                     1,287              40.6%                1,127             52.6%
              Moderate & Above        2,048               4.8%                6,206             12.1%
              Totals                  5,667              42.9%                8,239             22.5%
          Lemoore
              Ex. Low                  509               69.5%                  97              79.4%
              Very Low                 455               77.1%                 178              52.8%
              Low                      657               32.4%                 431              60.6%
              Moderate & Above        1,355               7.7%                2,750             14.5%
              Totals                  2,976              34.4%                3,456             24.1%
          Kings County
              Ex. Low                 2,764              76.2%                1,045             71.9%
              Very Low                2,926              63.0%                1,616             50.2%
              Low                     3,680              26.6%                2,857             45.1%
              Moderate & Above        5,778               4.4%               13,726             12.4%
              Totals                  15,148             34.2%               19,244             23.7%
          Source: HUD/CHAS based on 2000 Census (http://socds.huduser.org/chas/CHAS_java.odb)
  B. Empl oyment Trends
Kings County’s economy has an important impact on housing needs. Employment growth typically
results in increased housing demand in areas that serve as regional employment centers. Moreover,
the type of occupation and income levels for new employment also affects housing demand. This
section describes the economic and employment patterns in Kings County and how these patterns
influence housing needs.
Kings County and Cities of                               2-7                                              2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                                Housing Element

Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
1.        Employment by Industry
Kings County supports a diversified economy as shown in Table 2-9. Government represents the
largest sector (due in large part to state prisons) and provided 31% of all jobs in the County as of
2004. Farm employment represented 16% of jobs, while related food processing employment
represented an additional 6%. Retail trade comprised 9% of jobs while education and health services
(excluding public schools) comprised 8%.
  Table 2-9
  Industry Employment Projections 2004-2014, Kings County
                                                                              Annual Average
                                                                                Employment         Employment Change
  NAICS Code                            Industry Title                        2004       2014       Workers     Percent
                   Total Employment                                            43,400     50,500        7,100       16.4
                   Self Employment (A)                                          3,100       3,300         200         6.5
                   Unpaid Family Workers (B)                                      200         200           0         0.0
  11               Total Farm                                                   7,100       8,100       1,000       14.1
                   Total Nonfarm                                               32,900     38,900        6,000       18.2
  1133,21,23       Natural Resources, Mining, & Const.                          1,200       1,500         300       25.0
  31-33            Manufacturing                                                3,800       4,200         400       10.5
                        Durable Goods                                             600         700         100       16.7
                        Nondurable Goods                                        3,300       3,500         200         6.1
                             Food Beverage and Tobacco Mfg                      2,800       3,000         200         7.1
                             Residual-Textile Mills                               500         500           0         0.0
  22,42-49         Trade, Transportation, and Utilities                         5,000       6,400       1,400       28.0
  42                    Wholesale Trade                                           700         800         100       14.3
  44-45                 Retail Trade                                            3,700       4,700       1,000       27.0
  445                        Food and Beverage Stores                             900       1,000         100       11.1
  452                        General Merchandise Stores                         1,000       1,400         400       40.0
                             Residual-Miscellaneous Store Retailers             1,900       2,300         400       21.1
  22,48-49              Transportation, Warehousing & Utilities                   700         900         200       28.6
  51               Information                                                    300         400         100       33.3
  52-53            Financial Activities                                         1,200       1,300         100         8.3
  52                    Finance and Insurance                                     600         700         100       16.7
  53                    Real Estate and Rental and Leasing                        600         600           0         0.0
  54-56            Professional and Business Services                           1,300       1,500         200       15.4
  61-62            Education and Health Services                                3,300       4,200         900       27.3
  71-72            Leisure and Hospitality                                      2,500       3,200         700       28.0
  81               Other Services (excluding private household workers)           600         800         200       33.3
                   Government                                                  13,600     15,400        1,800       13.2
                        Federal Government*                                     1,000       1,000           0         0.0
                        State Government                                        5,400       5,500         100         1.9
                        Local Government                                        7,200       8,900       1,700       23.6
  Source: California Employment Development Department, March 2005 Benchmark
  *Does not include military personnel
  Note: Industry detail may not add up to totals due to independent rounding.
The California Employment Development Department’s job growth forecast for 2004-2014
estimated an increase in 7,100 new jobs during this 10-year period, or 16.4%. The industries
estimated to gain the largest number of new jobs during this period are local government (1,700
2009-2014                                                      2-8                                Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                           B.       Employment Trends
jobs), trade/transportation/utilities (1,400 jobs), agriculture (1,000 jobs), retail trade (1,000 jobs), and
education/health services (900 jobs). It should be noted, however, that this forecast was prepared
before the onset of the current recession in 2007. As in many counties in the Central Valley,
unemployment has risen significantly in Kings County. According to the most recent report from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics 2 (June 2009) the unemployment rate in Kings County rose to 15.3% in April
2009, up from 10.0% the previous year.
Table 2-10 summarizes the major employers                      Table 2-10
for the cities of Kings County. Given the rural                Major Employers
nature of the unincorporated communities,
                                                                                                              Number of
employment and economic activity is
                                                               City             Major Employers               Employees
concentrated in the cities.
                                                               Avenal      Avenal State Prison                   1,300
                                                                           Paramount Farms                        600
                                                                           Reef Sunset USD                        306
2.       Occupations Held by
                                                               Corcoran Corcoran Prisons                         2,940
         Residents                                                         JG Boswell Co.                         375
Occupations held by residents determine the                                Corcoran USD                           389
income earned by a household and their                                     Corcoran Hospital                      103
corresponding ability to afford housing. Higher                Hanford     Adventist Health                       857
paying jobs provide broader housing                                        Del Monte Food                         435
                                                                           Marquez Bro. Cheese                   1,500
opportunities for residents, while lower-paying
                                                                           Exopack                                306
jobs limit housing options. Understanding
                                                                           Kings County                          1,041
employment and occupation patterns can thus
                                                                           Hanford Joint Union                    740
provide insight into present housing needs.
                                                                           Hanford Elementary SD                  520
Table 2-11 describes the number and type of
                                                                           The Sentinel                           220
jobs held by residents in each community in
                                                               Lemoore     NAS (military)                        7,500
2000.                                                                      NAS (civilian)                        1,400*
                                                                           Leprino Foods                          670
In Hanford and Lemoore, a higher proportion
                                                                           S K Foods                         300 (seasonal)
of residents held managerial, business or                                                                   50 (year-round)
financial related employment. These types of                               Palace Casino                          800
“white-collar” jobs typically pay higher salaries              *Excludes military personnel (civilian employees only)
and thus allow residents to afford a greater                   Source: Kings County Economic Development Corporation.
choice of housing opportunities. However,                      2009
service occupations, sales/office positions, and
“blue-collar” positions typically pay relatively lower wages. Residents in these occupations have more
limited ability to afford housing and, in some cases, are in the greatest need of affordable housing
and assistance.
According to the 2000 Census, a significantly larger percentage of Hanford and Lemoore residents
held “white-collar” jobs, and a relatively smaller percentage held “blue-collar” jobs. Few workers in
either city held agricultural jobs. As a result, the median household incomes of Hanford and Lemoore
residents were the highest in the County. By the same token, the high prevalence of “blue-collar”
and agricultural jobs held by residents in Avenal and Corcoran was responsible for a lower median
household income.
2
   U.S. Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, News Release, June 3, 2009.
Kings County and Cities of                                  2-9                                                    2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                                        Housing Element

Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
  Table 2-11
  Occupations Held by Civilians
                                                                             Corcoran      Hanford      Lemoore       Unincorp.
                                                                                                                                  Kings
  Jurisdiction                                              Avenal                                                                County
  Management, business, and financial                      5%              6%             10%          9%            13%          10%
  Professional and related occupations                     9%              12%            20%          18%           11%          16%
  Service occupations                                      15%             18%            22%          22%           16%          20%
  Sales and office occupations                             16%             18%            23%          26%           23%          23%
  Farming, fishing, and forestry occupations               33%             13%            4%           4%            14%          9%
  Construction, extraction, and maintenance                9%              9%             8%           8%            10%          9%
  Production, transport., material moving                  14%             22%            13%          12%           13%          14%
  Source: 2000 Census
3.      Jobs-Housing Balance
Commuting patterns in Kings County have an important implication for housing needs. Larger
employers in the County (e.g., three state prisons, Naval Air Station Lemoore, and agricultural
industries) generate a significant number of jobs. However, the workforce employed at these
institutions or in the agricultural industries may live in other communities for a variety of reasons,
including preferences, the availability of suitable housing, or other reasons.
Table 2-12 summarizes commuting patterns of residents in Kings County. Countywide, 33% of
residents lived and worked in the same community, 46% lived in the County but not in the
jurisdiction where employed, and 21% worked outside the County. In contrast, 50% of the
workforce of Corcoran and Hanford lived in their community. This residency-workplace balance was
by far the highest of the jurisdictions in Kings County.
In contrast, only 24% of Avenal’s residents and 30% of Lemoore’s residents worked and lived in their
communities. The difference was attributable to a variety of reasons. For instance, only 8% of the
employees at Avenal State Prison lived in Avenal, while 40% lived in Hanford and Lemoore. Avenal
also had a significant number of agricultural employees working outside the city. Many Lemoore
residents also worked outside the community at the neighboring Naval Air Station Lemoore.
            Table 2-12
            Commuting Patterns in Kings County
                                                                                        Place of Work
                                           Workers 16                 Place of           Elsewhere in             Outside
            Jurisdiction                 years and older             Residence              County                County
            Avenal                            2,478                    24%                    21%                  55%
            Corcoran                          2,902                    50%                    35%                  15%
            Hanford                           16,067                   51%                    31%                  18%
            Lemoore                           8,218                    30%                    50%                  20%
            Unincorporated                    12,279                   11%                    70%                  19%
            Kings County                      41,944                   33%                    46%                  21%
            Source: 2000 Census
            Table includes all employment in civilian and military service
2009-2014                                                     2-10                                           Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                                Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                    C.    Housing Characteristics
As noted above, the creation of jobs within a particular community does not necessarily increase the
demand for housing in that community since employees may choose to live in another area for a
variety of reasons.
  C. Housi ng Chara cteris ti cs
This section describes the housing characteristics and
conditions that affect housing needs in Kings County.
Important housing stock characteristics include housing type,
tenure, vacancy rates, age, condition, cost and affordability.
1.       Housing Type
The California Department of Finance (DOF) provides
annual estimates of the number of housing units by type for
each jurisdiction based on reported building and demolition
permits. DOF estimated that Kings County had a total of
42,484 housing units in 2009, representing a growth of
5,921 new units (16%) Countywide since 2000. As is typical in small towns and rural areas, the
majority of housing stock in all jurisdictions is comprised of single-family detached houses. Single-
family attached (condominium) units represent just 6% of all units Countywide. Meanwhile,
approximately 18% of the County’s housing stock consisted of multi-family projects, such as
apartments and townhomes. The remaining 5% of housing units in Kings County were mobile and
manufactured homes.
As shown in Table 2-13, Hanford and Corcoran had the highest proportion of single-family homes,
while Avenal and Lemoore had the highest percentage of multi-family units. Unincorporated areas
had the highest percentage of mobile homes.
   Table 2-13
   Housing Units by Type
                                                                   Percent of Housing by Type
                                                Single-        Single
                              Housing           Family         Family     Multi-Family Multi-Family   Mobile
   Jurisdictions                Units         Detached        Attached     (2-4 units)   (5+ units)   homes
   Avenal                           2,265        67%             2%            14%          13%         4%
   Corcoran                         3,981        74%             5%             9%           8%         4%
   Hanford                         17,981        73%             5%             9%          12%         2%
   Lemoore                          8,266        67%             2%             7%          20%         4%
   Unincorporated                   9,991        69%            14%             2%           1%        13%
   Kings County                    42,484        71%             6%             7%          11%         5%
   Source: California Department of Finance, E-5 Report, May 2009
Kings County and Cities of                                  2-11                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                               Housing Element

Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
2.        Housing Tenure and Vacancies
Housing tenure (owner vs. renter) influences several aspects of the local housing market. Residential
mobility is influenced by tenure, with ownership housing evidencing a lower turnover rate than rental
housing. The vacancy rate also indicates the match between the demand and supply of housing.
Table 2-14 details housing tenure and vacancies in Kings County and incorporated communities
according to the 2000 Census.
Vacancy rates of 5% to 6% for rental housing and 1.5% to 2.0% for ownership housing are generally
considered to be optimum. A higher vacancy rate may indicate an excess supply of units, a softer
market, and result in lower housing prices. A lower vacancy rate may indicate a shortage of housing
and high competition for available housing, which generally leads to higher housing prices and
diminished affordability.
        Table 2-14
        Household Tenure and Vacancy Rates
                                                  For-Sale Units                 Rental Units
                                 Housing      Percent                      Percent
        Jurisdiction               Units     Owners       Vacancy Rate     Renters       Vacancy Rate
        Avenal                     2,061       51%            3.1%           49%             5.2%
        Corcoran                   3,016       57%            1.6%           43%             9.1%
        Hanford                   14,721       59%            2.1%           41%             6.0%
        Lemoore                    6,823       55%            1.8%           45%             6.9%
        Unincorporated             9,945       50%            1.1%           50%             3.3%
        Kings County              36,563       56%            1.8%           44%             5.6%
        Source: 2000 Census
According to the 2000 Census, the housing vacancy rate in Kings County totaled 1.8% among for-sale
units and 5.6% for rental units. However, the vacancy rate varied among communities. Corcoran had
the highest rental vacancy rate at 9.1% yet the lowest vacancy rate among for-sale units at 1.6%.
Avenal had the highest vacancy rates among for-sale units (3.1%). Meanwhile, the unincorporated
areas had the lowest rental and for-sale vacancy rates overall.
All jurisdictions reported that more than 50% of households owned a home. Hanford and Corcoran
had the highest homeownership rates, an expected pattern due to the higher percentage of single-
family residences in those communities.
3.        Housing Conditions
Housing conditions are an important indicator of quality of life in Kings County communities. Like
any asset, housing ages and deteriorates over time. If not regularly maintained, structures can
deteriorate and discourage reinvestment, depress neighborhood property values, and even become
health hazards. Thus maintaining and improving housing quality is an important goal for
communities.
Housing age can be an indicator of the need for housing rehabilitation. Shown in Table 2-15, the
2000 Census reported that 60% of all housing in Kings County has been built since 1970, reflecting
2009-2014                                         2-12                               Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                      C.     Housing Characteristics
the significant housing growth in recent decades. Approximately 27% of the homes Countywide were
30 to 50 years old, while 13% of the homes exceeded 50 years of age.
Most homes require increased maintenance after 30 years. Common repairs include a new roof,
painting, plumbing, appliances and fixtures. Lemoore reported the newest housing stock with a
median housing age of just 23 years. Avenal and the unincorporated areas had the highest
percentage of housing that was more than 50 years old.
Homes older than 50 years often require more substantial repairs (e.g., new siding, plumbing, or
upgrades to electrical systems) in order to maintain the useful life and quality of the structure.
Moreover, lead-based paint hazards are also more common in homes built before 1978 and
particularly for homes built more than 50 years ago.
           Table 2-15
           Age of Housing Stock
                                                                   Age Distribution
                                      Housing  Median    Less than   30 to 50      50 or more
                  Jurisdiction         Units     Age      30 years     years          years
           Avenal                      2,061    1974        56%         26%           18%
           Corcoran                    3,016    1971        51%         33%           16%
           Hanford                    14,721    1978        64%         25%           11%
           Lemoore                     6,823    1980        72%         22%             6%
           Unincorporated              9,945     N/A        48%         32%           19%
           Kings County               36,563    1980        60%         27%            13%
           Source: 2000 Census
As part of the 2009-2014 Housing Element update process, each jurisdiction in Kings County
conducted a comprehensive survey of housing conditions within their community. The surveys were
based upon criteria developed by the California Department of Housing and Community
Development. Housing was classified according to five categories – sound, minor repair, moderate
repair, substantial repair, or dilapidated. Table 2-16 summarizes the results of these housing
conditions surveys.
Lemoore found the fewest problems, with 82% of the housing stock reported in sound condition.
This is not surprising since Lemoore also has the newest housing stock. Hanford reported over three-
quarters of its housing stock in sound condition. Avenal and Corcoran reported the highest
proportions of structures with problems. In Avenal, 42% were in need of repair (minor, moderate or
substantial) and 9% were considered dilapidated. In Corcoran, 55% of homes required repairs and
8% were dilapidated.
The housing plans for each of the jurisdictions include programs to improve housing conditions.
These programs provide grants or loans to assist low- and moderate-income households with housing
repairs and rehabilitation.
Kings County and Cities of                        2-13                                          2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element

Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
   Table 2-16
   Housing Conditions
                                                                        Housing Conditions
                                                                             Moderate      Substantial
   Jurisdiction                               Sound       Minor Repair        Repair         Repair        Dilapidated
   Avenal                                      49%               7%            22%            13%              9%
   Corcoran                                    37%              18%            28%             9%              8%
   Hanford                                     73%              19%             8%            <1%             <1%
   Lemoore                                     82%              15%             3%            <1%             <1%
   Unincorporated Community                    <1%              24%            47%            15%              14%
   Districts and Public Utility District
   Source: Housing Conditions Reports for individual jurisdictions (2008-09)
4.        Housing Affordability
State law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing programs based on the area (i.e.,
County) median income (“AMI”): extremely-low (30% or less of AMI), very-low (31-50% of AMI), low
(51-80% of AMI), moderate (81-120% of AMI) and above-moderate (over 120% of AMI). Housing
affordability is based on the relationship between household income and housing expenses.
According to HUD and the California Department of Housing and Community Development 3,
housing is considered “affordable” if the monthly housing cost is no more than 30% of a household’s
gross income.
Table 2-17 shows current (2009) affordable rent levels and estimated affordable purchase prices for
jurisdictions in Kings County by income category. Based on state-adopted standards, the maximum
affordable monthly rent for extremely-low-income households is $419, while the maximum
affordable rent for very-low-income households is $698. The maximum affordable rent for low-
income households is $1,116, while the maximum for moderate-income households is $1,674.
Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage interest rates
and qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments, homeowner association fees,
property insurance rates, etc. With this caveat, the maximum home purchase prices by income
category shown in Table 2-17 have been estimated based on typical conditions in Kings County.
              Table 2-17
              Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs
                  2009 County Median Income =                                                    Affordable
                               $55,800                     Income Limits     Affordable Rent     Price (est.)
              Extremely Low (<30%)                             $16,750            $419             $70,000
              Very Low (31-50%)                                $27,900            $698            $115,000
              Low (51-80%)                                     $44,650           $1,116           $180,000
              Moderate (81-120%)                               $66,950           $1,674           $275,000
              Above moderate (120%+)                           $66,950+          $1,674+          $275,000+
              Assumptions:
               -Based on a family of 4
               -30% of gross income for rent or PITI
               -10% down payment, 5.5% interest, 1.25% taxes and insurance
              Source: Cal. HCD; Conexus
3
   HCD memo of 4/2/2009 (http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/rep/state/inc2k9.pdf)
2009-2014                                                      2-14                               Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                         C.    Housing Characteristics
          a.       Housing Prices
According to the Kings County
Board of Realtors, median
sales prices for single-family
detached homes in Kings
County during 2008 and the
first quarter of 2009 ranged
from $106,000 in Corcoran to
$219,000 in Lemoore (Table
2-18). Hanford and Lemoore,
the largest cities, also had the
highest median prices. Sales
prices at recent new home
developments (Table 2-19)
ranged from $190,000 in
                                                            Copper Valley - Hanford
Avenal to $334,000 in
Lemoore. Comparing these
home sales prices with the affordability categories shown in Table 2-17 above shows that a significant
portion of single-family detached homes were priced within the low-income range, with many
homes affordable to very-low-income households, particularly in Avenal, Corcoran and
unincorporated areas. Most new homes were sold at prices affordable to moderate-income
households. In Avenal, some new homes were affordable to larger low-income families.
  Table 2-18
  Single-Family Home Sales Price Distribution, 2008–09
  Price Range                       Avenal       Corcoran     Hanford        Lemoore   Unincorporated
  Under $100,000                       5            18           17             3             7
  $100,000 - $124,999                  0            5            30             3             4
  $125,000 - $149,999                  1            6            44            11             3
  $150,000 - $174,999                  4            7            58            23            10
  $175,000 - $199,999                  3            2            82            33             7
  $200,000 - $224,999                  0            0            49            45             4
  $225,000 - $249,999                  0            0            62            50             0
  $250,000 - $274,999                  0            1            25            23             0
  $275,000 - $299,999                  0            0            25            10             0
  $300,000 - $324,999                  0            0            25             8             0
  $325,000 - $349,999                  0            0            15             7             0
  $350,000+                            0            0            15             2             0
  Median                          $132,000       $106,000     $195,000      $219,000      $149,000
  January 2008 – March 2009
  Source: Kings County Board of Realtors, 4/2009
Kings County and Cities of                             2-15                                   2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                   Housing Element

Chapter 2. Housing Needs Assessment
Recent new home developments (Table 2-19)
had sales prices ranging $190,000 in Avenal
to $334,000 in Lemoore. Comparing these
new home sales prices with the affordability
categories shown in Table 2-17 above shows
that most new single-family detached homes
were priced within the moderate-income
range. Real estate listings for recently built
single-family homes (Table 2-20) show that
most asking prices are in the moderate-
income range of $170,000 to $275,000, with                               Larkspur - Corcoran
a few homes priced in the low-income range
in Avenal, Corcoran and the unincorporated areas of the County. A few homes in Hanford and
Lemoore have asking prices in the above-moderate category.
  Table 2-19
  Kings County New Home Prices 2008-2009
  Jurisdiction                     Project/Builder                 Price Range             Income Category
  Avenal              Panda Koala Homes                        $190,000 – $235,000              Moderate
  Corcoran            Larkspur/K. Hovnanian                    $160,000 - $213,000           Low/Moderate
  Hanford             Villas at Copper Valley/Centex           $204,000 – $240,000              Moderate
  Lemoore             Liberty/Lennar                           $229,000 - $334,000          Moderate/Above
  Lemoore             The Landing/Thorson-Flatley              $289,000 - $329,000               Above
  Unincorporated      Aster Circle/Spradling Construction      $161,000 - $195,000           Low/Moderate
  Source: Conexus, 2009
A relatively small but important component of the housing market is represented by mobile homes.
As of 2009, Kings County had more than 2,100 mobile homes, located primarily in unincorporated,
rural areas. According to the 2000 Census, senior households owned approximately one-half of the
mobile homes. Typical sales prices for new mobile homes range from approximately $24,000 for a
small (600 to 800 square feet) single-wide economy model to $72,000 or more for a large (1,800 to
1,900 square feet) double/triple wide model 4, and represent an affordable homeownership option
for many households.
4
   Source: http://www.mh-quote.com, 6/2009
2009-2014                                                 2-16                           Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                            Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                 C.      Housing Characteristics
istings 2009
                                 Income  Year
                   Type   Price Category Built  Size  Bdrms. Baths Lot Size              Developer/Broker
                    SFD 219,000          2005   1,574   3     2.5   5,227   Fernandez Real Estate
                    SFD 180,000          2004   1,239   4      2    7,013   Mountain View Real Estate
                    SFD 129,500          2003   1,330   4     1.5   6,643   London Properties-Lender Services
                    SFD 169,900           UC    1,614   3      2    6,500   Melissa Martinez Broker
                    SFD 165,900          2007   2,048   4      3    8,280   All Estate Realtors
                    PUD  76,000          2005   1,364   4      2    3,779   Century 21 Jordan-Link & Co
                    SFD 358,000          2007   3,100   3     2.5   10,480  Talkot Real Estate
                    SFD 300,000          2007   3,033   4      3    10,963  Coldwell Banker Premier Real Estate
                    SFD 288,651          2009   2,118   3      2    8,869   McMillin Homes
                    SFD 268,085          2009   2,008   3     2.5   9,585   McMillin Homes
                    SFD 258,228          2009   1,809   3      2    14,638  McMillin Homes
                    SFD 235,000          2007   2,046   4     2.5   8,500   Searchlight Realty
                    SFD 194,990          2009   1,357   3      2    7,150   McMillin Homes
                    SFD 184,000          2007   1,509   4      2    4,687   Mark Raeber
                    SFD 175,000          2008   1,528   3      2    8,408   Coldwell Banker Premier Real Estate
                    SFD  49,500          2009    600    2      1    10,454  Martella Real Estate
                    SFD 330,000          2007   2,694   4      3    10,615  Mark Raeber
 del home)          SFD 329,000          2009   2,707   4     2.5   13,000  Jan Banks Real Estate
                    SFD 325,000          2008   2,554   4      3    18 ac.  C21 The United Group
                    SFD 279,000          2009   2,078   3      3    7,770   Jan Banks Real Estate
                    SFD 274,900          2007   2,500   5     2.5   38,333  Schuil and Associates Diversified RE
                    SFD 259,000          2009   1,769   4      2    7,770   Jan Banks Real Estate
                    SFD 249,000          2007   1,875   3      2    9,583   Century 21 Jordan-Link & Co
h 4)                SFD 194,950          2006   1,662   4      2    5,259   Family Realty and Appraisal
orth-Ph 4)          SFD 179,900          2009   1,200   3      2     n.a.   Family Realty and Appraisal
 )                  SFD 174,500          2006   1,662   4      2    10,258  American Dream Realty
4)                  SFD 164,500          2006   1,440   4      2    5,100   Coldwell Banker Premier Real Estate
h 4)                SFD 161,370          2006   1,660   3      2    7,500   C21 Jordan-Link & Co
sales 6 yrs old or less
                                           2-17                                                             2009-2014
emoore                                                                                          Draft Housing Element
Chapter 2. . Housing Needs Assessment
          b.         Rental Market
For many lower-income households, rental housing is an
affordable option. Shown below in Table 2-21, all recently-
built apartments in Kings County are affordable to lower-
income households, including both income-restricted and
market-rate units. Income-restricted projects also include units
affordable at the very-low- and extremely-low-income level.
In addition to the newer market-rate apartment projects
shown here, Kings County has a substantial number of assisted             El Palmar Apartments - Avenal
multi-family projects that were built prior to the last planning
                                                      period. As discussed later in this chapter, Kings
                                                      County has approximately 25 multi-family projects
                                                      financed with a variety of local, state, and federal
                                                      funds. These projects provide approximately 1,500
                                                      units of affordable housing to extremely-low-, very-
                                                      low- and low-income individuals, families, seniors,
                                                      and disabled persons (see Table 2-32 on page 2-28).
         Market rate duplex - Hanford
Table 2-21
Rents for Recently-Built Apartments, 2009
                                                         No.                  Rent by Unit Size
   Jurisdiction/Project               Address           Units   1 Bdrm    2 Bdrms        3 Bdrms       4 Bdrms
Avenal
  El Palmar                 1112 E. Whitney               81       --       $425           $611          $762
  Hearthstone Village       1217 S 7th Ave                81       --       $425           $611          $762
  Villa Esperanza           500 E Alpine                  81       --       $425           $611          $762
Corcoran
  Dairy Villas Apts.        1830 Dairy Ave.               69       --    $342-685*      $396-792*     $441-883*
  Kings Manor Apts.         1420 North Ave                80       --    $326-660*      $375-730*         --
  Avalon Family Apts.       2502 Hanna Ave.               56             $326-703*      $375-810*     $416-901*
Hanford
  Windgate Village Apts.    536 E. Grangeville            54   $725-750   $925-950           --           --
  Lincoln Plaza Apts.       804 S. Harris St.             40       --    $400-450*      $450-500*     $500-550*
  Lomarey Apts.             1426 S. 11th Ave.                      --       $750             --           --
  (no project name)         109 E. Third St.              3        --       $800             --           --
  (no project name)         576 S. Douty St.              2        --       $800             --           --
  (no project name)         320-340 N. East St.           4        --       $850             --           --
  (no project name)         211 W. South St.              2        --       $576           $700           --
Lemoore
  College Park Apts.        899 Dogwood                  120     $790     $975-990           --           --
  Silva                                                   48       --     $905-935     $1,005-1,035       --
  Montgomery Crossings      1150 Tammy Lane               57       --    $376-753*      $435-870*     $485-970*
  Valley Oak (Butler)       1165 Hanford-Armona Rd.       73     $675     $750-850         $950           --
Unincorporated area
  Railroad Ave. fourplex    10842 Railroad Av, Armona     4        --       $700             --           --
*Income-restricted affordable units
Source: Conexus, 6/2009
2009-2014                                               2-18                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                           Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                           D.    Special Needs Groups
  D. Spe cial Needs Groups
Certain groups have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing due to special
circumstances. Special circumstances may be related to one’s income, family characteristics, and
disability status among others. In Kings County, persons and households with special needs include
seniors, families with children (large households and single-parents with children) military personnel,
agricultural employees, persons with disabilities, and the homeless. This section analyzes these
special needs groups and identifies resources and programs designed to address these needs.
1.        Seniors
According to the 2000 Census, the County had 9,557
seniors age 65 years and older. The majority of seniors lived
in a home (as opposed to group quarters), with a total of
5,815 households. Hanford and the unincorporated County
had the largest number of senior households.
Senior households have special housing needs primarily
due to three concerns – physical disabilities or limitations,
limited income, and higher medical costs. Table 2-22
provides a summary of key housing need indicators for
seniors, including the percentage of seniors with a
disability, median income, percent renters, and the percentage of senior renters overpaying for
housing gleaned from the 2000 Census.
  Table 2-22
  Senior Housing Needs in Kings County
                                   Senior Households                     Senior Housing Needs
                                                                Percent of                    Percent
                           No. of     Percent of All  Percent Seniors with      Median        Renters
  Jurisdiction           Households    Households     Renters  a Disability     Income     Overpaying
  Avenal                    240           12%           20%        57%          $15,909        37%
  Corcoran                  488           18%           26%        48%          $25,868        53%
  Hanford                  2,633          12%           28%        46%          $25,405        68%
  Lemoore                   788           19%           24%        42%          $25,789        40%
  Unincorporated           1,666          18%           17%        50%            N/A          46%
  Kings County             5,815          17%           24%        47%          $25,456        58%
  Source: 2000 Census
Seniors require a variety of housing options, depending on their life circumstance. While 76% of
seniors were homeowners, a variety of factors such as fixed retirement incomes, rising health care
costs and physical disabilities can result in deferred home maintenance. Each jurisdiction’s housing
plan includes grant or loan programs to help seniors with repairs. Seniors with mobility disabilities
may also require home modifications to improve accessibility and facilitate independent living. All
jurisdictions have programs to ensure reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities.
Kings County and Cities of                           2-19                                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

Chapter 2. . Housing Needs Assessment
Senior renters, while facing similar income and mobility limitations as homeowners, are often at
greater risk due to housing costs. According to the Census, 58% of all senior renters overpaid for
housing. To address these needs, the Housing Authority administers Section 8 rent subsidy vouchers
for extremely-low- and very-low-income seniors. In addition, subsidized rental projects provide
affordable housing options for many seniors.
The Kings/Tulare Area Agency on Aging and the Kings County Commission on Aging provide
leadership at the local level in developing systems for home- and community-based services that
maintain seniors in the least restrictive environment for as long as possible. Each jurisdiction also
provides other types of supportive services for seniors. However, at some point in time, seniors may
require a more supportive living environment. Congregate care facilities, residential care facilities,
and skilled nursing facilities provide a wide range of housing, supportive, and medical services for
seniors requiring additional care. The majority of independent and supportive residential environ-
ments are located in the most urbanized portions of the County in Hanford and Lemoore.
2.       Female-Headed Households and Large Families
Female-headed households and large families with five or more members have special housing
needs. Single-parents require affordable housing, accessible daycare, health care, and other
supportive services. Large families have many of the same needs, but may have greater difficulty
finding suitably-sized rental housing.
Female-headed households comprised a large percentage of households in Kings County. State law
recognizes that these households face challenges due to a combination of income levels, child care
expenses, and housing availability. As shown in Table 2-23, the proportion of female-headed
households ranged from 18% in the unincorporated area to 29% in Hanford. Large families
represented between 16% (Lemoore and the unincorporated County) and 40% (Avenal) of all
households.
The Housing Authority helps address the needs of these families by providing rental assistance in the
form of Section 8 vouchers for extremely-low- and very-low-income households. Vouchers provide
the difference between the market rent charged for the unit and the amount of rent that can be
afforded by the household, typically no more than 30% of household income.
          Table 2-23
          Female-Headed Households and Large Families
                                 Female Headed Households              Large Families
                                  No. of       Percent of All     No. of         Percent of All
          Jurisdiction          Households      Households     Households         Households
          Avenal                    428             22%            767                40%
          Corcoran                  703             26%            737                27%
          Hanford                  4,124            29%           1,143               18%
          Lemoore                  1,817            28%           2,259               16%
          Unincorporated           1,677            18%           2,177               16%
          Kings County             8,749            25%           7,083               21%
          Source: 2000 Census
2009-2014                                         2-20                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                             D.      Special Needs Groups
Whereas providing rental assistance helps meet the needs of extremely-low- and very-low-income
households, the underlying need for affordable housing units must also be addressed. As discussed in
Table 2-32, Assisted Housing Units (page 2-28), Kings County has a total of over 2,500 units of
subsidized affordable housing. The majority of these projects are located in Hanford and Lemoore.
The Housing Plan (Chapter 5) sets forth programs to encourage the construction of additional
affordable rental and ownership housing.
3.       Military Personnel and Veterans
The U.S. Navy plays a critical role in Kings County economy and its housing market. Lemoore is
home to the Naval Air Station Lemoore (NASL). Commissioned in 1961, NASL serves as the master
training center for carrier-based fighter squadrons for the United States Pacific Fleet. According to
NASL, military personnel at the base totaled approximately 7,500 enlistees and officers in 2009. Of
those, approximately 40% were single and 60% had families.
There are currently (2009) 1,630 residential units on base,
which is significantly fewer than the total housing need for base
personnel and their families. In addition to Navy personnel,
approximately 2,700 civilians are employed on-base. Because
of the housing shortfall, military personnel and civilians must
find accommodations in nearby communities.
The basic housing allowance provided to Navy personnel
ranges from $734 to $1,461 for single individuals and from
$979 to $1,756 for families. Single-service members, grade E-1
through E-4, are typically required to live on-base, while enlistees with their families must compete
for remaining base family housing without any preference based on their pay grade.
In addition to active personnel, military veterans comprised a significant need group. According to
the 2000 Census, approximately 10,500 military veterans lived within Kings County and actually
comprised a significant percentage of adults in each community. Among incorporated cities, veterans
comprised 9% of the adult population of Avenal and Corcoran, 14% of adults residing Hanford, and
17% of adults in Lemoore. Assuming one
veteran per household, veterans comprised             Table 2-24
more than one of ten households.                      Leading Agricultural Crops, Kings County
                                                               Crop               Rank           Value
                                                      Milk                         1          $670,408,000
4.       Agricultural Employees
                                                      Cotton                       2          $140,628,000
Kings County is one of the state’s major              Cattle and Calves            3          $120,324,000
agricultural areas, ranking 8th among                 Alfalfa                      4          $104,889,000
California counties in total agricultural             Processed Tomatoes           5          $101,083,000
production. According to the Kings County             Corn Silage                  6          $96,031,000
                                                      Wheat Grain                  7          $74,841,000
Agricultural Commissioner, 84% of the total
                                                      Pistachios                   8          $53,079,000
land area in the County is devoted to farm
                                                      Wheat, Silage                 9         $40,177,000
land. Table 2-24 shows the County’s ten               Peaches                      10         $38,700,000
leading agricultural products.                        Source: 2008 Kings County Crop Report
Kings County and Cities of                         2-21                                            2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                         Housing Element

Chapter 2. . Housing Needs Assessment
The 2000 Census reported 3,141 persons
                                                                Table 2-25
employed in farming, fishing and forestry
                                                                Farmworkers by Jurisdiction
occupations in Kings County. Of these, 43%
were enumerated in unincorporated areas                                                         Number of      % of County
                                                                Jurisdiction of Residence Farmworkers             Total
(Table 2-25). Other estimates of the
                                                                Avenal                             647             21%
farmworker population come from the Migrant
                                                                Corcoran                           324             10%
Health Program, housed in the federal Bureau
                                                                Hanford                            516             16%
of Primary Health Care, Health Resources and
                                                                Lemoore                            288              9%
Services Administration 5. In their most recent                 Unincorporated                    1,366            43%
study (2000), MHP researchers estimated that                    Kings County                      3,141           100%
there were approximately 9,000 seasonal                         Source: 2000 Census, SF3 Table P50
workers and 7,700 migrant farmworkers (those
who establish temporary residences in connection with their work) in Kings County. The estimated
total population for all farmworker households (including non-farmworker members) was nearly
30,000 (Table 2-26). The difficulty in enumerating farmworkers, and especially migrant farmworkers,
helps to explain the large difference between the Census data and the Migrant Health Program
statistics.
      Table 2-26
      Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers, Kings County
                                                                                                  Farmer Workers +
                                                          Migrant                                  Other Household
      Jurisdiction               Farmworkers           Farmworkers         Seasonal Workers            Members
      Kings County                   16,592                7,682                 8,910                   29,526
      Source: Bureau of Primary Health Care, Health Resources and Services Administration, 2000
Farmworkers have special housing needs due to
their relatively low wages. According to
California Employment Development Depart-
ment 6, the median wage for farmworkers is
$8.01/hour, which is equivalent to approxi-
mately $16,000/year for full-time work. As a
result, farmworkers often overpay for housing (in
relation to their income) and/or live in over-
crowded and substandard living situations.
The nature of agricultural work also affects the
specific housing needs of farmworkers. For
instance, farmworkers employed on a year-
round basis generally live with their families and
need permanent affordable housing much like other lower-income households. Migrant farmworkers
who follow seasonal harvests generally need temporary housing only for the workers themselves.
5  Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers Enumeration Profile Study: California,” Alice C. Larsen, Ph. D., Migrant Health
   Program, Bureau of Primary Health Care, Health Resources and Services Administration. September 2000.
6
   http://www.labormarketinfo.edd.ca.gov/?pageid=146
2009-2014                                                   2-22                                   Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                           D.    Special Needs Groups
California has a statewide shortage of farmworker housing projects. For instance, the number of
agricultural employee housing facilities registered with the State of California Department of Housing
and Community Development (HCD) has dramatically declined since the 1950s. Between 1955 and
1982, grower-registered facilities declined from 9,000 to 1,414 camps. By 1998, only 500 camps
were registered with HCD, none of which were in Kings County. According to growers, the dramatic
decline in labor camps is due to the high cost of maintaining housing and the climate of litigation
facing growers who maintain camps.
Although no farmworker camps exist in Kings County, the County does have a significant number of
government-subsidized housing projects (e.g., Section 515 and public housing) which house
farmworkers and their families. Many farmworkers also live in mobile homes on the farming site. A
new farmworker housing project was completed in Hanford during the previous planning period
(2003-2008). That project involved the renovation of an existing former motel into a temporary
and/or long-term, permanent agricultural employee housing. The project included 24 units plus
parking, courtyard, children’s play areas and open space.
The Constraints analysis (Chapter 4) contains a discussion of each jurisdiction’s land use policies and
regulations regarding farmworker housing. In communities with large farmworker populations, such
as Avenal and Corcoran, farmworker housing needs are met through City-funded homeownership
assistance and rehabilitation loans. The majority of loans under both types of programs are issued to
people working in the agricultural industry. Moreover, the majority of occupants of Section 515
projects and other subsidized projects also are employed in the farming industry. In Hanford and
Lemoore, the farmworker population is significantly smaller, although many farmworkers also access
standard homeownership and/or rehabilitation loans. The Housing Plan (Chapter 5) includes
programs to address the housing and supportive services needs of farmworkers.
5.       Persons with Disabilities
According to the Census Bureau, a “disability” is “… a long-lasting physical, mental, or emotional
condition that can make it difficult for a person to do activities such as walking, climbing stairs,
dressing, bathing, learning, or remembering. This condition can also impede a person from being
able to go outside the home alone or to work at a job or business”. The Census tracks six types of
disabilities – sensory, physical, mental, self-care, go outside the home, and employment.
Disabilities are most common among senior citizens. In 2000, the proportion of people 65 years of
age and over reporting some type of physical disability ranged from 29% in Hanford to 33% in the
unincorporated area. The incidence of disabilities affecting employment among the working age
population was considerably less, ranging from 7% in Avenal to 11% in Hanford (see Table 2-27).
For persons requiring a more supportive setting, Kings County has over 20 licensed care facilities. The
Central Valley Regional Center is a private, nonprofit corporation that provides services to persons
with developmental disabilities in Fresno, Kings, Madera, Mariposa, Merced, and Tulare Counties.
The Center provides diagnosis, evaluation, and case management services. The Center also operates
approximately 20 small group homes for mentally disabled clients and placement services to help
clients find affordable, independent housing (typically Section 8 units). The Kings County
Rehabilitation Center in Hanford also offers rehabilitation, vocational and life training, and operates
four group homes for mentally and physically handicapped individuals.
Kings County and Cities of                           2-23                                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

s Assessment
                                                                                                   Unincorporated
                    Avenal                   Corcoran               Hanford           Lemoore            Area            County Total
             Persons      Percent       Persons    Percent    Persons    Percent Persons  Percent Persons   Percent   Persons   Percent
               2,033                     2,202                  8,237             4,054            6,751               23,277
                 17         0.8%            5        0.2%        113       1.4%     26      0.6%     97       1.4%       258      1.1%
                 10         0.5%            0          -         146       1.8%     22      0.5%    126       1.9%       304      1.3%
                 47         2.3%           68        3.1%        477       5.8%    194      4.8%    364       5.4%      1,150     4.9%
                  0            -           19        0.9%        147       1.8%     46      1.1%     97       1.4%       309      1.3%
              11,347                    10,326                 25,686            12,358           26,573               86,290
                120         1.1%          131        1.3%        565       2.2%    244      2.0%    558       2.1%      1,618     1.9%
                310         2.7%          485        4.7%       2,090      8.1%    720      5.8%   1,198      4.5%      4,803     5.6%
                196         1.7%          311        3.0%       1,320      5.1%    482      3.9%    744       2.8%      3,053     3.5%
                115         1.0%          138        1.3%        648       2.5%    138      1.1%    343       1.3%      1,382     1.6%
ty              454         4.0%          723        7.0%       1,921      7.5%    823      6.7%   1,458      5.5%      5,379     6.2%
                759         6.7%          943        9.1%       2,859     11.1%   1,277    10.3%   2,048      7.7%      7,886     9.1%
 s              441                       832                   4,347             1,227            2,842                9,689
                 91        20.6%          115       13.8%        616      14.2%    163     13.3%    441      15.5%      1,426    14.7%
                136        30.8%          263       31.6%       1,272     29.3%    372     30.3%    934      32.9%      2,977    30.7%
                 53        12.0%          122       14.7%        485      11.2%    164     13.4%    290      10.2%      1,114    11.5%
                 45        10.2%          107       12.9%        476      11.0%    101      8.2%    288      10.1%      1,017    10.5%
ty               99        22.4%          211       25.4%        950      21.9%    241     19.6%    711      25.0%      2,212    22.8%
epresent persons, not disabilities. Persons may report more than one disability.
s P8 and P41
                                                          2-24                                                      Kings County and Cities of
                                                                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                                D.     Special Needs Groups
State and federal law mandate minimum accessibility standards for housing. For example, local
governments that use federal housing funds must meet federal accessibility guidelines for new
construction and substantial rehabilitation. At least 5% of the units must be accessible to persons with
mobility impairments, and an additional 2% must be accessible to persons with sensory impairments.
New multi-family housing must be built so that: 1) the public and common use portions of such units
are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons; 2) the doors allowing passage into and within
such units can accommodate wheelchairs; and 3) all units contain adaptive design features. In
addition, state law requires all jurisdictions to provide reasonable accommodation in the application of
housing policies and regulations (see Chapter 4. Constraints for additional discussion). Programs to
assist persons with disabilities in securing accessible housing include the adoption of Reasonable
Accommodation ordinances and the Section 8 Program (see Chapter 5 – Housing Plan).
6.       Homeless
Homelessness is usually the result of a multiple of             Table 2-28
factors that converge in a person’s life. The combina-          Homeless Persons
tion of loss of employment, inability to find a job
because of the need for retraining, and high housing                                              Estimated Total
                                                                Jurisdiction                         Homeless
costs lead to some individuals and families losing their
housing. For others, the loss of housing is due to              Avenal                                  104
chronic health problems, physical disabilities, mental          Corcoran                                 25
health disabilities or drug and alcohol addictions along        Hanford                                 237
with an inability to access the services and long-term          Lemoore                                  1
support needed to address these conditions.                     Unincorporated area                      54
                                                                Kings County totals                     421
Obtaining an accurate assessment of the magnitude of            Source: Kings/Tulare County Continuum of Care, 2009
the homeless population is difficult because many
individuals are not visibly homeless but rather live with relatives or friends, in hotels/motels or shelters,
and other temporary accommodations. In an attempt to address the needs of homeless people in Kings
County, the Kings/Tulare County Continuum of Care Coordinating Group conducted a Point-in-Time
survey of homeless people in these two counties in January 2009.
Based on a survey of 261 persons, the following portrait of homeless people emerged.
         •      44% have been homeless for one year or more; 20% are chronic homeless
         •      60% are of Hispanic origin and 41% are female
         •      20% are employed
         •      19% are families with children
         •      16% are victims of domestic violence
         •      53% have a physical disability
         •      8% are veterans
As of 2009, 62% of the homeless population is housed in temporary living arrangements. Of this total,
49% lived with friends or relatives, 6% lived in transitional housing, 3% in emergency shelters, and 4%
in hotels/motels. About one-third were living on the streets or in a car.
Currently, a significant shortage of services exists for the homeless population in Kings County.
Religious and nonprofit service organizations provide some services, but the overall service network is
fragmented. The Kings/Tulare County Continuum of Care Group was created to provide a forum for
Kings County and Cities of                           2-25                                              2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                             Housing Element

Chapter 2. . Housing Needs Assessment
identifying needs, coordinating service delivery to homeless people, and applying for state and federal
grants.
Kings Community Action Organization (KCAO) is a private, nonprofit organization established in 1967
that provides various assistance programs to low income individuals, including emergency food,
shelter, utility assistance, and rental assistance. The KCAO operates a 38-bed shelter in Hanford for
women and children (Table 2-29). In addition, 86 transitional housing beds are located in Hanford and
Lemoore (Table 2-30).
   Table 2-29
   Emergency Shelter Facilities
                                                                 Target                Family       Individual
   Provider                                                    Population               Beds           Beds         Total Beds
   Kings Community Action Organization (Barbara            Single females and            30                8              38
   Saville Women's Shelter)                               females w/ children
   Total Year-Round Capacity                                                             30                8              38
   Seasonal Facilities                                             N/A                   N/A            N/A              N/A
   Total Seasonal Capacity                                         N/A                   N/A            N/A              N/A
   Total Capacity                                                                        30                8              38
   Sources: Barbara Saville Women's Shelter, United Way of Tulare, 2009
   Table 2-30
   Transitional and Supportive Housing Facilities
                                                      Target                Family      Individual
   Provider                                        Population                Beds          Beds       Total Beds      Location
   Foster care transitional home              Aged-out foster girls            0             6               6         Lemoore
   Foster care transitional home              Aged-out foster boys             0             6               6         Hanford
   Champions Recovery Alternatives             Single females and              6             9              15         Hanford
   Program (Hannah's House)                  households w/children
   Cornerstone Men's Recovery*                     Single males                -             29             29         Hanford
   Cornerstone Women's Recovery*               Single females and              8             22             30         Hanford
                                             households w/children
   Total Transitional and Supportive                                          14             72             86
   Housing
   *The Cornerstone Men’s and Women’s Recovery facilities are not accepting new clients into their facilities because of funding
   cuts. All Cornerstone shelters may be completely converted into an outpatient treatment program because of funding cuts.
   Sources: Housing Authority of Kings County, United Way of Tulare County, 2009
Additional emergency assistance is provided by the Salvation Army in Hanford, which provides short-
term assistance in the form of food, financial assistance for rent and utility bills, motel vouchers and
bus or plane tickets. Corcoran Christian Aid provides food, vouchers and other types of emergency
financial assistance within Corcoran.
Despite these services, a significant shortage in emergency shelters and transitional housing remains. In
2007 the State Legislature passed Senate Bill (SB) 2, which strengthened the planning and zoning
2009-2014                                                     2-26                                   Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                         E.     Analysis of At Risk Housing
requirements for emergency shelters and transitional housing. SB2 requires that all jurisdictions adopt
zoning regulations that allow emergency shelters by-right in at least one zone, subject to objective
development standards, or as an alternative, the jurisdiction may meet the need through a multi-
jurisdictional agreement with up to three adjacent jurisdictions. In response to SB2, the Housing Plan
(Chapter 5) includes a program to update Zoning Ordinances in conformance with state law.
  E.     Analysis of At Risk Housi ng
State law requires that all housing elements include an
analysis of existing assisted housing projects that are
eligible to change from low-income housing to market
rate housing during the next ten years due to
termination       of     subsidy   contracts, mortgage
prepayment, or expiration of affordability restrictions.
Assisted housing developments include multi-family
rental housing that receives assistance under certain
federal and state programs, as well as local programs
(e.g., redevelopment, in-lieu fees, inclusionary and/or
density bonus program).
1.       Inventory of Affordable
         Housing
Kings County and its four incorporated cities have over 40 projects providing more than 2,400
affordable rental units subsidized through local, state, and federal programs. Covenants and deed
restrictions are used to maintain the affordability of publicly assisted housing as affordable to low- and
moderate-income households. Over time,
however, these covenants and use restrictions            Table 2-31
expire and must be renewed or renegotiated to            At-Risk Housing Projects, 2009-2019
ensure continued affordability of housing. Table
2-32 shows the assisted rental projects in Kings                                                     Affordable
                                                         Project                    Jurisdiction        Units
County for which affordability controls are
                                                         Saltair Place                Corcoran            40
currently in place. Three projects with 117 deed-
restricted units have affordability covenants that       Cedarbrook                   Hanford             70
could expire within the next 10 years – one each         Lucerne   Hotel              Lemoore             7
in Corcoran, Hanford, and Lemoore (Table 2-31).          Kings County totals                             117
These projects are considered “at-risk.”                 Source: Kings County, 2009
Kings County and Cities of                         2-27                                              2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                           Housing Element

Chapter 2. . Housing Needs Assessment
Table 2-32
Assisted Housing Units
                               Year Total Low Income                                              Covenant
Project/Jurisdiction          Built Units    Units              Assistance Program                 Expires
Avenal
El Palmar Apartments          2004   81        80    TCAC, RDA, CCRC (Large Family)                 2059
Hearthstone Village           2005    81       80    TCAC (Large Family)                            2060
Pleasant Valley Manor Apts    1986   40        39    USDA Rural Dev, Section 515 (Family)           2036
Villa Esperanza               2008   81        80    TCAC (Large Family)                            2063
Wien Manor                    1983   40        38    HUD, Section 515 (Family)                      2032
Totals - Avenal                      323      317
Corcoran
Avalon Family Apartments       N/A   56        55    TCAC (Large Family)                            2035
Carolyn Apartments            1983   40        38    HUD, Section 515 (Family)                      2032
Corcoran Family Apartments    2009   69        68    TCAC (Large Family)                            2064
Corcoran Garden Apartments    2002   38        38    TCAC, Section 515 (Large Family)               2032
Corcoran Station Senior Apts  1997   44        44    CHRPR, RDA, HOME (Elderly)                     2047
Kings Manor                   2004   81        80    TCAC, Bonds (Large Family)                     2059
Saltair Place                 2004   42        40    TCAC (Large Family)                            2014
Valley View Village           1966   100      100    HUD                                             N/A
Westgate Manor                1985   45        44    Section 515 (Elderly, Disabled)                2035
Whitley Gardens I             1979    63       62    TCAC (Non Targeted)                            2029
Whitley Gardens II            1984   24        24    TCAC (Non Targeted)                            2035
Totals - Corcoran                    602      593
Hanford
Amberwood I                   1996   48        42    USDA Rural Dev, Sec. 515 (Family)              2030
Amberwood II                  1981   40        39    USDA RD and HUD, Sec 515 (Family)              2031
Cameron Commons               1982   32        32    RHCP                                         perpetuity
Casa Del Sol Apartments       1997   80        79    TCAC (Large Family)                            2052
Cedarbrook                    1999   70        70    TCAC (Large Family)                            2014
Hanford Senior Villas         1982   48        47    TCAC (Senior)                                  2032
Heritage Park at Hanford      1997   81        80    TCAC (Senior)                                  2047
Kings View Apartments Inc      N/A   N/A       10    N/A                                             N/A
Kings View Hanford             N/A   10        10    HUD                                            2021
Lincoln Plaza                 2006   40        39    TCAC (Large Family)                            2061
Sunnyside Village             1969   150      150    HUD                                          perpetuity
View Road Apartments          1983   121      120    USDA Rural Development (Elderly)               2031
Totals - Hanford                     720      718
Lemoore
Alderwood                     1996   80        79    TCAC (Large Family)                            2051
Antlers Hotel                 2003   10        10    CDBG/RDA                                       2058
Brookfair Manor               1968   72        72    FDIC Affordable Housing Prog (Family)          2052
Country Club Apartments       1965   108       55
Kings River Apartments        1986   44        43    USDA, Section 515                              2034
Lemoore Elderly               1987   23        23    USDA, Section 515                              2032
Lemoore Villa                 1979   28        28    USDA, Section 515                              2032
Lucerne Hotel                 2001    7        7     RDA                                            2015
Montclair Apartments          1999   80        79    TCAC (Large Family)                            2054
Montgomery Crossing           2009    57       56    TCAC (Large Family)                            2064
Mountain View Apartments      1988   39        38    HUD, Section 515                               2037
Villa San Joaquin             1975   36        35    TCAC, Section 515 (Non Targeted)               2059
Westberry Square Apartments   1998   100       99    TCAC (Large Family)                            2053
Totals - Lemoore                     684      624
Unincorporated Area
Armona Village                1986   33        32    USDA Rural Development, Section 515            2033
Kettleman City Apartments     1983   40        40    USDA Rural Development, Sec 514/516            2032
Single Family Homes (various) 1980s   7        7     Public Housing                               perpetuity
Sycamore Court                1966   118      118    HUD                                          perpetuity
Totals – Unincorporated Area         198      197
Grand Total – Kings County          2,527    2,449
2009-2014                                    2-28                                  Kings County and Cities of
Draft Housing Element                                          Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                         E.     Analysis of At Risk Housing
2.       Analysis of At-Risk Projects
Projects in Kings County are financed under four basic loan programs. These loan programs include
USDA Rural Development Section 514/515/516, HUD Section 202/811, HUD Section 236(j)(1), and
Low Income Housing Tax Credits. All three of the at-risk projects were assisted with Low Income
Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC).
The LIHTC Program is a tool for financing the construction or rehabilitation of affordable rental units
for low- and very-low-income persons. The program provides an annual federal tax credit ranging
from 4% to 9% (the lower amount is for federally funded projects) of project costs. Eligible costs
include acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation (but not land costs). Tax credits can be used to
offset income tax liability on a dollar-for-dollar basis for 10 years or provide additional project equity
through syndication of the credits. The three at-risk projects currently provide 117 units of deed-
restricted affordable housing.
3.       Preservation Options
Jurisdictions can utilize three major strategies to ensure that affordable units remain affordable to the
intended income group: 1) transfer of ownership to a nonprofit; 2) providing rental assistance; or
3) replacement of at-risk housing with new units.
         a.       Transfer of Ownership to a Nonprofit
Transferring ownership of an at-risk
project to a nonprofit housing provider is         Table 2-33
generally one of the least costly ways to          Market Value of At-Risk Projects
ensure that the at-risk units remain               Project         No. Units Est. Market Value*            Type
affordable. By transferring ownership to a
                                                   Saltair Place      40          $2.0 - 2.8 million    Multi-family
nonprofit      organization,      low-income
                                                   Cedarbrook         70         $3.5 – 4.9 million     Multi-family
restrictions can be secured indefinitely
                                                   Lucerne Hotel       7        $350,000 – 490,000       Mixed use
and the project becomes eligible for a
greater range of governmental assistance.          *Based on average per-unit value of $50,000 – $70,000
Table 2-33 shows the estimated market
value of the three at-risk projects based on typical current apartment prices. Based on these
estimates, the total cost of transferring ownership of these projects would be approximately $5.8 to
$8.2 million.
         b.       Rental Assistance
Rental assistance could be structured in a similar fashion to Section 8 where the tenant pays 30% of
gross income for housing with the balance paid by rental assistance. The feasibility of this alternative
is highly dependent on the availability of funding sources necessary to provide the rental subsidies
and the willingness of the owners to accept the subsidies if they are provided. The amount of subsidy
required is estimated to be the difference between what a three-person very-low-income household
can afford to pay per month 7 ($628 in 2009) versus the fair market rent 8 determined by HUD for a
7
   California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2009 Income Limits.
Kings County and Cities of                           2-29                                                 2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                                Housing Element

Chapter 2. . Housing Needs Assessment
two bedroom unit ($766), times the 117 at-risk units. Taken together, the total cost for rental
subsidies would be $16,146 per month, which equates to $193,752 annually for the three at-risk
projects.
          c.      Construction of Replacement Units
Constructing new low-income housing units is another means of replacing at-risk units that convert to
market-rate use. The cost of developing the new housing depends upon a variety of factors, including
density, unit size, location, land costs, and type of construction. Local non-profit developers indicate
that total development costs (including “soft” costs) for recent multi-family developments has been
approximately $180 per square foot. Based on this average, construction of 117 replacement units
would cost approximately $16.8 million, assuming an average unit size of 800 square feet. Factoring
in land costs would make this amount much higher, and would vary depending on the number of
sites used to construct the housing as well as the location of the sites. Even without factoring in the
land costs, the cost of constructing replacement units exceeds the cost of acquisition or rental
assistance. Factoring in land costs would likely make replacement units the least feasible among the
three alternatives unless a significant amount of public subsidies (e.g., tax credits) were provided.
  F.      Housi ng Growth Needs
1.        Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
The Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to plan for
anticipated growth. The RHNA quantifies the anticipated need for housing within each jurisdiction
for the 7½-year period from January 2007 through June 2014. Communities then determine how
they will address this need through the process of updating the Housing Elements of their General
Plans.
In determining the housing allocation for the five jurisdictions within Kings County, the Kings County
Association of Governments (KCAG) developed an allocation methodology with the assistance of the
Kings Regional Housing Technical Advisory Committee (KRHTAC). This methodology takes into
account local growth assumptions and considers certain criteria as specified in Government Code
§65584(a). The criteria used in this methodology include an analysis of available data on local
housing, population, economic, and other growth factors. One growth assumption deemed relevant
to housing growth and demand within Kings County is the housing needs of Naval Air Station
Lemoore personnel. Although the housing unit allocations in the RHNA are not required to take into
account the military base, the Indian reservation, or prison populations, the Naval Air Station
Lemoore is identified as a relevant factor. Using the assumptions and methodology detailed within
the RHNA plan, KCAG in coordination with the KRHTAC derived the distribution of each
jurisdiction’s share of the regional housing need and allocated the units according to the four income
categories for housing affordability.
The goal of the RHNA Plan is to promote a fair distribution of attainable housing among the four
cities and the unincorporated County in a way that also helps meet the state’s housing goals.
Attainable housing is defined as housing that is both sufficient in supply and affordably priced. The
8
    Kings County Housing Authority, http://www.hakc.com/HCV/fmrua.htm.
2009-2014                                               2-30                         Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                               F. Housing Growth Needs
total housing units specified in the RHNA plan for each jurisdiction are not to be construed as quotas
for development. The RHNA Plan only determines the number and affordability of housing units that
jurisdictions need to plan for through land use policies, regulations, infrastructure plans, and other
housing assistance programs. Construction and development of these allocations is not a requirement
of the RHNA plan.
       Table 2-34
       Regional Housing Needs, 2007-2014
                                Extremely                                         Above
       Jurisdiction               Low*         Very Low*          Low  Moderate    Mod      Total
       Avenal                       40             40             126    214       291       711
       Corcoran                     40             40             160    295       370       905
       Hanford                     723            723            1,015   938      2,359     5,758
       Lemoore                     374            374             534    502      1,237     3,021
       Unincorporated               69             68             193    316       448      1,094
       Kings County total         1,246          1,245           2,028  2,265     4,705    11,489
       * 50% of VL units are assumed to be extremely-low per state law
       Source: KCAG 2008
All new units built or preserved after January 1, 2007 are credited in the new RHNA period. A
discussion of how each jurisdiction’s land inventory accommodates this growth need is provided in
Chapter 3.
Kings County and Cities of                                   2-31                               2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element


Chapter 3. Resources and Opportunities
This chapter analyzes the resources available for the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of
housing in Kings County and the cities of Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford, and Lemoore. This includes an
evaluation of the extent to which vacant or underutilized land compares to the regional housing
needs allocation, and the financial and administrative resources available to support housing activities
and implement the housing programs described in Chapter 5.
  A. Land Resources
California law (Government Code §65584) requires that each city and county, when preparing its
state-mandated housing element, develop local housing programs designed to address housing needs
for all income groups in their community. This concept seeks to ensure that each jurisdiction, to the
extent feasible and appropriate, plans for a variety of housing for population growth expected in the
region as well as people who might reasonably be expected to reside within the jurisdiction if a
variety of housing accommodations appropriate to their needs were available. This section analyzes
the capacity for residential development in each jurisdiction and how that capacity compares to the
regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) identified in the previous chapter.
The current RHNA covers the period January 1, 2007 through June 30, 2014. Housing units built
since 2007 are credited in the new planning period. Jurisdictions must demonstrate that there is
adequate capacity to achieve the remainder of their RHNA for all income categories during the
planning period based on an analysis of realistic development potential on vacant or underutilized
sites.
It is important to recognize that the RHNA is a planning target, not a construction mandate. Since
local governments do not build housing, their responsibilities are to create opportunities for
residential development through appropriate land use plans and regulations, and through
implementation of programs designed to facilitate housing development. The focus of these
responsibilities is on the provision of housing for lower-income households and persons with special
needs since these groups have the greatest difficulty in obtaining adequate and affordable housing. It
is an unfortunate reality that in difficult economic times, it is unlikely that the level of housing need
identified in the RHNA will be achieved.
1.        Housing Production Since 2007
Housing built since January 2007 (the beginning of the current RHNA period) is credited toward each
jurisdictions total RHNA need. Table 3-1 summarizes housing development during 2007-08 for each
jurisdiction by affordability level. A detailed analysis of new units built during this time period is
provided in Appendix A.
Kings County and Cities of                         3-1                                            2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                        Housing Element

Chapter 3. Resources and Opportunities
               Table 3-1
               Housing Development, 2007 - 2008
                                              New Units by Affordability Category
                                                                                     Above-
                  Jurisdiction        Very Low          Low            Mod         Moderate         Total
               Avenal                     -                -             14             -             14
               Corcoran                  66               67             99             1            233
               Hanford                    -              181            154            22            357
               Lemoore                   21              135            146           145            447
               Unincorporated             -                -            101             -            101
               Source: Kings County and the Cities of Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
Table 3-2 summarizes the net remaining regional housing needs allocation for each jurisdiction, after
accounting for housing production during 2007-08. The next section discusses how jurisdictions will
address this need through the availability of suitable sites for development.
              Table 3-2
              Remaining Regional Housing Needs, 2009-2014
                                              New Units by Affordability Category
                                                                                     Above-
              Jurisdiction           Very Low           Low          Moderate       Moderate        Total
              Avenal                     80             126             200            291           697
              Corcoran                   14              93             196            369           672
              Hanford                  1,446            834             784           2,337         5,401
              Lemoore                   727             399             356           1,092         2,574
              Unincorporated            137             193             215            448           993
              Source: Tables 2-33 and 3-1
2.       Inventory of Sites to Accommodate the Remaining RHNA
To fully address RHNA requirements, jurisdictions must demonstrate that there are adequate sites
with appropriate zoning and development standards to accommodate their remaining housing need
at all affordability levels. To that end, a parcel-specific inventory was prepared by each jurisdiction.
The resulting inventory consists of vacant sites or underutilized sites with potential for additional
development or redevelopment. Chapter 4 provides an analysis of the appropriateness of zoning
regulations and development standards for each jurisdiction to facilitate housing development at all
income levels. The detailed parcel listings and identification of potential development constraints for
each jurisdiction is provided in Appendix B. Sites with Farmland Security Zone or Williamson Act
contracts were eliminated from the analysis. The results of the land inventory analysis for each
jurisdiction are summarized below.
         a.       Avenal Sites Inventory Analysis
Avenal has over 500 acres of vacant land zoned for single-family residential development and over
46 acres zoned for multi-family development. Because housing costs in Avenal are among the lowest
2009-2014                                                     3-2                                 Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                                   A.  Land Resources
in the County, all of the multi-family sites can accommodate lower-income housing and all of the
single-family sites can accommodate moderate-income housing. The City’s multi-family zoning allows
densities up to 29 units/acre, although typical densities are in the 13 to 15 units/acre range due to
low land costs. All of the sites included in the parcel inventory (Appendix B, Table B-1a) can be
served by infrastructure and those parcels with constraints such as flood hazards were removed from
the inventory.
This analysis demonstrates that Avenal’s land inventory is significantly greater than the net remaining
RHNA in the lower- and moderate-income categories, although there is a shortfall in the above-
moderate category. However, the surplus of single-family sites assigned to the moderate category
exceeds the above-moderate shortfall; therefore the intent of the RHNA is satisfied (Table 3-3).
      Table 3-3
      Land Inventory Summary – City of Avenal
                                                  Potential Units by
                                                Affordability Category
                                       Lower          Moderate        Above-Moderate     Total
      Single-Family Sites                 -             2,423                -           2,423
      Multi-Family Sites                655                -                 -            655
      Total                             655             2,423                0           3,078
      Net Remaining RHNA                206              200                291           697
      Surplus (Shortfall)               449             2,223              (291)         2,381
      Source: Tables 3-2 and B-1a
         b.        Corcoran Sites Inventory Analysis
Corcoran has approximately 250 subdivided single-family lots plus over 427 acres of vacant land
zoned for single-family residential development, and over 7 acres of vacant land zoned for multi-
family development. In addition, there is approximately 3.5 acres of underutilized land suitable for
multi-family development. Because housing costs in Corcoran are among the lowest in the County,
most of the single-family sites can accommodate moderate-income housing, although half of the
single-family development potential on larger parcels has been allocated to the above-moderate
category in light of the City’s desire to encourage move-up housing. The City’s multi-family zoning
allows densities up to 15 units/acre (Medium Density) and 29 units/acre (High Density), although
typical densities are substantially lower due to modest land costs. All of the multi-family sites can
accommodate lower-income housing based on the market analysis and recent development
experience discussed in Chapter 2 and Appendix A. All of the sites included in the parcel inventory
(Appendix B, Table B-1b) can be served by infrastructure and those parcels with constraints that
would restrict development, such as flood hazards or sites affected by airport flight paths, were
adjusted to reflect their realistic development potential.
This analysis demonstrates that Corcoran’s land inventory is significantly greater than the net
remaining RHNA in all income categories (Table 3-4).
Kings County and Cities of                          3-3                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

Chapter 3. Resources and Opportunities
      Table 3-4
      Land Inventory Summary – City of Corcoran
                                                 Potential Units by
                                               Affordability Category
                                       Lower         Moderate        Above-Moderate         Total
      Single-Family Sites                 -            1,017              846               1,863
      Multi-Family Sites                124               -                 -                124
      Underutilized Sites                76               -                 -                 70
      Total                             200            1,017              846               2,063
      Net Remaining RHNA                107             196               369                672
      Surplus                            93             821               477               1,391
      Source: Tables 3-2 and B-1b
         c.        Hanford Sites Inventory Analysis
Hanford has approximately 57 acres of vacant land designated for very-low-density single-family
residential development and over 400 vacant acres designated for low-density single-family
development. These parcels were assigned to the above-moderate- and moderate-income categories,
respectively, based on recent new home sales prices (see Table 2-17, page 2-14). Along with
Lemoore, Hanford has the highest home prices in the County, with new single-family home sales in
2009 ranging in price from $204,000 to $240,000.
Approximately 70 acres of vacant land is designated for Medium Density (up to 15 units/acre), and
approximately 60 acres is designated for High-Density residential development (up to 22 units/acre).
This analysis demonstrates that Hanford’s land inventory can accommodate its net remaining RHNA
in all income categories (Table 3-65).
      Table 3-5
      Land Inventory Summary – City of Hanford
                                                 Potential Units by
                                               Affordability Category
                                       Lower         Moderate        Above-Moderate         Total
      Single-Family Sites                --            2,139             2,469              4,608
      Multi-Family Sites               2,431              --               --               2,431
      Mixed-Use Sites                       3             --               --                  3
      Total                            2,434           2,139             2,469              7,042
      Net Remaining RHNA               2,280             784             2,337              5,401
      Surplus (Shortfall)                 154          1,355               132              1,641
      Source: Tables 3-2 and B-1c
         d.        Lemoore Sites Inventory Analysis
Lemoore completed a comprehensive General Plan update in 2008, and revisions to the Zoning
Code are currently underway to bring zoning designations into conformance with the new General
2009-2014                                        3-4                                Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                       Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                               A.     Land Resources
Plan land use designations (see Program 4.7 in Chapter 5, the Lemoore Housing Plan). During the
interim period until the Zoning Code update is completed, the General Plan is the controlling land
use designation. In cases where an inconsistency between the new General Plan and zoning exists for
a proposed development project, the City will process a zone change concurrently with other
development applications (e.g., subdivision map) at no additional cost to the applicant, and the
project must conform to the General Plan. Any proposed development that conforms to the old
zoning but is inconsistent with the new General Plan designation would require a General Plan
amendment. The land inventory (Appendix B) is based on new General Plan designations.
Lemoore has approximately 190 acres of vacant land designated for very-low-density single-family
residential development and over 500 vacant acres designated for low-density single-family
development. These parcels were assigned to the above-moderate- and moderate-income categories,
respectively, based on recent new home sales prices (see Table 2-17, page 2-14). Along with
Hanford, Lemoore has the highest home prices in the County, with new single-family home sales in
2009 ranging in price from $229,000 to $334,000.
Over 160 acres of vacant land is designated Low-Medium Density Residential (up to 12 units/acre),
which allows small-lot single-family, attached single-family, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes and
townhomes to encourage home ownership. Lot sizes range from 3,000 to 7,000 square feet per unit.
Seventy-seven acres of vacant land is designated Medium Density (up to 17 units/acre), and two
parcels are designated for high-density residential development (up to 25 units/acre). In addition, 111
acres of land is designated for mixed-use (up to 20 units/acre). These sites were assigned to the
lower-income category.
The potential units shown in the land inventory (Appendix B) do not assume any development in the
190-acre residential area added to the FEMA 100-year flood hazard zone in June 2009, although
development may be feasible on these sites with appropriate mitigation.
All of these sites in the land inventory are within the City boundary; however, land within the
Blueprint Urban Growth Boundary Area has the capacity for an additional 71 lower-income multi-
family units, over 2,000 moderate-income single-family homes and about 2,600 above-moderate
single-family homes.
This analysis demonstrates that Lemoore’s land inventory is significantly greater than the net
remaining RHNA in the lower- and moderate-income categories, although there is a shortfall in the
above-moderate category. However, the surplus of single-family sites assigned to the moderate
category exceeds the above-moderate shortfall, therefore the intent of the RHNA is satisfied (Table 3-
6).
Kings County and Cities of                         3-5                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element

Chapter 3. Resources and Opportunities
    Table 3-6
    Land Inventory Summary – City of Lemoore
                                                  Potential Units by
                                                Affordability Category
                                       Lower          Moderate        Above-Moderate           Total
    Single-Family Sites*                 -              1,584               778               2,362
    Multi-Family Sites*                 561                -                  -                 561
    Mixed-Use Sites*                    800                -                  -                 800
    Underutilized Sites                 210              147                 72                 429
    Total                              1,571            1,731               850               4,152
    Net Remaining RHNA                 1,126             356               1,092              2,574
    Surplus (Shortfall)                 445             1,375              (242)              1,578
    *Sites within City boundaries only
    Source: Tables 3-2 and B-1d
         e.        Kings County Sites Inventory Analysis
The unincorporated area of Kings County has approximately 350 acres of vacant land zoned for
Very-Low-Density single-family residential development and over 134 vacant acres zoned for Low-
Density single-family development. These parcels were assigned to the above-moderate-income
category since large lots can accommodate larger, more expensive homes.
The Low-Medium zone encompasses 289 acres of vacant land while the Medium zone represents
175 acres. These parcels were assigned to the moderate-income category since they represent
standard-lot subdivisions.
The Medium-High zone contains approximately 90 acres of vacant land. This zone calls for multi-
family development at densities ranging from 7 to 11 units/acre. These sites were allocated to the
lower-income category.
The County’s High-Density residential zone allows development up to 24 units/acre and includes 28
acres of vacant land. An additional 5.74 acres are designated Very-High-Density, which allows a
density of up to 30 units/acre. These sites were allocated to the lower-income category.
2009-2014                                          3-6                                Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                         Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                        B.     Financial and Administrative Resources
      Table 3-7
      Land Inventory Summary – Kings County Unincorporated
                                                   Potential Units by
                                                Affordability Category
                                       Lower           Moderate       Above-Moderate     Total
      Single-Family Sites                                1,317             500
      Multi-Family Sites               1,099
      Mixed-Use Sites                   510
      Total                            1,609             1,317             500           3,426
      Net Remaining RHNA                330               215              448            993
      Surplus (Shortfall)              1,279             1,102              52           2,433
      Source: Tables 3-2 and B-1e
In addition, there is 70 acres of land designated for mixed-use (up to 20 units/acre). These sites were
assigned to the lower-income category.
This analysis demonstrates that the unincorporated County’s land inventory is significantly greater
than the net remaining RHNA in all income categories (Table 3-7).
  B. Financial a nd Adminis tra tive Resources
Kings County jurisdictions have access to a variety of local, state, federal, and private resources to
assist in the production of affordable housing for extremely-low, very-low, low- and moderate-
income households. In addition, various nonprofit and for-profit agencies may have the
administrative capacity to help the jurisdictions further their housing goals. The following section
describes the most significant funding sources currently used by cities and the County, and the
agencies that can help achieve the housing goals described in Chapter 5.
1.       Financial Resources
Home Investment Partnership (HOME): The federal HOME Program offers funding for local
jurisdictions to improve and/or expand the supply of affordable housing opportunities for lower-
income households. All projects and programs funded with HOME funds must be targeted to very-
low- and low-income households and may have requirements for matching funds from non-federal
resources equal to 25% of the requested funds. All of the jurisdictions in Kings County must apply to
state HCD for HOME funds annually on a competitive basis. Recently, the cities of Avenal and
Hanford received HOME grants for first-time homebuyer loans and housing rehabilitation loans.
Lemoore received first-time homebuyer grant funds while Kings County and Hanford received Rental
New Construction grant funding.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): The federal CDBG program is designed to
maintain viable urban communities by providing decent housing and a suitable living environment,
and by expanding economic opportunities, especially for persons of low- and moderate-income.
CDBG funds can be used for a variety of activities, including housing acquisition, housing
Kings County and Cities of                         3-7                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element

Chapter 3. Resources and Opportunities
rehabilitation, new construction, public works, and community facilities. Each year, jurisdictions may
apply for up to $800,000 under both the General Allocation and Economic Development
components of the CDBG programs. The maximum amount per application is $500,000. In addition,
grants of up to $70,000 per year from the General Planning and Technical Assistance allocation and
$70,000 per year for the Economic Development Planning and Technical Assistance are awarded
and do not count toward the $800,000 cap.
Redevelopment Set-Aside: Jurisdictions with redevelopment agencies are required to allocate at
least 20% of tax increment revenues into a housing fund, which is used to assist in the development
of low- and moderate-income (LMI) housing. All four cities and the County have redevelopment
agencies. Each agency must complete a redevelopment implementation plan, which details how LMI
housing funds are to be expended. Housing developed under this program must remain affordable to
the targeted income group for at least 55 years for rentals and 45 years for ownership units.
 Table 3-8
 Redevelopment LMI Fund Revenues, Expenditures and Planned Uses 2009-2014
  Jurisdiction     Est. Revenues         Est. Expenditures                             Planned Uses
 Avenal               $770,000                 $770,000           Retirement of bond for infrastructure improvements
                                             $1.14 million        Rehabilitation (minor and substantial), homebuyer
 Corcoran           $1.14 million
                                                                  assistance
                                                                  Neighborhood conservation, affordable housing
                                                                  developer incentives, paint programs, housing
                                             $2.58 million
 Hanford            $2.60 million                                 rehabilitation, matching HOME grants, first-time
                                                                  homebuyer assistance, graffiti control, smoke detector
                                                                  funding
                                                                  Minor rehabilitation, home buyer assistance, infill
                                                                  housing, solar energy retrofits, historic
 Lemoore            $8.1 million             $9.9 million
                                                                  rehab/preservation, deferred loans for multi-family
                                                                  housing development
                                                                  Low- and moderate-income housing rehabilitation and
 Kings County          $62,500                  $62,500
                                                                  preservation
 Source: Redevelopment Implementation Plans for each jurisdiction
The Housing and Emergency Shelter Trust Fund Act of 2006 (Proposition 1C), is a $2.85 billion
bond measure passed by California voters in 2006, to provide housing and infrastructure investment
to produce an estimated 118,000 housing units, 2,350 homeless shelter spaces, and infrastructure
projects that help infill housing development such as water, sewer, parks, and transportation
improvements. Prop 1C funds support the following programs:
    •    Multifamily Housing - low-interest loans for affordable housing development where units are
         reserved for low-income renters, usually for 55 years.
    •    Supportive Housing - low-interest loans for housing projects that provide health and social
         services for residents, including homeless youth.
2009-2014                                                   3-8                                    Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                    Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                          B.     Financial and Administrative Resources
     •   Down Payment Assistance (California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA)) - deferred low-
         interest loans for up to three percent of a home purchase price for low- and moderate-
         income first-time homebuyers.
     •   CalHome - homeownership programs for low income households.
     •   Building Equity & Growth in Neighborhoods (BEGIN) - grants to local governments to fund
         homebuyer assistance in high-density developments.
     •   Self-Help Construction Management - grants to organizations that assist low- and moderate-
         income households in building their own homes.
     •   Farmworker Housing – low-interest loans and grants for construction of housing for
         farmworkers.
     •   Migrant Farmworker Housing – low-interest loans and grants for projects that serve
         migratory workers.
     •   Emergency Housing Assistance - grants for the construction and operation of homeless
         shelters.
     •   Transit-Oriented Development Implementation Program - funding for infrastructure and
         housing to help cities and counties develop higher-density housing near transit stations.
     •   Infill Incentives Grant Program - grants for development of public infrastructure projects
         that facilitate or support infill housing construction.
     •   Affordable Housing Innovation Fund - funds for pilot programs to demonstrate innovative,
         cost-saving approaches to creating or preserving affordable housing.
     •   Housing Related Parks - grants for the development of housing related parks.
2.       Administrative Resources
Described below are the major public and non-profit agencies that have been involved in housing
activities or are interested in housing activities in Kings County. These agencies play important roles
in meeting the housing needs of the community. In particular, they are involved in the improvement
of the housing stock, provision of affordable housing, homeownership assistance, and rental
assistance to households in need.
Self Help Enterprises: Incorporated in 1965, Self-Help Enterprises of Visalia is a non-profit housing
developer that assists low-income residents of rural areas with housing and related services. “Self-
help” housing refers to housing built in part by the future occupants of the home by allowing families
to use their "sweat equity" as the down payment on the new home they might otherwise not be able
to afford. Self-Help Enterprises is actively involved in helping farm laborers and other low-income
families in becoming homeowners through both training and supervision as self-help builders, and
assembling public and private funds in support of new construction. Self-Help Enterprises also
develops multi-family housing and administers housing programs for all jurisdictions in Kings County
on a contract basis.
Kings County and Cities of                            3-9                                       2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element

Chapter 3. Resources and Opportunities
Housing Authority of Kings County (HAKC): The Housing Authority’s mission is to promote decent,
safe, and affordable housing and economic opportunity to low-income families throughout Kings
County and its four incorporated cities. The Housing Authority operates three public housing projects
providing 268 units of affordable housing and 32 state housing apartments. The Housing Authority
also provides 688 Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers. Finally, the Authority manages 45 farm labor
residences, a Rental Housing Construction program apartment complex, a 44-unit California Housing
Rehabilitation Program-Rental (CHRP-R) senior citizen project, and two transitional housing projects
with 12 spaces for foster youth.
  C. Opportunities f or Energy Cons ervati on
Avenal
The City of Avenal is developing a Partnership with Pacific Gas & Electric to provide homeowners
and renters with energy audits and to provide them with resources to obtain low energy products
such as lights and insulation. The partnership should be in place early in 2010.
Corcoran
The City of Corcoran provides expedited permit processing for residential solar energy equipment
installations. The City’s Rehabilitation Program also encourages energy-efficient improvements when
equipment or construction will involve items eligible for such upgrades. The City is also working with
ARRA funds to install electrical retrofits on City-owned buildings/equipment, and entered into a
Lease Agreement for a Solar Farm. In addition, the Housing Plan includes a new program (2.16) to
refer lower-income households to the Kings Community Action Organization and other community
services agencies that provide financial assistance to offset the cost of home weatherization, heating
(including solar photovoltaic water heater systems) and cooling.
Hanford
The City of Hanford will be incorporating the policies and requirements of recent amendments to
state law (AB32 and SB375). In addition, the City requires or encourages the following in residential
developments:
    •    Street trees which reduce heat generated from pavement
    •    Landscaping in new development to shade parking lots
    •    Solar photovoltaic panels as options
    •    Require developers to exceed Title 24 Standards (Heat & Energy) by 10%
    •    Increased residential densities
    •    High Albedo (light-colored roofs are often required)
2009-2014                                         3-10                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                       Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                          C.    Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Lemoore
The Community Design Element of the City’s new General Plan incorporates several policies and
implementation actions that support energy conservation and green development. These include:
    •    Requiring new development to incorporate passive heating and natural lighting where
         feasible
    •    Incorporate green building standards into the Zoning Ordinance and Building Code to ensure
         a high level of energy efficiency in new development, including requiring the use of Energy
         Star appliances in new development and substantial renovations, requiring all new
         development to qualify for the equivalent of “LEED Silver” rating or better, requiring all new
         residential development to be pre-wired for optional photovoltaic energy systems and/or
         solar water heating, and requiring all new projects that will use more than 40,000 kilowatt-
         hours per year of electricity to install photovoltaic energy systems.
Kings County
The Community Development Agency recently adopted a new program (Chapter 5, Program 5.15)
which provides expedited plan check and permit processing for residential projects designed to
comply with the voluntary residential requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code.
Expedited plan check/permit processing is also given to photovoltaic systems that provide energy for
residential uses.
In addition, the Housing Plan includes a new program (5.16) to refer lower-income households to
the Kings Community Action Organization and other community services agencies that provide
financial assistance to offset the cost of home weatherization, heating (including solar photovoltaic
water heater systems) and cooling.
Kings County and Cities of                           3-11                                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element


Chapter 4. Constraints
The Kings County jurisdictions recognize that adequate and affordable housing for all income groups
strengthens the community. Government policies and regulations can impact the price and
availability of housing and, in particular, the provision of affordable housing. Likewise, non-
governmental constraints such as land and construction costs, and environmental and infrastructure
constraints can also affect housing cost and availability.
This chapter of the Housing Element discusses potential governmental and non-governmental
constraints focusing primarily on those constraint areas that may be mitigated through the policies
and programs discussed in Chapter 5.
  A. Governme ntal Constraints
Local policies and regulations can impact the price and availability of housing and, in particular, the
provision of affordable housing. Land use controls, residential development standards, and permit
processing procedures may present constraints to the maintenance, development, and improvement
of housing.
1.       Land Use Plans and Regulations
The jurisdictions’ General Plan Land Use Elements contain the primary policies that guide residential
development. These policies are implemented through several types of ordinances, including the
Zoning and Subdivision ordinances. Zoning regulations establish the amount and distribution of
different land uses within the jurisdictions, while subdivision regulations establish requirements for
the division and improvement of land.
         a.       General Plan Land Use Designations
Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term General Plan to guide its
future. The land use element of the General Plan establishes the basic land uses and density of
development within each jurisdiction. Under state law, the General Plan elements must be internally
consistent, and each jurisdiction’s zoning must be consistent with its General Plan. Thus, the land use
plan must provide suitable locations and densities to implement the policies of the Housing Element.
Table 4-1 shows the residential General Plan land use categories for the Kings County jurisdictions.
The land use designations support a variety of housing types, ranging from very low density
development, which generally includes single-family homes on large lots to high-density
development, which includes multi-family development ranging from 14 to 29 units per acre.
Kings County and Cities of                         4-1                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
 Table 4-1
 General Plan Residential Land Use Categories
 Designation                         Density Range                                 Description
 Avenal
 Residential Estate                          0-2     Single-family detached with lot sizes greater than 20,000 sf
 Low Density Residential                    2-10     Single-family detached with lot sizes greater than 6,000 sf
 Medium Density Residential                10-15     Duplex, triplex and fourplex development
 High Density Residential                  15-29     Multi-family apartments and condominiums
 Downtown Commercial                        n.a.     Residential use allowed in conjunction with commercial
 Community Commercial                       n.a.     Residential use allowed in conjunction with commercial
 Corcoran
 Very Low Density Residential                0-2     Single-family estate lots greater than 20,000 sf
 Low Density Residential                 4.5 – 7.5   Single-family detached in traditional subdivisions or clustered
                                                     planned developments. Lot sizes generally are 6,000 sf.
 Medium Density Residential                10-15     Duplex, triplex and fourplex development.
 High Density Residential                  15-29     Multi-family apartments and condominiums.
 Hanford
 Very Low Density Residential                0-3     Single-family estate lots with 12,000 sf or more.
 Low Density Residential                     2-9     Single family detached with lot sizes from 6,000 sf to 10,000 sf.
 Medium Density Residential                 7-15     Duplexes, zero lot lines, patio homes, and townhomes on lot
                                                     sizes from 4,500 sf. to 7,500. 6,000sf min. for new subdivision.
 High Density Residential                  10-22     Multi-family apartments and condominiums development.
 Lemoore
 Agriculture/Rural Residential               0-1     Single-family detached in rural and semi-rural areas with lot sizes
                                                     greater than 40,000 sf
 Very Low Density Residential                1-3     Single-family detached in semi-rural area with lot sizes between
                                                     15,000 sf to 40,000 sf
 Low Density Residential                     3-7     Single-family detached in typical residential subdivision with lot
                                                     sizes from 7,000 to 15,000 sf
 Low Medium Density                         7-12     Small lot single-family, attached single-family and duplexes,
 Residential                                         triplexes, fourplexes and townhomes.
 Medium Density Residential                12-17     Apartments and townhomes.
 High Density Residential                  17-25     Multi-family apartments and townhomes.
 Mixed Use                                  8-20     Multi-family and commercial uses.
 Kings County
 Very Low Density                            0-1     Single-family detached in unincorporated rural areas with lot sizes
                                                     greater than 20,000 sf
 Low Density                                 1-2     Single-family detached in unincorporated rural communities and
                                                     city fringe areas with lot sizes greater than 20,000 sf
 Low-Medium Density                          2-4     Single-family detached in unincorporated rural communities and
                                                     city fringe areas with lot sizes between 12,000 sf and 20,000 sf
 Medium Density                              4-5     Single family detached in unincorporated rural communities and
                                                     city fringe areas with 8,000 sf minimum lot size.
 Medium High Density                        5-15     Multi-family apartments and condominiums in unincorporated
                                                     rural communities and city fringe areas
 High Density                              15-22     Multi-family apartments and condominiums in unincorporated
                                                     rural communities and city fringe areas
 Very High Density                         22-29     Multi-family apartments and condominiums in unincorporated
                                                     rural communities and city fringe areas
 Source: General Plans of Kings County Jurisdictions
2009-2014                                                4-2                                     Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                   Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                      A.     Governmental Constraints
          b.        Zoning Designations and Housing Opportunities
Each jurisdiction in Kings County regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential
development through local zoning ordinances. The zoning regulations serve to implement each
jurisdiction’s general plan and are designed to protect and promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of residents. Housing Element law requires that jurisdictions facilitate and encourage a range
in types and prices of housing for all economic and social groups in the community. This includes
single-family and multi-family housing, manufactured housing, licensed care facilities, emergency
shelters, transitional housing, and other housing.
A summary of the residential development permitted by each King County jurisdiction is provided in
Table 4-2 through Table 4-6.
  Table 4-2
  Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, City of Avenal
                                                   A-I
  Housing Type                                     A-E        R-E       R-1       R-2      R-3     D-C        S-C     P-F
  Single-Family Detached                            P          P         P         P         P                          P
  Single-Family Attached                                                           P         P
  Multi-Family                                                                    P*        P*      C
  Mobile or Manufactured Home                       P          P         P         C         C
  Second Units                                      C          P         P         P         P
  Farmworker Housing                                C1                             P         P
  Emergency Shelters                                                                                                    C
  Transitional and Supportive Housing
  Residential Care Facility (6 or less)                        P         P         P         P
  Residential Care Facility (7 or more)                        C         C         C         C
  Senior Housing/Assisted Living2                              C         C         C         C      C
  Single Room Occupancy                                                                             C          C
  Notes:
  P=permitted use C=conditional use
  *CUP currently required for projects with 20 or more units (see Program 1.17 in Chapter 5)
  1. Farmworker housing conditionally permitted in conjunction with a primary permitted use.
  2. Conventional senior housing is permitted under the same regulations as multi-family. “Retirement or Rest Home” and
       “Convalescent Hospital/Nursing Home” are conditionally permitted uses.
  Source: City of Avenal Zoning Ordinance
Kings County and Cities of                                      4-3                                                2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                                         Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
    Table 4-3
    Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, City of Corcoran
                                                                                                                      CC, CN,
    Housing Type                                        A          RA           R-1          RM            CD         CS, CO
    Single-Family Detached                              P1          P             P           P              P
    Single-Family Attached                                                                    P              P
    Multi-Family (under 20 units)                                                             P             P3
    Multi-Family (20 or more units)                                                           C*            P3
    Mobile or Manufactured Home                         P2          P             P           P
    Second Units                                                    P             P
    Farmworker Housing                                 C4                        P4           P4
    Emergency Shelters
    Transitional and Supportive Housing
    Residential Care Facility (6 or less)                                         P           P
    Residential Care Facility (7 or more)                                        C            C
    Senior Housing/Assisted Living                                               C            C
    Single Room Occupancy                                                                                    C           C
    Notes:
    P=permitted use C=conditional use
    *See Program 2.16 in Chapter 5
    1. One family dwelling permitted when incidental to a permitted use.
    2. Mobile home as a residence or as farmworker housing incidental to a permitted or conditional use.
    3. Multi-family permitted as a secondary use (not to exceed 50% of the total square feet of the existing building).
    4. CUP required for farmworker housing in excess of 5 dwelling units per parcel or 7+ occupants.
    Source: City of Corcoran Zoning Ordinance
 Table 4-4
 Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, City of Hanford
                                                         R-1       R-1
 Housing Type                                 AG          20     6, 8, 12     RM          OR         CC          DC        MC
 Single-Family Detached                        P           P         P          P          P                                P
 Single-Family Attached                                                         P          P                                P
 Multi-Family                                                                   P          P          C1           P        P
 Mobile or Manufactured Home                   P           P         P          P          P
 Second Units                                              P         P          P          P
 Farmworker Housing (3 or less)                P
 Farmworker Housing (4 or more)                C
 Emergency Shelters                                                                       P2
                                                                                 3
 Transitional and Supportive Housing                                           C          P2
 Residential Care Facility (6 or less)                     P         P          P          P
 Residential Care Facility (7 or more)                                         C
 Senior Housing/Assisted Living                                                C           C
 Single Room Occupancy                                                         C4         P4
 Notes:
 P=permitted use C=conditional use
 1. Dwellings over a permitted use.
 2. Subject to Site Plan Review
 3. Domestic violence shelters and housing for persons on a temporary basis that do not require personal supervision or
      rehabilitation services
 4. Listed as “Boarding and Rooming Houses”
 Source: City of Hanford Zoning Ordinance
2009-2014                                                     4-4                                     Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                       Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                 A.      Governmental Constraints
    Table 4-5
    Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, City of Lemoore
    Housing Type                                     RA             R             RM             C-C            PO
    Single-Family Detached                            P             P              P                             P
    Single-Family Attached                                          P              P                             P
    Multi-Family                                                                   P              P1             P
    Mobile or Manufactured Home                       P             P              P
    Second Units                                      P             P              P
    Farmworker Housing
    Emergency Shelters
    Transitional and Supportive Housing
    Residential Care Facility (6 or less)                           C              C                             C
    Residential Care Facility (7 or more)
    Senior Housing/Assisted Living
    Single Room Occupancy
    Notes:
    P=permitted use C=conditional use
    1. Apartments over a permitted commercial use, in accordance with design standards of the General Plan.
    Source: City of Lemoore Zoning Ordinance
In 2008 the City of Lemoore adopted a new General Plan, which emphasizes the principles of “smart
growth” including more compact development and mixed use. Chapter 2 of the Land Use Element
(pp. 2-11 and 2-20 through 2-24) describes the policies that apply to mixed-use development, both
in the downtown and in other designated mixed-use centers. While the General Plan provides the
guiding policy regarding mixed-use, specific implementing regulations and guidelines will be
established in the new Zoning Code, which is currently underway. In the interim period until the
Zoning Code update is completed, applications must be found consistent with the General Plan and
if necessary, zone changes will be processed concurrently with the application at no additional cost
to the applicant. Development standards will be applied consistent with the new zoning designation.
For mixed-use projects, development standards will be determined based on the type of use
proposed and the applicable development standards for that use.
Among the General Plan policies supporting mixed use are the following:
     •    LU-I-26 Establish an incentive program for mixed-use development including FAR bonuses
          for uses that contribute to public benefit and shared parking arrangements
     •    LU-I-27 Create guidelines and a Best Practices Manual for mixed-use development to
          educate local builders and developers about the types of mixed-use areas the City desires
     •    LU-I-28 Establish Downtown Mixed Use Zones (DMX1, DMX2 and DMX3) in the Zoning
          Ordinance with the following land use requirements:
            DMX1 will allow retail, commercial, professional office, second-story residential, public
                and institutional uses, provided retail and restaurant uses are retained as a primary use at
                the site. Typical new buildings will require a minimum height of at least 20 feet or two-
                story, with exceptions for uses with special needs (e.g. cinemas). Service Commercial
                types of uses may be allowed when deemed appropriate through a Conditional Use
                Permit.
Kings County and Cities of                                 4-5                                                   2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                                       Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
            DMX2 will allow retail, commercial, professional office, high-density residential or
                 live/work studios, public and institutional uses.
            DMX3 will allow professional office and medium-density residential, with small-scale
                 support commercial uses, with bed-and-breakfast use an option.
Under the new General Plan, projects with up to 49% residential use may be allowed in the DMX1
district while 100% residential use is allowable in the DMX2 and DMX3 districts. In addition, a
significant portion of the downtown mixed-use area is within the In-Lieu Parking Fee Exemption
Zone where no on-site parking is required.
The residential capacity for mixed-use parcels has been estimated at 9 units/acre (see Appendix B,
Table B-1d). The new General Plan allows residential development at up to 20 units/acre in mixed-
use areas, therefore this assumption is very conservative and accounts for a non-residential
development component of these sites. One project, Antlers Apartments, was recently developed in
the mixed-use area at a density over 50 units/acre. Since the estimated capacity is less than half the
allowable density, and is far less than actual project experience, it is considered quite reasonable.
    Table 4-6
    Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District, Kings County
    Housing Type                                         A        RR        R        RM         C        PO          PF
    Single-Family Detached                               P         P        P         P        C2         P
    Single-Family Attached                                                            P        C2         C
    Multi-Family                                                                      P        C2         C
    Mobile or Manufactured Home                          P1        P        P         P
    Second Units                                                            P         P
    Farmworker Housing (5 or less)                       P
    Farmworker Housing (6 or more)                       C
    Emergency Shelters                                                      C         P        C3                     P
    Transitional and Supportive Housing
    Residential Care Facility (6 or less)                P         P        P         P
    Residential Care Facility (7 or more)                C
    Senior Housing/Assisted Living
    Single Room Occupancy
    Notes:
    P=permitted use C=conditional use
    1. Mobile home or manufactured housing permitted when used as farm employee housing incidental to a permitted or
         conditional use.
    2. Single-family and multi-family uses allowed by conditional use permit in the CC zone. One-family dwelling over or to
         rear of a permitted use allowed by- right in the CN, CC and CR zones.
    3. Emergency shelters allowed by conditional use permit in the CC, CHL, and CH zones.
    Source: Kings County Zoning Ordinance
As shown in Table 4-2 through Table 4-6 above, Kings County jurisdictions allow for a wide variety of
housing types, including single-family and multi-family residences at a variety of densities that
facilitate market rate and affordable housing projects. Mixed use is encouraged in the downtown
areas of Lemoore and Hanford and is also allowed in Avenal and Corcoran. The City of Lemoore
General Plan, which was updated in 2007, calls for the creation of three new mixed-use zoning
overlays for the Downtown area. The mixed-use zoning overlays, expected to be completed by Fall
of 2011, will increase height and residential densities for mixed-use development.
2009-2014                                                       4-6                                Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                      Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                            A.   Governmental Constraints
All jurisdictions allow for the development of manufactured housing and mobile homes, providing a
valuable source of affordable housing for seniors, families, and farmworkers. In accordance with state
law, all jurisdictions allow second units as a permitted use in all single-family zones. Low-income
housing can be accommodated in all districts permitting residential use in Kings County jurisdictions
including mixed-use districts.
         c.       Special Needs Housing
To further fair housing opportunities, Kings County jurisdictions provide for a range of housing
opportunities for persons with special needs, including those in residential care facilities, persons with
disabilities, the elderly, farmworkers, persons needing emergency shelter or transitional living
arrangements, and single-room-occupancy units. Many of these groups also fall under the category of
extremely-low-income households. Table 4-2 through Table 4-6 above show the current
requirements for each jurisdiction with respect to permitted and conditionally permitted special
needs housing types. Chapter 5, the Housing Plan, sets forth programs for each jurisdiction to revise
its Zoning Ordinance to comply with state law with respect to special needs housing. Each
jurisdiction’s provisions for these housing types are discussed below.
Extremely-Low-Income Households
Many of the persons and households discussed in this section under the topic of special needs fall
within the extremely-low-income category, which is defined as 30% or less of area median income,
or up to $16,750 per year for a 4-person household in Kings County (2009).
A variety of policies and programs described in Chapter 5 address the needs of extremely-low-
income households, including persons with disabilities and those in need of residential care facilities.
Such programs include housing rehabilitation, preservation of existing affordable units, Section 8
vouchers, provision of adequate sites for new multi-family housing, administrative, regulatory and
financial assistance to affordable projects, zoning to encourage and facilitate farmworker housing,
emergency shelters, transitional and supportive housing, single room occupancy (SROs) and second
units. However, it must be recognized that the development of new housing for the lowest income
groups typically requires large public subsidies, and the level of need is greater than can be met due
to funding limitations, especially during these times of declining public revenues.
Residential Care Facilities
Residential care facilities refer to any family home, group home, or rehabilitation facility that provides
non-medical care to persons in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance,
guidance, or training essential for daily living. Health and Safety Code §§1267.8, 1566.3, and 1568.08
require local governments to treat licensed group homes and residential care facilities with six or fewer
residents no differently than other single-family residential uses. “Six or fewer persons” does not include
the operator, the operator’s family, or persons employed as staff. Local agencies must allow these
licensed residential care facilities in any area zoned for residential use, and may not require licensed
residential care facilities for six or fewer clients to obtain conditional use permits or variances that are not
required of other single-family dwellings.
For all Kings County jurisdictions the development standards for licensed residential care facilities of
six or fewer persons are no different than for other residential uses in the same zone. A conditional
Kings County and Cities of                               4-7                                          2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                            Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
use permit is required in some jurisdictions for residential care facilities of more than six persons. A
deviation in site planning requirements and reduction in parking may be granted through the
conditional use process. A discussion of each jurisdiction’s regulations for residential care facilities is
provided below:
         •     Avenal – In compliance with the 2003-2008 housing plan, the City amended its zoning
               code to allow residential care facilities that serve six or fewer persons as a permitted
               use in the R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones. Facilities serving more than six persons are
               conditionally permitted in the same zones. These requirements are consistent with
               state law and do not pose a constraint on the establishment of such facilities.
         •     Corcoran – Under current zoning regulations, residential care facilities that serve six or
               fewer persons are a permitted use in the R-1 zone only. Residential care facilities
               serving more than six persons are not expressly permitted in the zoning ordinance. In
               order to comply with the Health and Safety Code, the Corcoran Housing Plan
               (Chapter 5, Program 2.14) provides that the City will amend the Zoning Code to allow
               licensed residential care facilities for six or fewer persons in any residential zone as a
               permitted use and to allow residential care facilities for more than six persons by
               conditional use permit in the R-1 and RM zones. With these changes, Corcoran’s
               Zoning Code would not pose a significant constraint on the establishment of residential
               care facilities.
         •     Hanford – Under current zoning regulations, residential care facilities that serve six or
               fewer persons are a permitted use in the R-1-20, R-1-6, R-1-8, R-1-12, RM and OR
               zones. Larger state- or county-licensed care facilities that provide housing on a
               temporary basis and that do not require personal supervision or rehabilitation services
               are conditionally permitted in the RM and OR zones. The Hanford Housing Plan
               (Chapter 5, Program 3.14) provides that the City will amend the Zoning Code to also
               allow residential care facilities for more than six persons by conditional use permit in
               the R-1 zone. With this revision, Hanford’s Zoning Code would not pose a significant
               constraint on the establishment of residential care facilities.
         •     Lemoore – Under current zoning regulations, residential care facilities that serve six or
               fewer persons are permitted by conditional use permit in the R, RM, and PO zones.
               Residential care facilities serving more than six persons are not expressly permitted in
               the Zoning Ordinance. To comply with the Health and Safety Code, the Lemoore
               Housing Plan (Chapter 5, Program 4.18) provides that the City will amend the Zoning
               Code to allow licensed residential care facilities for six or fewer persons in any
               residential zone as a permitted use and to allow residential care facilities for more than
               six persons by conditional use permit in the RM, PO, and CC zones. With these
               changes, Lemoore’s Zoning Code would not pose a significant constraint on the
               establishment of residential care facilities.
         •     Kings County – Under current zoning regulations, residential care facilities that serve
               six or fewer persons are a permitted use in the A, RR, R and RM zones. Residential care
               facilities serving more than six persons are permitted by conditional use permit in the A
               zone only. The Kings County Housing Plan (Chapter 5, Program 5.12) provides that the
               County will amend the Zoning Code to allow residential care facilities for more than six
               persons by conditional use permit in the RR, R, and RM zones. With these changes, the
2009-2014                                            4-8                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                         Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                           A.     Governmental Constraints
                County’s Zoning Code would not pose a significant constraint on the establishment of
                residential care facilities.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act impose an
affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e., modifications or
exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. Additionally,
§65008 of the Government Code requires localities to analyze potential and actual constraints, and
include programs to accommodate housing for disabled persons.
Building codes adopted by all Kings County jurisdictions incorporate accessibility standards contained
in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. Compliance with building codes and the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) may increase the cost of housing production and can also impact the
viability of rehabilitation of older properties required to be brought up to current code standards.
However, these regulations provide minimum standards that must be complied with in order to
ensure the development of safe and accessible housing.
Because many homes in Kings County jurisdictions were built before modern accessibility standards,
an important housing issue facing people with disabilities is retrofitting existing homes to improve
access. For retrofitting homes, all jurisdictions administratively permit unenclosed ramps to protrude
into required setbacks without a variance. Each jurisdiction allows a property owner to build a ramp
to allow people with disabilities access into a single-family home upon securing a building permit and
payment of local building permit and inspection fees. Each jurisdiction also administers a Housing
Rehabilitation Program that provides federally funded loans to eligible homeowners or rental
property owners to make accessibility improvements.
Key planning requirements for each jurisdiction related to housing persons with disabilities are
described below:
       Avenal
                •         Definition of “family” – The Avenal Zoning Code defines family as: “An
                          individual, or 2 or more persons related by blood or marriage or legal adoption,
                          or a group of not more than 6 persons who are not so related living together as
                          a single housekeeping unit.” In order to comply with state Fair Housing Law,
                          Chapter 5, Program 1.15 provides that the City will amend its Zoning Code to
                          revise the definition of “family.”
                •         Separation requirements – The City’s Zoning Code does not impose any
                          separation requirements between group homes or residential care facilities.
                •         Site planning requirements – The site planning requirements for residential care
                          facilities are no different than for other residential uses in the same zone.
                •         Reasonable accommodations – The City’s Zoning Code does not currently
                          include administrative procedures for reviewing and approving requests for
                          modifications to building or zoning requirements in order to ensure reasonable
Kings County and Cities of                               4-9                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                           Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
                         accommodations for persons with disabilities. Program 1.15 in the Housing
                         Plan (Chapter 5) includes a commitment to address this issue.
      Corcoran
               •         Definition of “family” – The Corcoran Zoning Code defines family as: “One or
                         more persons living as a bona fide single nonprofit relatively permanent
                         housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or
                         lodging house, hotel or club suitable for group use”. This definition is consistent
                         with current housing law.
               •         Separation requirements – The City’s Zoning Code does not impose any
                         separation requirements between group homes or residential care facilities.
               •         Site planning requirements – The site planning requirements for residential care
                         facilities are no different than for other residential uses in the same zone.
               •         Reasonable accommodations – Currently the City’s Zoning Code does not
                         contain a reasonable accommodations ordinance. Chapter 5, Program 2.14
                         provides that the City will amend the code to include administrative procedures
                         for reviewing and approving requests for modifications to building or zoning
                         requirements in order to ensure reasonable accommodations for persons with
                         disabilities.
      Hanford
               •         Definition of “family” – The Hanford Zoning Code defines family as: “A single
                         residential unit or person or group of persons living together as a domestic unit
                         in a single residential unit”. This definition is consistent with current housing
                         law.
               •         Separation requirements – The City’s Zoning Code does not impose any
                         separation requirements between group homes or residential care facilities.
               •         Site planning requirements – The site planning requirements for residential care
                         facilities are no different than for other residential uses in the same zone.
               •         Reasonable accommodations – The City’s Zoning Code (Chapter 17.72)
                         includes administrative procedures for reviewing and approving requests for
                         modifications to building or zoning requirements in order to ensure reasonable
                         accommodations for persons with disabilities. Requests for reasonable
                         accommodation are reviewed and approved administratively by the
                         Community Development Director within 30 days of receiving an application.
                         There is no fee associated with a reasonable accommodation application.
               Program 3.14 is included in the Housing Plan (Chapter 5) to ensure that City
               regulations and procedures are reviewed and updated as necessary to encourage and
               facilitate accessible housing for persons with disabilities.
2009-2014                                              4-10                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                            Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                           A.     Governmental Constraints
       Lemoore
                •         Definition of “family” – The Lemoore Zoning Code defines family as: “An
                          individual, two (2) or more persons who are related by blood or marriage or a
                          group of not more than five (5) persons not necessarily related by blood or
                          marriage living together in a dwelling unit.” In order to comply with state Fair
                          Housing Law, Chapter 5 Program 4.18 provides that the City will amend its
                          Zoning Code to revise the definition of “family” consistent with current law.
                •         Separation requirements – The City’s Zoning Code does not impose any
                          separation requirements between group homes or residential care facilities.
                •         Site planning requirements – The site planning requirements for residential care
                          facilities are no different than for other residential uses in the same zone.
                •         Reasonable accommodations – Currently, the City’s Zoning Code does not
                          contain a reasonable accommodations ordinance. Chapter 5, Program 4.18
                          provides that the City will amend the code to include administrative procedures
                          for reviewing and approving requests for modifications to building or zoning
                          requirements in order to ensure reasonable accommodations for persons with
                          disabilities.
       Kings County
                •         Definition of “family” – The Kings County Zoning Code defines family as: “One
                          or more persons living as a bona fide single nonprofit relatively permanent
                          housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or
                          lodging house, hotel or club suitable for group use. A family shall not include a
                          fraternal, social or business group.” This definition is consistent with current
                          housing law.
                •         Separation requirements – The County’s Zoning Code does not impose any
                          separation requirements between group homes or residential care facilities.
                •         Site planning requirements – The site planning requirements for residential care
                          facilities are no different than for other residential uses in the same zone.
                •         Reasonable accommodations ordinance – Currently, the County’s Zoning Code
                          does not contain a reasonable accommodations ordinance. Chapter 5, Program
                          5.12 provides that the City will amend the code to include administrative
                          procedures for reviewing and approving requests for modifications to building
                          or zoning requirements in order to ensure reasonable accommodations for
                          persons with disabilities.
Farmworker Housing
Housing for agricultural employees occurs in two types of settings: housing accommodations located
on farmland that is exclusively for farmworkers; or traditional housing that is intended for lower-
income households but is not restricted to farmworkers.
It is estimated that approximately 9,000 farm laborers in Kings County are permanent non-migrant
and seasonal laborers. The housing needs of these farmworkers are primarily addressed through the
provision of permanent affordable housing, such as apartments, lower-cost single-family homes, and
Kings County and Cities of                              4-11                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                           Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
mobile homes. The remaining farm laborers are migrant farmworkers who are not permanent
residents of Kings County. To provide housing for migrant farmworkers, various jurisdictions within
the County allow migrant farm labor camps and other types of housing subject to conditional use
permits. Such housing is typified by (but not exclusively) dormitory style structures designed for
temporary occupancy by migrant workers.
The California Employee Housing Act 9 regulates farmworker housing and generally requires that
facilities with no more than 36 beds or 12 units be treated as an agricultural land use that is not
required to obtain any conditional use permit or other approval that is not required of other
agricultural uses in the same zone.
Each jurisdiction’s policies regarding farmworker housing are described below.
          •     Avenal – Currently farmworker housing is a permitted use in the R-2 and R-3 zones
                and is conditionally permitted in the AI and AE zones in conjunction with a primary
                permitted use (see concluding note below). Development standards of the underlying
                district apply to proposals for farmworker housing. Since Avenal has some of the lowest
                housing prices and apartment rents in California, the need for farmworker housing is
                largely met by traditional housing. The City of Avenal actively assists farmworker
                housing needs: the majority of homeownership loans are made to farmworkers, and a
                majority of units in assisted multi-family projects are occupied by farmworkers.
          •     Corcoran – Corcoran permits mobile homes as farmworker housing, and conditionally
                permits farm employee housing in excess of five units per parcel in the A Zone (see
                concluding note below). Corcoran has some of the lowest housing prices and
                apartment rents in California and can meet its needs for farmworker housing through
                traditional housing. The City actively assists farmworker housing needs: farmworkers
                receive the majority of homeownership and home rehabilitation loans each year and
                occupy a larger share of units in assisted multi-family projects.
          •     Hanford – Hanford currently allows farmworker housing in the AG zone. Permitted
                (by-right) uses include a one-family dwelling related to agricultural use, a mobile home
                on a permanent foundation used as employee housing, and farm employee housing up
                to 3 units per parcel. Farm employee housing exceeding 3 units per parcel requires a
                conditional use permit (see concluding note below). As the most urbanized city in Kings
                County, Hanford has few resident farmworkers.
          •     Lemoore – As a more urbanized community, the City of Lemoore has no farmland
                within its boundaries and no agricultural zoning. Farmworker housing is not a
                permitted or conditional use within any of the City’s zones. However, the City’s overall
                efforts to provide and maintain affordable housing opportunities will help to support
                the few permanent non-migrant and seasonal laborers who may choose to reside in the
                city.
          •     Kings County – Kings County currently permits mobile homes as farm employee
                housing and farmworker housing not exceeding 5 units per parcel in the AL-10, AG-20,
                AG-40, and AX zones. Farmworker housing in excess of 5 units per parcel requires a
                conditional use permit (see concluding note below). Although no farm labor camps
                currently are present in Kings County, the County routinely permits mobile homes used
                as employee housing and smaller farmworker housing units.
9
   California Health and Safety Code §17021.5 and §17021.6
2009-2014                                              4-12                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                          Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                       A.     Governmental Constraints
          •     Conclusion – To comply with the California Employee Housing Act, the Housing Plans
                (Chapter 5) for the jurisdictions of Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford, and Kings County
                include commitments to process Code amendments with respect to agricultural
                employee housing. With these amendments none of the Kings County jurisdictions’
                zoning ordinances would pose unreasonable constraints to farmworker housing.
Emergency Shelters, Transitional and Supportive Housing
An emergency shelter is a facility that provides shelter to homeless families and/or individuals on a
limited short-term basis. Transitional housing is temporary (often six months to two years) housing for
a homeless individual or family who is transitioning to permanent housing. Transitional housing often
includes supportive services (e.g., job training, rehabilitation counseling) to allow individuals to gain
necessary life skills in support of independent living.
The passage of SB2 in 2007 amended the requirements for local governments’ regulations regarding
emergency shelters and transitional/supportive housing. Unless a city has sufficient existing shelter
facilities to accommodate its need, land use regulations must identify at least one zoning district
where shelters are a permitted use (i.e., do not require a conditional use permit or other
discretionary review). Additionally SB2 requires that transitional and supportive housing be treated as
a residential use subject to only those requirements that apply to other residential uses of the same
type in the same zone.
Each jurisdiction’s policies regarding emergency shelters, transitional and supportive housing are
described below.
          •     Avenal - Currently, emergency shelters are permitted by conditional use permit in the
                R-1, R-2, R-3 and PF zones. Transitional and supportive housing is conditionally
                permitted in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones. In order to comply with state law Program
                1.13 includes a commitment to amend the Zoning Code to comply with SB 2 within
                one year of Housing Element adoption. This action will also ensure that transitional and
                supportive housing is treated as a residential use subject only to those requirements
                that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
          •     Corcoran - Currently, emergency shelters are not expressly permitted “by right” or by
                conditional use permit within any zone. Transitional and supportive housing are also
                not expressly permitted or conditionally permitted in the City’s Zoning Code. In order
                to comply with state law Program 2.12 includes a commitment to amend the zoning
                code to comply with SB 2 within one year of Housing Element adoption. This action
                will also ensure that transitional and supportive housing is treated as a residential use
                subject only to those requirements that apply to other residential uses of the same type
                in the same zone.
          •     Hanford – Emergency shelters and transitional housing are permitted subject to site
                plan review in the OR (Office Residential) zone. The OR zone encompasses
                approximately 166 acres, is located near transit and commercial services, and can
                accommodate at least one emergency shelter. Program 3.13 in the Hanford Housing
                Plan (Chapter 5) includes a provision to amend the Zoning Code regarding emergency
                shelters and transitional/supportive housing in conformance with SB 2.
          •     Lemoore – Currently, emergency shelters are not expressly permitted “by right” or by
                conditional use permit within any zone. Transitional and supportive housing are also
Kings County and Cities of                           4-13                                       2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
               not expressly permitted or conditionally permitted in any zone. In order to comply with
               state law Program 4.16 in the Housing Plan includes a commitment to amend the
               Zoning Code to comply with SB 2 within one year of Housing Element adoption. This
               action will also ensure that transitional and supportive housing is treated as a residential
               use subject only to those requirements that apply to other residential uses of the same
               type in the same zone.
         •     Kings County – The Zoning Ordinance allows emergency shelters through a ministerial
               site plan review process in the RM and PF zones and subject to a conditional use
               permit in the R, CC, CHL, and CH zones, and is therefore consistent with SB 2. RM
               and PF zones contain approximately 151 and 325 acres, respectively, and have the
               capacity to accommodate additional shelters. Transitional and supportive housing are
               not expressly permitted or conditionally permitted in any zone. In order to comply with
               state law Program 5.9 includes a commitment to amend the Zoning Code to ensure
               that transitional and supportive housing is treated as a residential use subject only to
               those requirements that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same
               zone.
      Conclusion
With the program commitments described above, none of the Kings County zoning ordinances
would pose unreasonable constraints to emergency or transitional/supportive housing.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities are small studio-type apartment units, typically occupied by
extremely-low-income persons. Currently, only the cities of Avenal and Corcoran permit SROs by
conditional use permit within the D-C and S-C zones (Avenal) and the CC, CH, CD, CO, and CS
zones (Corcoran). Hanford permits “boarding and rooming houses” with administrative approval in
the OR zone and subject to a conditional use permit in the RM zones. The Housing Plans (Chapter 5)
for Hanford, Lemoore, and Kings County include programs to amend the zoning codes to explicitly
define (or clarify) and designate appropriate zones for SRO facilities with appropriate development
standards.
         d.      Development Standards
The Kings County jurisdictions regulate the type, location, density, and scale of residential
development primarily through their zoning ordinances. Zoning regulations are designed to protect
and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents, as well as preserve the character
and integrity of neighborhoods. The Zoning Ordinance sets forth the specific residential development
standards, described below and summarized in Table 4-7.
2009-2014                                            4-14                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                   A.  Governmental Constraints
 Table 4-7
 Residential Development Standards
                                                                           R-1-20,        R-1-8,    RM-3, RM-2,
 Jurisdiction           Development Standard              RR/RRE            R1-12         R-1-6       RM-1.5
 Kings County           Min. Lot Size (sf)                 20,000           12,000        6,000        6,000
                        Max. Density (du/ac)                  2              2-3.6       5.4-7.3      14.5-29
                        Lot Coverage (%)                    40%               40%          40%    50%, 60%, 70%
                        Max. Height (ft.)                    30                30           30           30
                        Parking (spaces/unit)                 1                 1            1           1.5
                        Development Standard                 RE               R-1          R-2          R-3
 Avenal                 Min. Lot Size (sf)                 20,000            6,000        7,000        6,000
                        Max. Density (du/ac)                  2               7.3          12.4         21.8
                        Lot Coverage (%)                    40%               50%          60%          60%
                        Max. Height (ft.)                    35                35           35           35
                        Parking (spaces/unit)                 2                 2            2            2
                                                                       R-1-12, R-1-10,
                        Development Standard                R-A              R-1-6       RM-2.5       RM-1.5
 Corcoran               Min. Lot Size (sf)                 20,000            6,000        6,000        6,000
                        Max. Density (du/ac)                  2            3.6-7.3         17.4          29
                        Lot Coverage (%)                    40%               40%          60%          70%
                        Max. Height (ft.)                    35                35           35           35
                        Parking (spaces/unit)                 2                 2         1.5-2        1.5-2
                                                                        R-1-12, R-1-8
                        Development Standard               R-1-20            R-1-6        RM-3         RM-2
 Hanford                Min. Lot Size (sf)                 20,000            6,000        6,000        6,000
                        Max. Density (du/ac)                  3            3.6-7.3         14.5         21.8
                        Lot Coverage (%)                     40               40%          50%          50%
                        Max. Height (ft.)                    40                35           35           35
                        Parking (spaces/unit)                 2                 2         1.5-2         15-2
                                                           RA-20                                  RM-2, RM-2.5,
                        Development Standard               RA-40            R-1-10        R-1-7        RM-3
 Lemoore                Min. Lot Size (sf)                 14,520           10,000        5,000     2,000/2,500/
                                                           40,000                                      3,000
                        Min. Density (du/ac)                  1                 3            5           12
                        Max. Density (du/ac)                  3                 4            7           25
                        Lot Coverage (%)                    25%               40%          40%          80%
                        Max. Height (ft.)                    30                30           30           35
                        Parking (spaces/unit)                 2                 2            2           1-2
 Source: Zoning Ordinances for Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford, Lemoore, and Kings County
Kings County and Cities of                                  4-15                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                             Housing Element
Chapter 4. Constraints
Structural Standards
The permitted density of residential development varies between jurisdictions and zones. The
maximum allowable density ranges from 22 units per acre in Avenal and Hanford up to 29 units per
acre in Corcoran and Kings County. The wide range of densities allowed in Kings County jurisdictions
facilitates a variety of housing types ranging from single-family homes to multi-family apartment
complexes.
Minimum lot sizes range from 5,000 square feet to 12,000 square feet for single-family residential
zones and from 2,000 to 7,000 square feet per unit for multi-family residential zones. The zoning
ordinances also regulate the size of residential structures through lot coverage and height limits. All
Kings County jurisdictions have reasonable structural limits, with maximum heights ranging from 30
to 35 feet. Multi-family lot coverage requirements are generous, ranging from 50% to 80%. The
single-family zones allow lot coverage ranging from 40% to 50%. Agricultural zones have a lower lot
coverage limit due to the predominant non-residential nature of these areas. These development
standards are typical of other cities in the San Joaquin Valley and are not considered to be a
constraint to development.
Parking Requirements
The parking requirements for Kings County jurisdictions are relatively consistent for all residential
uses. For instance, most residential units require 2 parking spaces per unit, with the exception of
Kings County, which requires 1 space per single-family unit and 1.5 spaces for multi-family units. In
addition, all jurisdictions require only 1.5 spaces for multi-family units with fewer than 2 bedrooms.
In all communities, multi-family residential projects with 2 or more bedrooms are required to provide
2 parking spaces. In Lemoore, only one space per unit is required for senior housing regardless of
unit size.
Providing adequate parking is necessary to facilitate the sale or rental of a unit. Allowing too few
spaces limits the potential occupants of a unit. These parking requirements are designed to
accommodate multiple vehicles for households most likely to own more than one vehicle –
households in single-family homes and in apartments with two or more bedrooms. According to the
2000 Census, 69% of owner-occupied units and 38% of renter units have 2 or more vehicles.
Therefore, requiring two spaces per residence is a reasonable requirement and does not constrain
development in Kings County.
          e.     Secondary Dwelling Units
Secondary dwelling units are attached or detached units that provide complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and
sanitation, located on the same lot as the primary structure. Second units often provide affordable
housing for extremely-low-, very-low- and low-income households, including seniors. Government
Code §65852.2 (AB 1866) requires jurisdictions to allow second units by-right (as permitted uses) in
all single-family zones unless specific findings are made. As shown in Table 4-2 (page 4-3) Table 4-6
(page 4-6), second units are permitted in single-family zones in all five jurisdictions.
2009-2014                                           4-16                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                        A.    Governmental Constraints
Specific requirements for secondary units for each jurisdiction are summarized below.
         •      Avenal – The City of Avenal requires a ministerial permit review for second units to
                ensure consistency with the following standards set forth in the zoning code: 1) the
                floor area of the second unit shall not exceed 1,200 square feet or 30% of the primary
                structure, 2) the height shall not exceed the height of the main dwelling, 3) one
                additional parking space shall be provided, 3) the unit shall be used only by the
                occupants of the main dwelling, their non-paying guests, or domestic employees and
                may not be rented, and 4) the unit shall not cause a high concentration of such units
                sufficient to change the character of the surrounding residential neighborhood. These
                provisions may pose a constraint upon second units; therefore, Program 1.12 in the
                Housing Plan includes a provision to review the Zoning Ordinance with respect to AB
                1866.
         •      Corcoran – The City of Corcoran requires an administrative permit for all second units.
                The Zoning Code does not impose specific development standards for second units but
                does require that the unit be consistent with the applicable development standards for
                the zone. These regulations are consistent with AB 1866 and do not pose a constraint
                on second units.
         •      Hanford – The City of Hanford requires an administrative application for second units
                to ensure consistency with development standards set forth in the Zoning Code. These
                standards include: 1) a floor area limit of 1,200 square feet or 30% of the primary
                structure, 2) owner occupancy of the primary residence or the second unit, 3) at least
                one additional parking space, and 4) compliance with the other regulations for the R,
                RM and OR districts, except as provided in the second housing units standards. These
                regulations are consistent with AB 1866 and do not pose a constraint on second units.
         •      Lemoore– The City of Lemoore requires an administrative permit for all second units to
                ensure consistency with development standards set forth in the zoning code. These
                standards include: 1) a floor area limit of 30% of the existing living area (interior
                habitable area) of the existing dwelling if attached and 1,200 square feet if detached,
                2) a prohibition on second units in planned unit developments unless approved as part
                of the project, 3) height limited to the height of the existing unit and 4) compliance
                with the height, building setbacks, lot coverage and zoning requirement generally
                applicable to the zone in which the property is located. These regulations are
                consistent with AB 1866 and do not pose a constraint on second units.
         •      Kings County – Kings County requires ministerial site plan review for second units to
                ensure consistency with develop standards set forth in the zoning code. These
                standards include: 1) a floor area limit of 30% of the existing living area if attached and
                1,200 square feet if detached, 2) owner occupancy of the primary residence or the
                second unit, 3) at least one additional parking space, and 4) compliance with the other
                regulations for the R district. These regulations are consistent with AB 1866 and do not
                pose a constraint on second units.
Kings County and Cities of                           4-17                                          2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                         Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
         f.      Density Bonus
Under current state law (SB 1818 of 2004), cities and counties must provide a density increase up to
35% over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the Municipal Code and the
Land Use Element of the General Plan (or bonuses of equivalent financial value) when builders agree
to construct housing developments with units affordable to low- or moderate-income households.
The density bonus policies for each jurisdiction are discussed below.
         •     Avenal – In response to program requirements in the previous housing plan and SB
               1818, the City of Avenal adopted a local ordinance that provides density bonus
               incentives in conformance with state law. Use of the density bonus has been limited,
               however, since allowable densities are sufficient to facilitate affordable housing without
               requiring a density bonus.
         •     Corcoran – The City of Corcoran adopted a density bonus ordinance in conformance
               with state law in 2008.
         •     Hanford – The City of Hanford adopted a density bonus ordinance in conformance
               with state law in 2008.
         •     Lemoore – The City has not yet completed the comprehensive update to the Zoning
               Code; therefore, Program 4.9 is included in the Housing Plan to adopt a density bonus
               ordinance by 2010.
         •     Kings County – The County has not yet adopted a density bonus ordinance in
               compliance with SB 1818; therefore, Program 5.5 is included in the Housing Plan to
               update its density bonus ordinance by 2010.
         g.      Mobile Homes/Manufactured Housing
There is often an economy of scale in manufacturing homes in a plant rather than on site, thereby
reducing cost. State law precludes local governments from prohibiting the installation of mobile
homes on permanent foundations on single-family lots. It also declares a mobile home park to be a
permitted land use on any land planned and zoned for residential use, and prohibits requiring the
average density in a new mobile home park to be less than that permitted by the Municipal Code.
As described below, all jurisdictions allow for the development of manufactured housing and mobile
homes, providing a valuable source of housing for seniors, families, as well as farmworkers.
         •     Avenal – The City of Avenal permits mobile homes and manufactured housing by right
               in the A-I, A-E, R-E and R-1 zones and by conditional use in the R-2 and R-3 zones.
               Although the Zoning Ordinance includes a Mobile Home Park (MHP) district, there is
               no land designated as such in the city. All existing MHPs are zoned R-1.
         •     Corcoran – The City of Corcoran permits mobile homes and manufactured housing by
               right in the S, RA, R-1, and RM zones. Existing MHPs are located in single-family, multi-
               family, or service commercial zones.
         •     Hanford – The City of Hanford permits mobile homes and manufactured housing by
               right in the AG, R-1-20, R-1, RM, and OR zones. Mobile home parks are permitted in
               the RM-2 and RM-3 zones subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
2009-2014                                          4-18                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                   A. Governmental Constraints
           •       Lemoore – The City of Lemoore permits mobile homes and manufactured housing by
                   right in the RA, R, and RM zones subject to design criteria.
           •       Kings County – Kings County permits mobile homes and manufactured housing by
                   right in the A, RR, R, and RM zones. The RM Multi-Family Residential District allows
                   manufactured housing communities or mobile home parks with a conditional use
                   permit.
2.         Residential Permit Processing and Environmental Review
Development review procedures exist to ensure that proposals for new residential development
comply with local regulations and are compatible with adjacent land uses. As shown in Table 4-8,
processing times for Kings County jurisdictions are relatively quick: single-family projects require one
to eight weeks, while multi-family projects typically require one to six months.
 Table 4-8
 Development Review Processing
 Permitting Requirements                                                 Jurisdiction
 and Timeframes                         Avenal          Corcoran           Hanford       Lemoore     Kings County
 Tentative Tract Map                     2 mo.             3 mo.          45-60 days    45-60 days      2-3 mo.
 Parcel Map                              3 mo.             2 mo.          30-45 days      45 days      4-6 weeks
 Required Permits
 Conditional Use Permit for        MF projects with Req. for projects    Not Required  Required for  Not Required
 Housing in Residential Zones          20+ du          with 20+ du       for Housing;  PUDs only;     for Housing;
                                      45-60 days          60 days         30-45 days      60 days       120 days
 Architectural Review for          Administrative as    Only PUDs         Only PUDs    Downtown
 Housing in Residential Zones         part of SPR       30-45 days        30-45 days  Projects Only  Not Required
                                                                                        30-45 days
 Administrative Site Plan              Required          Required          Required      Required       Required
 Review for Apartments                  30 days         30-45 days          30 days       45 days       5 Weeks
 Time Frame from plan submittal to approval
 - Single-family project                1 week            14 days         45-60 days      60 days      4-6 weeks
 - Multi-Family project               45-60 days        1 to 3 mo.        30-45 days    60-90 days     4-6 weeks
 du=dwelling unit
 * Exception is for Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
 Source: Cities of Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford, and Lemoore; Kings County.
State planning and zoning law provides permit processing requirements for residential development.
Within the framework of state requirements, each jurisdiction has structured its development review
process in order to minimize the time required to obtain permits while ensuring that projects receive
careful review. A description of each jurisdiction’s permit and environmental review process is
described below.
           •       Avenal – Generally, residential projects can be built by-right in all residential zones
                   provided that the project’s site plan conforms to the Zoning Ordinance. Multi-family
                   projects larger than 19 units require a conditional use permit due to traffic concerns.
                   The conditional use permit has standard findings applicable to all uses, is processed
Kings County and Cities of                                   4-19                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                               Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
               expeditiously, and facilitates affordable housing. The Planning Commission approves
               projects where: 1) the site is adequate in size, shape, and location for the use; 2) the
               use is consistent with the General Plan; 3) adequate CEQA documentation has been
               considered; and 4) the use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
               welfare of persons residing or working in that neighborhood and the use will not be
               injurious or detrimental to property or improvements. The Zoning Ordinance for the
               City of Avenal requires a Conditional Use Permit when a multi-family project exceeds
               19 units. A recent permit for an 81-unit low-income complex for Amcal Housing took
               just three months from application filing to final approval from the Planning
               Commission. The purpose of the CUP process for a large multi-family project is to
               allow the Planning Commission to review parking, landscaping and other project design
               features to ensure that adequate amenities such as playground equipment and
               barbeques are included in the project. While the CUP process has not been a
               significant constraint to the production of lower-income housing, in order to improve
               development certainty a program has been included in the Housing Plan (Chapter 5) to
               replace the CUP requirement in favor of site plan review by the Planning Commission.
         •     Corcoran – Single-family homes can be built by right in residential zones. Multi-family
               projects with less than 20 units are permitted by-right while projects of 20 or more
               units are required to obtain a conditional use permit. The conditional use permit is
               required because larger projects usually have a potentially significant traffic impact on a
               small community the size of Corcoran. The conditional use permit does not constrain
               the timing, certainty or location of multi-family housing since the findings are the same
               as for all conditionally permitted uses. Since October 2008 the City has received 3
               applications for multi-family apartment complexes ranging in size from 56 to 81 units,
               all of which were approved within 2 to 16 months. The Avalon Apartments CUP took
               16 months due to lack of proper easements and road issues. Dairy Villas took 10
               months because of several changes submitted by the developer and an incomplete
               easement agreement with Corcoran Irrigation District. Kings Manor took 2 months from
               CUP application submittal to approval. While the CUP process has not been a
               significant constraint to the production of lower-income housing, in order to improve
               development certainty a program has been included in the Housing Plan (Chapter 5) to
               replace the CUP requirement in favor of site plan review by the Planning Commission.
         •     Hanford – Residential projects can be built by-right in their respective zones via an
               approved site plan review and applicable CEQA requirements without a conditional
               use permit or a design review. For multi-family projects, a site plan review is required
               to enable the City to determine whether a proposed project conforms to the intent and
               provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, to guide the Building Official in the issuance of
               building permits, and to provide for the expeditious review of environmental impact
               assessments. The Community Development Department makes findings for approval
               provided the project complies with the following City policies: 1) traffic safety, street
               dedications, street improvements, and environmental quality, 2) zoning, fire, police,
               building and health codes, and public works construction standards; and 3) any other
               applicable federal, state or local requirements. Architectural review is required only for
               Planned Unit Development (PUD) overlays, and only one parcel in Hanford is
               designated as such. Developers follow objective guidelines and the Planning
               Commission approves the project.
2009-2014                                           4-20                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                         A.    Governmental Constraints
         •      Lemoore – Residential projects can be built by right in their respective zones via an
                approved site plan review and applicable CEQA requirements. Architectural review is
                only required in the downtown district. City staff provides a standard checklist of items
                to developers at the outset of a project. Individual homes are approved administratively
                with only a building permit and no requirement for a public hearing. Site plan review is
                required for multi-family and PUD projects to enable the City to determine whether a
                project conforms to the intent and provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, to guide the
                building official in permit issuance, and to provide for expeditious review of
                environmental assessments. For projects with 5 or more units, a public hearing is
                required. The Planning Commission reviews and approves planned developments
                (minimum five acres for multi-family sites; ten acres for single-family sites) and
                modifications to development standards. The PUD process has not resulted in any
                project denials.
         •      Kings County – Kings County allows single-family and multi-family residential projects
                by right in residential zones. No conditional use permits are required for residential
                uses. Moreover, Kings County does not require architectural review or design review.
                However, the County does require a standard site plan review for multi-family housing
                to enable the County to determine whether a proposed project conforms to the intent
                and provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, to guide the Building Official in the issuance
                of building permits, and to provide for the expeditious review of environmental impact
                assessments. Processing times are largely a function of compliance with CEQA
                requirements.
These procedures help to ensure that each jurisdiction’s development process meets all legal
requirements without causing a significant unwarranted constraint to housing development.
3.       Developer Fees, Improvement Requirements and Building
         Codes
State law limits fees charged for development permit processing to the reasonable cost of providing
the service for which the fee is charged. Various fees and assessments are charged by Kings County
jurisdictions and other public agencies to cover the costs of processing permit applications and
providing services and facilities such as schools, parks and infrastructure. Almost all of these fees are
assessed through a pro rata share system, based on the magnitude of a project’s impact or on the
extent of the benefit that will be derived.
After the passage of Proposition 13 and its limitation on local governments’ property tax revenues,
cities and counties have faced increasing difficulty in providing public services and facilities to serve
their residents. One of the main consequences of Proposition 13 has been the shift in funding of new
infrastructure from general tax revenues to development impact fees and improvement requirements
on land developers. Kings County jurisdictions require developers to provide on-site and off-site
improvements necessary to serve their projects. Such improvements may include water, sewer and
other utility extensions, street construction and traffic control device installation that are reasonably
related to the project. Dedication of land or in-lieu fees may also be required of a project for rights-
of-way, transit facilities, recreational facilities, and school sites, consistent with the Subdivision Map
Act.
Kings County and Cities of                             4-21                                       2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                        Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
State law prohibits the imposition of building standards that are not necessitated by local geographic,
climatic or topographic conditions, and requires that local governments making changes or
modifications in building standards must report such changes to the Department of Housing and
Community Development along with a finding with justification that the change is needed. Kings
County jurisdictions’ building codes are based upon the California Building, Plumbing, Fire,
Mechanical, Electrical, Housing, Building Conservation and Energy Codes, and the International
Property Maintenance Code. These are considered the minimum necessary to protect the public's
health, safety and welfare. Although minor amendments have been incorporated to address local
conditions, no additional regulations have been imposed that would unnecessarily add to housing
costs.
Additional information regarding development fees, improvement requirements, and building codes
is provided below.
          a.        Planning and Development Fees
Housing construction imposes short- and long-term infrastructure costs on communities. Short-term
costs include staffing for planning services and inspections. In addition, new residential developments
can result in significant long-term costs to maintain and improve infrastructure, public facilities, parks,
and streets. In response to the taxing constraints imposed by Proposition 13, many California cities
have relied increasingly on planning and development fees to fund services needed by new housing.
In Kings County, all jurisdictions collect planning and building fees for new development, as well as
impact fees to assist in the construction of new schools as necessary. In addition, the cities of Avenal,
Hanford, Corcoran, and Lemoore collect impact fees to help fund infrastructure improvements. The
impact fees include public safety (police and fire), water system supply and distribution, wastewater
collection/treatment, streets/thoroughfares, parks and recreation, and various others. Kings County
does not charge impact fees. Development within special districts (either a community service district
or public utility district) requires connection fees to be paid to the respective special district where
services were provided.
Table 4-9 presents the development processing and impact fees charged in each jurisdiction.
According to a statewide fee study 10, Kings County jurisdictions’ fees were lower than half of all
jurisdictions in the state. Based on current conditions, fees (both processing and impact) range from
approximately 3% to 13% of the total cost of housing in Kings County. Given the current realities of
local government fiscal conditions, this is considered very modest and is not an unreasonable
constraint to housing.
Residential projects may sometimes require the extension of water, sewer, and roads. In these cases,
the off-site improvements are more costly than traditional infill development. In Kings County, cities
often require the developer to pay for extending water and sewer infrastructure, but then allow the
developer to recapture up to 50% of the costs if infill projects developed within ten years are served
by that infrastructure extension that was oversized.
10
    Pay to Play: Residential Development Fees in California Cities and Counties. HCD, August 2001.
2009-2014                                                    4-22                                Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                    Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                                          A.     Governmental Constraints
nt Fees
                                   Single Family Projects 1                                       Multi-Family Projects 2
              Avenal       Corcoran       Hanford       Lemoore         County     Avenal   Corcoran Hanford Lemoore             County
                 $1,332        $2,635       $2,588         $2,100          $2,450    $826       $925     $2,043        $700          $650
                       --          $74           NA          $235               --   $200        $74      $145         $250            $52
s                  $550        $1,269       $5,998         $1,380          $3,245       NA        NA         NA            NA           NA
                       --         $422        $306             $38          $630         --     $422      $153            $19        $630
                 $1,882        $4,400       $8,892         $3,753          $6,325   $1,026    $1,421     $2,341        $969         $1,332
                   $742        $1,163       $1,843         $1,647     $350-5,9004    $490     $1,163     $1,419      $1,726    $350-5,9004
                   $629        $3,137       $2,272           $831       $0-6,6374    $504     $3,137     $2,074        $508      $0-6,6374
                       --             --    $2,476         $1,046               --       --        --         --       $670
                 $1,311           $923      $2,787         $1,543               --  $1,050      $923     $2,452      $2,500              --
                       --         $300            --         $658               --       --     $300          --       $475              --
                   $882           $882        $158                          $882     $700       $700      $139         $147          $700
                   $323           $323        $323           $323           $323     $256       $256      $256         $256          $256
                 $1,207        $1,207       $1,207         $1,207          $1,207    $957       $957      $957         $957          $957
                   $342               --          --             --         $342     $271          --         --            --       $271
                       --         $466        $302           $198               --       --     $466      $266         $295              --
                       --            $4          $4             $4             $4        --       $3         $3            $3           $3
                     $69           $69          $69            $69            $69      $55       $55        $55           $55          $55
                       --             --      $310               --             --       --        --         --            --           --
                   $657           $733            --         $626               --   $526       $733          --       $778              --
                 $6,162        $9,207      $11,752         $8,152         $3,177-   $4,809    $8,693     $7,621      $8,370        $2,592-
                                                                           15,364                                                   14,779
 es              $8,044      $13,607       $20,644        $11,905         $9,502-   $5,835   $10,114     $9,963      $9,339        $3,924-
                                                                         $21,689                                                  $16,111
  ost6                4%            7%         10%              6%         5-11%        5%        8%         8%            7%       3-13%
 subdivision with typical unit sizes
 l 20-unit apartment project
ty Service Districts
ange from $2.97 to $4.06 per sq. ft. depending on school district
  hed sales price of $200,000 and a multi-family unit value of $125,000
ns, 12/2009
                                                            4-23                                                                       2009-2014
ore                                                                                                                               Housing Element
Chapter 4. Constraints
Developer impact fees are charged in some cases for certain improvements. In addition to paying
impact fees, a developer may provide needed public facilities and services through the creation of a
special assessment or infrastructure financing district, annexation to existing public utilities or
community services district, or raising of private capital to complete the needed improvements.
These costs are passed on to residents through prices or rents charged for new housing. In rural
communities, new development is required to be annexed into a city or community services district
in order to obtain water and sewer services.
         b.          Site Improvement Requirements
For new housing developments, all jurisdictions require installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and
street lighting. Developments must also provide connections to water and wastewater systems, or
provide wells and septic tanks. Where roadways are not present, developers are required to
construct all internal roadways for a subdivision, and provide connections to existing roadways. Table
4-10 summarizes typical improvements.
 Table 4-10
 On-Site and Off-Site Improvements
                                                             Standard Improvements
                                                                  On-site Landscaping             Curb, Gutters, Sidewalk,
 Permit Type                  Internal Streets                      and Open Space                          Utilities
 Avenal            ROW includes local street width of     Front yard setback and lot           Requires curb, gutters,
                   36’ for streets, plus 4’ for sidewalk, coverage (see Table 3-8).            sidewalks, and roads where
                   and none for landscaping. For          Park dedications are not required.   they do not exist. Also must
                   collectors, ROW 60’ with 5’            City requires two trees per          connect to utilities and provide
                   sidewalks on both sides                residential lot.                     street lights.
 Corcoran          ROW includes local street width of     Front yard setback and lot           Requires curb, gutters,
                   60’, plus 4’ sidewalk on either        coverage (see Table 3-8). Park       sidewalks, and roads where
                   side. Requires 6’ landscaping.         dedications are not required. City   they do not exist. Also must
                   Collector ROW is 68 feet with          requires two trees per residential   connect to utilities and provide
                   same requirements                      lot.                                 street lights.
 Hanford           ROW includes street width of 40’       Front yard setback and lot           Must provide curb, gutters,
                   plus 5’ for sidewalk, and 5’ for       coverage (see Table 3-8)             sidewalks, street lights, as well
                   utility easement                       Yard must be landscaped with 4       as sewer and water hookups,
                   Collector has 80’ ROW, with same       trees per lot. Apartments must       and fire hydrants
                   easements.                             have 160 sq ft of open space per
                                                          unit
 Lemoore           58’ ROW includes local street          Front yard setback and lot           Must provide curb, gutters,
                   width of 34’, 5’ sidewalks, 7’         coverage (see Table 3-8). 10,000     sidewalks, street lights, as well
                   landscaping on each site. Street       sq ft. of open space required (can   as sewer and water hookups,
                   trees are placed every 40 feet.        include recreation bldg) if          fire hydrants, and
                   Most collectors and arterials have     apartment project exceeds 25         undergrounding of utilities up
                   74’-84’ ROWs, respectively, and        units                                to 70 kv
                   6’ sidewalks
 Kings County      For minor street, ROW is 36’ for       Standard lot coverage                Curbs and gutters are required
                   streets plus 5’ sidewalk and 5’        requirements of 40% for single-      for lot sizes less than 20,000
                   landscape. For collector, ROW is       family residences and 70% for        square feet. Street lights not
                   40’ plus 6’ each for sidewalk and      multi-family residences. No          required. Sewer and water
                   landscaping                            standards for open space required,   hookups required for lot sizes
                                                          just landscaping.                    less than one acre.
 ROW=right of way
 Source: Cities of Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford, and Lemoore; Kings County
2009-2014                                                       4-24                                  Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                     A.     Governmental Constraints
While site improvement requirements increase housing costs, they are typical for most jurisdictions.
Moreover, site improvements are necessary to maintain the quality of life desired by residents, and
ensure the availability of needed public services and facilities. Jurisdictions can mitigate the cost of
these improvement requirements by assisting affordable housing developers in obtaining state and
federal financing for their projects, or providing regulatory and financial incentives. In several
jurisdictions, the Redevelopment Agency also plays an active role in financing the construction and
improvement of infrastructure.
         c.       Building and Construction Codes
All Kings County jurisdictions have adopted the Uniform Building Code and uniform Housing Code.
The City of Lemoore requires new homes to be pre-wired to facilitate aftermarket solar energy
installations. No other additional regulations have been imposed by the jurisdictions that would
unnecessarily add to housing costs.
Code enforcement programs are implemented through each jurisdiction’s Building Department,
Planning Department, Public Works Department or Redevelopment Agency. Code enforcement staff
investigates violations of building code and property maintenance standards as well as other
complaints. When violations are identified, eligible property owners are referred to appropriate
rehabilitation programs providing grants or low-interest loans for property and building improve-
ments. Each jurisdiction is committed to increasing public awareness of rehabilitation and home
improvement programs and to coordinating these programs with code enforcement efforts. This
commitment is reflected in Program 1 (Code Enforcement) of each jurisdiction’s Housing Plan. In
addition, all Housing Plans for Kings County jurisdictions have a housing rehabilitation program.
Kings County and Cities of                        4-25                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
  B. Non-Gove rnme ntal Constraints
1.       Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints
Environmental and infrastructure issues affect the amount, location, and timing of new residential
development. New housing opportunities create challenges regarding public infrastructure extensions
and expansions, and encroachment into agricultural land. In addition, the availability of adequate
water, public infrastructure such as wells and wastewater treatment facilities, and other public
services and facilities can impact the feasibility of new residential development. This section analyzes
the potential environmental and infrastructure constraints to housing in Kings County.
         a.      Agricultural Lands
The California Land Conservation Act, (commonly
referred to as the “Williamson” Act) was adopted by the
state legislature in 1965 to protect agricultural, wetland,
and scenic areas of the state from unnecessary or
premature conversion to urban uses. The Williamson Act
explicitly pronounces the State’s responsibility for
protecting its agricultural industry from stagnation and
recession. The agricultural industry is critical to the
economy of Kings County, and its agricultural preserve
program was first implemented in 1969.
To that end, Kings County has several mechanisms that serve to protect farmland from premature
urbanization. Conservation or Farmland Security Zone Contracts provide that property may not be
used by the owner, or their successors, for any purpose other than the production of agricultural
products for commercial purposes. The minimum timeframe of a Land Conservation Contract cannot
be less than 10 years. Farmland Security Zone contracts cannot be less than 20 years. Both contracts
automatically renew one additional year and the automatic renewal continues indefinitely unless a
notice of non-renewal is filed.
As discussed in Chapter 3 and Appendix B – Land Inventory, the sites identified for housing
development are not encumbered with Williamson Act contracts, nor are any sites located within
Farmland Security Zones. Thus, all sites proposed for development are not constrained by agricultural
land use conservation contracts.
         b.      Wastewater Infrastructure
Wastewater service for residential development in King County is provided by public sewers in the
incorporated cities and community service districts. In rural areas of the County, wastewater service is
not provided and residential developments rely on individual septic systems. An analysis of sewer
capacity in Kings County jurisdictions and the capacity to accommodate growth commensurate with
the RHNA for 2009-2014 is provided below.
         •     Avenal – The City of Avenal provides sewer service to its urbanized areas and the
               Avenal State Prison. The City’s sewage collection system includes two major trunk lines
2009-2014                                           4-26                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                   B.   Non-Governmental Constraints
                in Laneva Boulevard that extend from the urban area to the sewage treatment plant
                located in southeast Avenal. Based on projected population growth the City’s portion
                of treatment plant reserve capacity will not be fully utilized until the year 2024 under
                average flow conditions. Even under peak flow conditions, however, the plant’s reserve
                capacity will not be fully utilized until the year 2014. No expansion is proposed at this
                time.
         •      Corcoran – Corcoran’s wastewater is collected and conveyed to the City’s treatment
                plant, located at the intersection of King Avenue and Pueblo Avenue, in the
                southeastern portion of the City. This facility provides secondary level treatment.
                Corcoran State Prison has its own wastewater treatment facility. The City’s wastewater
                treatment plant has been expanded in recent years to accommodate population growth
                as outlined in the General Plan. The City continues to plan for expansion of the
                wastewater treatment facility as part of its Capital Improvement Program and
                Wastewater Collection Master Plan as necessary to include alternative analysis of water
                reclamation facilities. New development is responsible for construction of all sewer
                lines serving the development. Adequate treatment plant capacity is projected through
                the planning period.
         •      Hanford – Hanford’s wastewater treatment plant was recently expanded to provide
                additional capacity for city growth through 2016. To allow for growth east of the City’s
                boundaries, either a major new interceptor line will be installed to connect this area
                with the wastewater treatment plant or a satellite tertiary wastewater treatment plant
                must be built. These improvements will either be funded through impact fees or
                provided by developers to ensure adequate capacity to accommodate development.
                Thus, adequate capacity will be available to serve new residential development
                commensurate with the regional housing production goals.
         •      Lemoore – Lemoore requires all new developments to connect to the City’s sewer
                system. Single-family homes on lots of at least one-acre, which were previously allowed
                to use private septic systems, are now required to connect to sewer systems to prevent
                groundwater contamination. Lemoore’s wastewater system has adequate capacity to
                serve projected development through the end of the planning period. New trunk lines
                and collectors must be planned in areas of the city where growth is expected to occur.
                Such improvements will be funded through wastewater impact fees.
         •      Unincorporated County – Wastewater treatment capacity is more limited in
                unincorporated communities than in the cities. In most of the unincorporated areas,
                wastewater treatment services are not provided, and residential development relies on
                individual septic systems. However, the Armona, Kettleman City and Stratford areas are
                served by wastewater treatment systems. The Stratford Public Utility District is only able
                to service existing connections. The community districts of Armona, Home Garden,
                and Kettleman City have adequate wastewater treatment capabilities. Home Garden
                contracts with the City of Hanford for wastewater treatment.
         c.       Water Availability and Infrastructure
The availability of water to serve residential development is an important prerequisite for determining
the ability of sites to accommodate housing commensurate with the regional housing needs
Kings County and Cities of                           4-27                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
production goals during the 2009-2014 planning period. The availability of water to serve additional
growth in each jurisdiction is discussed below.
         •     Avenal – The City of Avenal uses imported water supplied from the San Luis Canal as
               part of the California Water Project. Based on the Avenal Water Master Plan, the City is
               projected to have sufficient supply of imported water to meet growth demands through
               the planning period, although it is difficult to predict future water supplies with
               certainty due to the current drought.
         •     Corcoran – Corcoran relies upon five groundwater wells located in a well field
               northeast of the City to meet all domestic, commercial, and industrial water demands.
               To prevent aquifer overdrafting, Corcoran participates in groundwater recharge
               activities, has adopted water conservation ordinances, and treats/reuses wastewater
               effluent for irrigation at Corcoran State Prison. The City has sufficient existing and
               planned groundwater supply to serve the City’s maximum population projected at
               buildout of the General Plan without depletion of the aquifer.
         •     Hanford – Hanford and surrounding urban areas rely on local groundwater from the
               San Joaquin Valley Groundwater Basin to meet all domestic, commercial, and industrial
               water demand. The City also maintains drainage basins to percolate storm water and
               excess domestic water year-round to recharge the aquifer. Approximately half of the
               water consumed by urban uses is used to recharge the aquifer and half is used as
               irrigation. Current forecasts project that adequate water will be available through the
               planning period to serve anticipated growth.
         •     Lemoore – The City of Lemoore provides water service within its corporate limits from
               7 wells. According to the 2008 General Plan, projected average day demand is
               expected to be within the current supply capacity. As the City grows in accordance
               with General Plan projections, demand will eventually exceed the supply available
               from existing wells. At that time, the City may need to drill additional wells. Lemoore is
               not located within an adjudicated water basin, so there is no restriction on the number
               of wells that may be drilled inside the City limits. The City also encourages conservation
               measures to decrease demand. Because the City lies above a semi-confined aquifer,
               groundwater recharge is accomplished by up-basin stream recharge.
         •     Unincorporated County – The Kettleman City Community Services District (KCCSD)
               provides water to the unincorporated community of Kettleman City from two
               groundwater wells. The KCCSD has established a moratorium on new commercial and
               residential development until water system improvements or an imported water source
               is identified.
               •        The Armona Community Services District (ACSD) provides water services in the
                        unincorporated community from two groundwater wells. The ACSD has
                        established a moratorium on new commercial and residential development
                        until water system improvements or an imported water source is identified.
               •        Neither the KCCSD nor the ACSD are restricted in the amount of groundwater
                        wells that can be drilled. The KCCSD and ACSD Capital Facilities Plans include
                        the provision of new wells and additional water storage capacity to
                        accommodate buildout of the General Plan land use policies. As demand for
2009-2014                                           4-28                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                         Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                    B.    Non-Governmental Constraints
                          water supply increases with population growth, these community service
                          districts will drill new wells and construct additional water storage facilities in
                          accordance with their Capital Facilities Plans.
                •         Home Garden Community Service District (HGCSD) can support limited infill
                          development and currently has undetermined capacity for future water
                          connections. However, a new water treatment plant is anticipated to come
                          online by the end of 2009. This water treatment facility will bring the HGCSD
                          into compliance with EPA standards as well as provide service to new growth.
                •         Stratford Public Utility District (SPUD) has three existing wells and can support
                          limited infill development. However, existing capacity will not support large
                          scale development within the community and new sources of potable water
                          will be needed.
All of the incorporated cities and unincorporated communities in Kings County have indicated
sufficient water supply to support projected populations at buildout of the General Plans without
depleting groundwater aquifers.
2.       Land and Construction Costs
Land and construction costs contribute to the cost and
affordability of housing. However, these market factors are
largely beyond the control of local jurisdictions.
While land costs are primarily controlled by regional
location, cities and counties can influence per-unit land costs
through allowable densities. As discussed in the
Governmental Constraints section, all of the jurisdictions in
Kings County allow residential development at sufficient
densities to accommodate market demand.
Like land costs, construction costs are not significantly
affected by local policies. The price of materials and labor
are affected by regional, national and international forces. Construction costs depend on the type of
home as well as amenities, materials used, and quality of construction. Jurisdictions have several
means to reduce the cost of housing construction, improve housing affordability, and expand housing
opportunities for more residents. Using prefabricated or manufactured housing is one way to reduce
construction costs. All Kings County jurisdictions have policies to facilitate the use of manufactured
housing.
Local building code requirements could also affect the cost of new housing. All Kings County
jurisdictions have adopted the Uniform Building Code and no local amendments have been adopted
that would significantly increase the cost of construction.
In some portions of Lemoore, mitigation is needed to comply with FEMA flood hazard regulations or
to provide noise insulation in homes impacted by aircraft overflight from the Naval Air Station
Lemoore. While these measures will increase constructions costs, they at least partially offset by
Kings County and Cities of                             4-29                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                         Housing Element

Chapter 4. Constraints
creating additional areas for residential development, thereby increasing the potential supply of
housing.
3.       Cost and Availability of Financing
Kings County jurisdictions are similar to most other communities with regard to private sector home
financing programs. The recent (2007-2009) financial crisis has affected the availability of real estate
loans, although the long-term effects are unpredictable. The “sub-prime” lending industry made it
possible for families or others who could not qualify for standard mortgages to become home owners
even though they might not have had the credit history and income to support repayment of the
loans. The problem typically occurred with adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) after the initial fixed
interest rate period expired (often two to three years) and the interest rate converted to market rate.
Because ARMs often offer “teaser” initial interest rates well below market for the first few years,
monthly payments may increase by several hundred dollars when the loan converts to market rate.
When property values were increasing, as was the case from 2000 to 2006, homeowners had the
option of refinancing to a new loan when the initial rate expired. However, when property values are
declining, homeowners may owe more than the resale value of their home, making refinancing
impossible. As a result of these conditions, there has been a significant rise in foreclosure rates, and
changes in mortgage underwriting standards are likely to have greater impacts on low-income
families than other segments of the community.
Under state law, it is illegal for real estate lending institutions to discriminate against entire
neighborhoods in lending practices because of the physical or economic conditions in the area
(“redlining”). In monitoring new construction sales, re-sales of existing homes, and permits for
remodeling, there is no evidence of redlining in Kings County.
  C. Fair Housi ng
State law prohibits discrimination in the development process or in real property transactions, and it
is each jurisdiction’s policy to uphold the law in this regard. In Kings County, fair housing complaints
are referred to different agencies depending on the jurisdiction. The cities of Corcoran, Hanford and
Lemoore refer fair housing complaints to the HUD Fair Housing Enforcement Center in San
Francisco. The cities of Corcoran and Lemoore also refer housing complaints to Tulare/Kings County
Legal Aid. Kings County and Lemoore refer fair housing complaints to the Human Rights/Fair Housing
Commission office in Fresno. The City of Avenal does not refer housing complaints to a fair housing
agency.
Since this approach may be confusing to residents and because some of the agency offices are far
removed and may be difficult to access, the Housing Plan includes a commitment for the cities to
coordinate with Kings County to select a local fair housing agency to provide landlord/tenant
mediation, fair housing investigations and testing. Each jurisdiction will develop a fair housing
brochure in Spanish and English or acquire one from a local fair housing provider. To broadly
disseminate information, these brochures will be distributed at City Halls, libraries, post offices, and
posted on each jurisdiction’s website.
2009-2014                                          4-30                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
The earlier chapters of the Housing Element describe the housing needs, resources and constraints
for the five jurisdictions in Kings County. This five-year Housing Plan sets forth a comprehensive
strategy and program of actions to address the housing issues identified within the cities of Avenal,
Corcoran, Hanford, Lemoore, and the unincorporated areas of Kings County.
Section A highlights the major housing issues identified in Kings County and corresponding goals and
policies to address those issues. Section B sets forth the specific programs to be implemented by the
cities of Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford, Lemoore, and unincorporated Kings County to effectively
implement the goals and policies.
  A. Goals a nd P olicies
1.       Housing and Neighborhood Conservation
Improving the condition of housing is a primary housing goal for many communities. As part of the
2009-2014 Housing Element update, each jurisdiction in Kings County conducted a comprehensive
housing survey. These surveys revealed that the majority of homes in each community are in sound
condition. However, there is a need for repair, improvement, and rehabilitation of homes,
particularly older “Farmers Home” units and mobile homes as well as older multi-family complexes.
Thus a primary goal of the Housing Element is to continue to support policies and programs for
improving housing and residential neighborhoods.
GOAL 1.           Improve and maintain the quality of housing and residential neighborhoods.
                  Policy 1.1. Promote and improve the quality of residential properties by ensuring
                  compliance with housing and property maintenance standards.
                  Policy 1.2. Assist in the repair, rehabilitation, and improvement of residential
                  structures; demolish and replace structures which are dilapidated and beyond repair.
                  Policy 1.3. Invest in infrastructure and public facilities to ensure that adequate water,
                  sewer, roads, parks, and other needed services are in place to serve existing and future
                  residential developments.
                  Policy 1.4. Preserve assisted rental housing for long-term occupancy by low- and
                  moderate-income households.
2.       Housing Production
Like most other areas in the San Joaquin Valley, Kings County has maintained a rapid growth rate in
recent decades. Strong population growth is expected to continue in the foreseeable future. The
Housing Element sets forth policies to encourage the production of high quality housing that meets
identified housing needs, further stimulates economic development, and improves residential
neighborhoods.
Kings County and Cities of                            5-1                                          2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                         Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
GOAL 2.           Facilitate and encourage the provision of a range of housing types and prices to
                  meet the diverse needs of residents.
                  Policy 2.1. Provide adequate sites for housing through appropriate land use, zoning
                  and development standards to accommodate the regional housing needs for the
                  2009–2014 planning period.
                  Policy 2.2. Work collaboratively with nonprofit and for-profit developers to seek state
                  and federal grants to support the production of affordable housing.
                  Policy 2.3. Ensure the adequate provision of water, sewer, roads, public facilities, and
                  other infrastructure necessary to serve new housing.
                  Policy 2.4. Support the construction of high quality single- and multi-family housing
                  which is well designed and energy efficient.
3.       Housing Constraints
Market factors and government regulations can have a significant impact on the cost of new housing.
Although market factors are largely beyond the influence of local governments, Kings County
jurisdictions can continue to implement responsive programs to mitigate the impact of market
conditions and governmental regulations.
GOAL 3.           Remove or mitigate, to the extent feasible and appropriate, potential
                  governmental constraints to the production, maintenance, improvement and
                  affordability of housing.
                  Policy 3.1. Offer regulatory and/or financial incentives, as available and appropriate, to
                  encourage the construction of quality housing.
                  Policy 3.2. Periodically review local ordinances and building regulations to ensure that
                  they do not unduly impede housing investment.
                  Policy 3.3. Utilize planned developments and other creative mechanisms to facilitate
                  the construction of more creative, well-designed, housing projects.
                  Policy 3.4. Ensure that developments are processed efficiently to minimize holding
                  costs and comply with the Permit Streamlining Act.
4.       Housing Assistance
Certain groups may have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing due to unique
circumstances. Persons with special needs include low- and moderate-income households, military
personnel, seniors, disabled persons, large families, people who are homeless, single-parent
households, and farmworkers. Kings County jurisdictions remain committed to assisting people of all
walks of life in securing adequate housing.
GOAL 4.           Provide housing assistance to extremely-low-, very-low-, low-, and moderate-
                  income households and those with special housing needs.
                  Policy 4.1. Support the provision of rental assistance to provide affordable housing
                  options for extremely-low-, very-low- and low-income households.
2009-2014                                            5-2                               Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                          Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                                 A.   Goals and Policies
                  Policy 4.2. Participate in efforts to expand homeownership opportunities to lower-
                  and moderate-income households through downpayment assistance and other
                  homeownership programs.
                  Policy 4.3. Support the provision of housing suitable for special needs groups,
                  including seniors, people with disabilities, homeless people, military personnel, large
                  households, single-parent families, and farmworkers.
                  Policy 4.4. Develop and maintain collaborative efforts among nonprofits, for-profit
                  developers, and public agencies to encourage the development, maintenance, and
                  improvement of housing.
5.       Fair and Equal Housing Opportunities
Ensuring fair and equal housing opportunity is a continuing need in Kings County to ensure that all
persons, regardless of their status, have the opportunity to find a suitable home. Mediating
tenant/landlord disputes, investigating complaints of discrimination, providing education services, and
improving public awareness are all part of a comprehensive program.
GOAL 5.           Further equal housing opportunities for persons, regardless of status.
                  Policy 5.1.     Support enforcement of fair housing laws prohibiting arbitrary
                  discrimination in the development, financing, rental, or sale of housing.
                  Policy 5.2.     Periodically review City ordinances and development regulations and
                  modify, as necessary, to accommodate housing for disabled persons.
Kings County and Cities of                           5-3                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
  B. Housi ng P rogra ms
1.       Avenal Housing Programs
Avenal has a long history dating back to the 1800s. Early American
settlers arrived in the Kettleman Hills during the 1850s with the dream of
raising cattle and farming. Oil, however, would bring fame, fortune, and
people to Avenal. In 1929, Standard Oil surveyed the current site of
Avenal to build a town. By 1940, Avenal was the second largest town in
Kings County with a population of 3,000 – mostly oil workers – and was
known for some of the best services and schools in California. During the
1940s, however, the decline of oil and gas production affected Avenal's
economy, and many stores and houses were vacated.
                                                 Avenal’s transition began when agricultural workers
                                                 came to the area. During the 1970s, the completion of
                                                 the California Aqueduct provided needed water and
                                                 completion of I-5 brought new business opportunities.
                                                 Following incorporation in 1979, the City attracted a
                                                 state prison in 1987, and later annexed the I-269/I-5
                                                 interchange and zoned the area for commercial and
                                                 industrial development. Future projects include the
                                                 proposed $325-million power plant in northeast
                                                 Avenal and expansion of the City’s landfill into one of
             Avenal State Prison                 the largest facilities in California.
Community development will play an important role in
Avenal’s future. New quality housing is needed to
attract employees of Avenal State Prison, recently-
completed Coalinga State Mental Hospital, and other
future employers. Rehabilitation and infrastructure
programs are needed to improve the quality of
neighborhoods and foster identity and pride. Assisting
residents in securing affordable rental and ownership
housing remains a priority for Avenal. The Housing
Element plays an important role in Avenal by guiding
community development programs which will define
and shape the City’s future through 2014.                                   El Palmar Apartments
1.1      Code Enforcement
Code enforcement is an important means to preserve public health and safety and ensure that the
character and quality of neighborhoods and housing is maintained. To that end, the City’s Code
Enforcement staff under the Public Works department will work to enforce state and local
regulations. In conjunction with code enforcement activities, City staff will provide information to
homeowners regarding the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program.
2009-2014                                           5-4                                 Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                           Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                      B.1 Avenal Housing Programs
       Objective:                 Continue to work with the community to address code violations.
                                  Refer property owners to the Housing Rehabilitation Program.
       Responsible Agency:        Code Enforcement Staff/Public Works Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Ongoing
1.2      Housing Rehabilitation Program
In collaboration with a housing partner, the City
will continue providing rehabilitation loans to
lower-income households, including very-low- and
extremely-low-income persons. Initiated in 1988
with CDBG funds, the Housing Rehabilitation
Program will provide loans for up to $190,430 for
most types of housing repairs, energy conservation
improvements, and handicapped accessibility
devices.
       Objective:                 Continue to
                                  provide between 6
                                  to 12 loans per year. Continue to market the program through
                                  brochures at the public counter.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department and Self-Help Enterprises
       Funding:                   CDBG; HOME; CAL-HOME
       Timeline:                  Ongoing
1.3      Preservation of At-Risk Affordable Housing
The City will work with interested agencies and community organizations to preserve at-risk units by
monitoring their status, providing technical and/or financial assistance in return for extended
affordability controls, and ensuring proper tenant notification prior to project conversion. As noted in
Chapter 2, Avenal has 317 units of affordable housing created through City, state, and federal
programs, some of which serve very-low- and extremely-low-income persons, and none are at risk
for conversion during the next 10 years.
       Objective:                 Continue to monitor at-risk units.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Ongoing
1.4      Adequate Sites
The City will facilitate the production of new housing to accommodate demand commensurate with
the City’s share of regional housing needs. To that end, the Housing Element identifies “adequate”
sites to accommodate the City’s regional housing needs allocation identified as 771 units (40
Kings County and Cities of                          5-5                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
extremely-low, 40 very-low, 126 low, 214 moderate, and 291 above moderate income affordability)
during the current planning period. Adequate sites are those with appropriate development and
density standards, water and sewer services, and adequate infrastructure.
      Objective:                 Maintain appropriate land use designations to provide adequate sites
                                 appropriate for new housing to meet Avenal’s housing needs
                                 allocation of 771 units.
      Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
      Funding:                   General Fund
      Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
1.5      Infill Development
The City will continue to support infill development for homes and mobile homes in residential
zones. Infill lots are being extensively used in Avenal for new development. Over 170 single-family
homes have been built during the previous planning period almost exclusively on infill lots. The City
works with developers to complete variances that allow more infill lots to be created and used The
City will provide an inventory at the public counter on the location of infill sites that are adequately
served by infrastructure and suitable for residential development.
      Objective:                 Facilitate infill development by providing the location and zoning of
                                 residential infill sites in the community and working with developers
                                 to expedite applications.
      Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
      Funding:                   General Fund
      Timeline:                  Ongoing
1.6      Density Bonus Program
In accordance with state law, Avenal has adopted a local ordinance that provides density bonus and
other incentives to encourage the development of affordable housing. The City will continue to work
with developers to facilitate the use of these options.
      Objective:                 Continue to implement the density bonus ordinance to assist
                                 development of affordable housing.
      Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
      Funding:                   General Fund
      Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
1.7      Regulatory and Financial Assistance
Avenal allows multi-family housing in high density zones and requires a conditional use permit for
projects in excess of 19 units. The City also assists developers of affordable housing by reducing or
deferring development fees and reducing processing times. The City expedited two CUP applications
for multi-family low-income projects during the previous planning period. The City also assisted these
2009-2014                                              5-6                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                         Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                      B.1 Avenal Housing Programs
developers with Tax Credit applications. The City continues to use the CUP process for large
apartment applications. The City will continue providing regulatory and financial assistance to
facilitate the development of affordable housing to extremely-low-, very-low-, low-, and moderate-
income households.
        Objective:                Continue to defer/reduce fees and expedite processing for affordable
                                  housing.
        Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department
        Funding:                  General Fund
        Timeline:                 Throughout the planning period.
1.8       First Time Homebuyer Program
In collaboration with a housing partner, Avenal will continue to provide home ownership
opportunities to new low-income homebuyers through the First Time Homebuyer Program. Initiated
in 2000, this program provides up to $130,000 in a deferred silent second loan to subsidize
mortgage payments and closing costs. Residents must provide a $1,000 down payment and qualify
for a home loan. The City assisted 54 applicants with the purchase of homes under the First Time
Homebuyer program during the previous planning period and is applying for CDBG funds to provide
additional assistance.
       Objective:                 Assist 10 to 15 new first-time homebuyers on an annual basis.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department and Self-Help Enterprises
       Funding:                   HOME
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
1.9       Section 8 Rental Assistance
Avenal will continue to participate in the Section 8 rental assistance program. The Section 8 rental
assistance program extends rental subsidies to extremely-low- and very-low-income households that
spend more than 30% of their income on rent. The rent subsidy is the difference between 30% of the
monthly income and the allowable rent determined by the Section 8 program.
       Objective:                 Assist Kings County Housing Authority in promoting the Section 8
                                  program by posting information at City Hall.
        Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department, County Housing Authority
       Funding:                   Department of Housing and Urban Development
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
Kings County and Cities of                          5-7                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
1.10     Affordable Housing Assistance
The City works with nonprofit groups, such as Self-Help
Enterprises, to build and/or rehabilitate housing affordable to
lower- income households. The City receives CDBG and
HOME funds for these efforts. Affordable housing is being
developed under existing zoning and development
standards, although in some cases the City provides financial
assistance to projects in the form of fee waivers and
regulatory incentives. To continue supporting affordable
housing, especially units for very-low- and extremely-low-
income persons, the City will undertake the following
actions.
       Objective:                Seek applicable grants from state and federal sources (e.g., CDBG,
                                 HOME, Proposition 1C) including funding specifically targeted to ELI
                                 housing, provide an inventory of housing sites to interested
                                 developers, continue to implement the density bonus ordinance, and
                                 continue to pursue housing production and rehabilitation activities
                                 with nonprofits. The City shall promote the benefits of this program to
                                 the development community by posting information on its web page
                                 and creating a handout to be distributed with land development
                                 applications.
       Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department and interested affordable
                                 housing providers/developers
       Funding:                  Local, state, and federal funds
       Timeline:                 Ongoing; apply for grant funding on an annual basis as available.
1.11     Special Needs Housing for Seniors and Persons with Disabilities
The City will assist in planning and locating affordable housing for special needs groups such as
seniors and persons with disabilities, many of whom have very-low- or extremely-low-incomes. The
City expedited one application for a senior housing apartment complex and assisted the developer
with a tax credit application. The City will continue to work with developers on the completion of a
senior project, including assistance to persons with disabilities by expediting applications and assisting
with grant applications.
       Objective:                Continue to work with developers on the completion of a senior
                                 project, including assistance to persons with disabilities by expediting
                                 applications and assisting with grant applications.
       Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department
       Funding:                  General Fund
       Timeline:                 Throughout the planning period
2009-2014                                           5-8                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                        B.1 Avenal Housing Programs
1.12     Second Units
Second units can provide additional housing opportunities for many special needs groups, including
seniors, farmworkers and other persons with very-low or extremely-low incomes. The City updated
its Zoning Ordinance during the previous planning period to allow second units by right in
residentially zoned areas consistent with state law. The City will continue to assist property owners
with second unit applications by providing information and expediting their applications.
       Objective:                 Continue to assist property owners with second unit applications by
                                  providing information and expediting their applications.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
1.13     Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing
Housing Element Law requires a jurisdiction to provide adequate sites for a variety of housing types,
including emergency shelters and transitional/supportive housing, through appropriate zoning and
development standards. These types of housing typically serve those with very-low or extremely-low
incomes. To address the requirements of Senate Bill 2, Avenal will amend the Zoning Code to permit
emergency shelters and transitional housing in the High Density Multi-Family Residential (R-3) zone
by right subject to appropriate development standards. The R-3 zone is conveniently located
adjacent to services needed by persons residing in a shelter. The Code amendment will also clarify
that transitional and supportive housing is a residential use subject only to the same requirements
and procedures as for other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
       Objective:                 Amend the Avenal Zoning Ordinance with respect to emergency
                                  shelters and transitional/supportive housing in compliance with SB 2.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Within one year of Housing Element adoption
1.14     Farmworker and Employee Housing
Farmworker housing is a permitted use in the R-2 and
R-3 zones and is conditionally permitted in the AI
and AE zones in conjunction with a primary
permitted use (see concluding note below).
Development standards of the underlying district
apply to proposals for farmworker housing. Since
Avenal has some of the lowest housing prices and
apartment rents in California, the need for
farmworker housing is largely met by traditional
housing. The City of Avenal actively assists farm-
worker housing needs: the majority of homeowner-
ship loans are made to farmworkers and a majority of
Kings County and Cities of                           5-9                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
units in assisted multi-family projects are occupied by farmworkers. Many of the farmworkers served
by these programs have very-low or extremely-low incomes.
To ensure compliance with state law and remove potential constraints to development of farmworker
housing, the City will also amend the Zoning Code in conformance with Health and Safety Code
§17021.5 and §17021.6.
       Objectives:               1.    Amend the Zoning Code to incorporate §17021.5 and
                                       §17021.6 of the Health and Safety Code regarding farmworker
                                       housing;
                                 2.    Inventory suitable sites for farmworker housing with the update of
                                       the Land Use Element;
                                 3.    Assist interested developers by identifying sites and supporting
                                       funding applications; and
                                 4.    Provide, to the extent feasible, financial and regulatory incentives.
       Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department
       Funding:                  General Fund
       Timeline:                 Amend the Zoning Code by 2010 and continue to facilitate the
                                 construction of farmworker housing throughout the planning period.
1.15     Housing for Persons with Disabilities
State law requires jurisdictions to analyze and remove potential constraints to housing for persons
with disabilities, many of whom have very-low or extremely-low incomes. As part of this Housing
Element update the City conducted an analysis of its zoning and land use requirements, permit
processing procedures, and building codes to identify potential impediments. In order to address the
potential constraints identified in Chapter 4, the City will amend the Zoning Code to ensure that the
definition of “family” is consistent with current law, and also adopt a reasonable accommodation
ordinance in conformance with SB 520.
       Objective:                Amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that the definition of “family”
                                 is consistent with state law and adopt reasonable accommodation
                                 procedures consistent with SB 520.
       Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department
       Funding:                  General Fund
       Timeline:                 Amend the Zoning Code by 2010
1.16     Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
Currently, the City does not refer fair housing complaints to a fair housing agency. This is particularly
problematic if a resident or landlord has a problem and cannot find the appropriate agency to
provide assistance. The City will designate and publicize an agency to provide information on fair
housing laws, and refer complaints of housing discrimination to the appropriate state or federal
agencies.
2009-2014                                           5-10                               Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                          Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                        B.1 Avenal Housing Programs
       Objective:                 Avenal will coordinate with Kings County to select a local fair housing
                                  agency to provide landlord and tenant mediation and fair housing
                                  investigations. The City will develop a fair housing brochure in
                                  Spanish and English or acquire one from a local fair housing provider.
                                  To broadly disseminate fair housing information, the City will
                                  distribute the brochure at the City Hall, library, post office, and
                                  appropriate shopping areas.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Select a local provider by 2010
1.17     Multi-Family Permit Processing
The City currently requires approval of a conditional use permit (CUP) for multi-family projects with
20 units or more. Although the CUP requirement has not been a significant constraint to housing
development in the past, in order to increase development certainty the City will amend the Zoning
Code to eliminate the CUP requirement in favor of a site plan review (SPR) by the Planning
Commission. The SPR process will focus on ensuring compliance with applicable development
standards.
       Objective:                 Amend the Zoning Code to increase development certainty by
                                  requiring SPR rather than a CUP for multi-family projects of 20 or
                                  more units.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Zoning Code amendment in 2010-2011
1.18     Energy Conservation
The City of Avenal is developing a Partnership with Pacific Gas & Electric to provide homeowners
and renters with energy audits and to provide them with resources to obtain low energy products
such as lights and insulation. The partnership should be in place early in 2010.
       Objective:                 Reduce energy use in residential developments by providing
                                  information and low-energy products to residents.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Program initiation in 2010 and implementation throughout the
                                  planning period
Kings County and Cities of                          5-11                                            2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                          Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
2.       Corcoran Housing Programs
Corcoran’s history dates to the early 1900s. The
town site originally served as a junction for the San
Francisco Railroad and San Joaquin Valley Railroad.
Later developers found Corcoran’s climate and soil
ideal for farming, particularly cotton, and grazing. In
subsequent years, Corcoran grew rapidly with the
rise of the cotton industry – attracting workers to its
booming agricultural industry. In 1914, the town of
Corcoran incorporated and continues to be known
as the farming capital of California.
                                                 During the 1960s, the mechanization of cotton
                                                 planting and harvesting caused a significant loss of
                                                 jobs, residents, and economic vitality in Corcoran.
                                                 Still the City remains a center of agriculture. J.G.
                                                 Boswell Company, the nation's largest cotton
                                                 producer, operates major farming operations in
                                                 Corcoran. In 1988 and 1997, the City attracted two
                                                 state prisons providing 3,200 jobs. In 2001, the City
                                                 attracted Bioproducts, a world-leading manufacturer
                                                 of nutritional animal food product supplements. The
                                                 City also adopted a Downtown Specific Plan to
                                                 revitalize its historic town center.
           Corcoran State Prison
In addition to ongoing economic programs,
community development also plays an ongoing
important role in defining Corcoran’s future.
The City has undertaken several rehabilitation
programs to improve older farmer housing,
revitalize neighborhoods, improve infra-
structure, and renovate the downtown. New
quality housing is also needed for employees of
Corcoran State Prison and to attract other
employers. Providing housing assistance so that
residents can afford quality rental and
ownership housing continues as a priority.
Corcoran’s Housing Element plays an important role by setting forth community development
programs that will define and shaping the City’s future through 2014.
2009-2014                                          5-12                                Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                          Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                   B.2 Corcoran Housing Programs
2.1      Code Enforcement
Code enforcement is an important means to preserve public health and safety and ensure that the
character and quality of residential neighborhoods and housing is maintained. The City’s Code
Enforcement staff under the Community Development Department will work to enforce state and
local regulations. In conjunction with code enforcement activities, City staff provides information to
homeowners regarding the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program.
       Objective:                 Continue to work with the community code violations. Refer property
                                  owners to the Housing Rehabilitation Program.
       Responsible Agency:        Code Enforcement Staff
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
2.2      Paint Programs
The City offers assistance to low- and moderate-income homeowners for exterior or interior painting
in three related programs. The City’s Paint Program covers the cost of paint only. Under the
Senior/Handicapped Paint Program, the City provides low- and moderate-income seniors and people
with disabilities with paint, paint supplies, and supervision.
       Objective:                 City Paint Program: 20-25 homes annually
                                  Senior/Handicapped Paint Program: 15 homes annually
                                  Kings County Paint Program: 5-10 homes annually-as funding permits
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department, Job Training Office, Kings
                                  County Planning Department, and Kings County Office of Education
       Funding:                   CDBG
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
2.3      Housing Rehabilitation Program
The City will continue providing rehabilitation loans to lower-income households through the
Housing Rehabilitation Program. Initiated in 1981, the Housing Rehabilitation Program provides
loans for up to the maximum allowed by HCD for most housing repairs, demolition/reconstruction,
energy conservation improvements, and handicapped accessibility devices. Health and safety grants
of up to $7,500 are provided to correct minor repairs or improve handicap accessibility for very low
and low income households.
       Objective:                 Provide 5 to 10 loans annually and 10 grants annually. Continue to
                                  market the program through brochures at the public counter.
                                  Conduct outreach to major employers (e.g., hospital, school district,
                                  and prisons) regarding the program.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   HOME; CDBG
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
Kings County and Cities of                          5-13                                       2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
2.4      Preservation of At-Risk Affordable Housing
 The City continues to work with interested agencies
and community organizations to preserve at-risk units
by monitoring their status, providing technical and/or
financial assistance in return for extended affordability
controls, and ensuring proper tenant notification prior
to project conversion. Corcoran has 593 units of
affordable housing for very-low-, low-, and moderate-
income households created through various City,
state, and federal programs. One of the housing
projects (Saltair Place) is at-risk for conversion to
market rate during the next 10 years. The City will
work with the project owner and interested non-profit
organizations to preserve this project, if feasible.
      Objective:                  Continue to monitor the status of publicly-assisted affordable units.
                                  The City will contact the property owners to determine their
                                  intentions, contact qualified nonprofits regarding potential opt-out
                                  projects, ensure that property owners comply with noticing
                                  requirements, support the acquisition of at-risk properties by
                                  nonprofits, and pursue grants to support the preservation of
                                  affordable at-risk housing.
      Responsible Agency:         Community Development Department
      Funding:                    General Fund
      Timeline:                   Throughout the planning period
2.5      Adequate Sites
The City will facilitate construction of new housing to accommodate projected employment and
population growth and to meet the needs of existing residents. To that end, the Housing Element
identifies adequate sites to accommodate the City’s share of the region’s housing needs allocation
identified as 905 units (80 very low, 160 low, 295 moderate, and 370 above moderate) for the new
planning period. Adequate sites are those with sufficient development and density standards, water
and sewer services, and adequate infrastructure.
In order to provide additional rental housing opportunities for persons of modest means, the City is
also working with downtown property owners to encourage conversion of underutilized second floor
space to residential apartments in existing commercial buildings.
      Objective:                  Maintain appropriate land use designations to provide adequate sites
                                  appropriate for new housing to meet Corcoran’s housing needs
                                  allocation of 905 units. Work with downtown property owners to
                                  facilitate the conversion of underutilized commercial buildings for
                                  residential use.
      Responsible Agency:         Community Development Department
2009-2014                                            5-14                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                          Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                     B.2 Corcoran Housing Programs
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
2.6      Density Bonus Program
In accordance with state law, Corcoran has adopted a local ordinance that provides density bonus
and other incentives to encourage the development of affordable housing. The City will continue to
work with developers to facilitate the use of these options.
       Objective:                 Continue to implement the density bonus ordinance to facilitate
                                  affordable housing.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
2.7      Affordable Housing Development Assistance
The City facilitates the development of affordable
housing through a number of tools including
density bonuses, minimal fee requirements (no
impact fees), and PUD development standards.
The City will continue to provide regulatory and
financial assistance to facilitate and encourage the
development of housing affordable to extremely-
low-, very-low-, low-, and moderate-income
households commensurate with its fair share
housing needs. SRO and transitional housing
projects in particular can help to address the needs
of extremely-low-income persons. In addition, the City will facilitate the improvement and
redevelopment of underutilized properties by encouraging consolidation of adjacent parcels through
expedited processing, modified development standards and reduced development fees when such
projects include affordable housing. To facilitate the development of affordable housing, the City will
approve projects at or above the maximum allowable density pursuant to state density bonus law and
continue to identify rezoning opportunities for additional High Density residential development.
       Objective:                 Seek applicable grants from state and federal sources (e.g., CDBG,
                                  HOME, Proposition 1C) including funding specifically targeted to ELI
                                  housing, provide an inventory of housing sites to interested
                                  developers, continue to implement the density bonus ordinance, and
                                  continue to pursue housing production and rehabilitation activities
                                  with nonprofits. The City shall promote the benefits of this program to
                                  the development community by posting information on its web page
                                  and creating a handout to be distributed with land development
                                  applications. Continue to defer/reduce fees and expedite processing
                                  for affordable housing.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
Kings County and Cities of                          5-15                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
      Funding:                 General Fund
      Timeline:                Throughout the planning period.
2.8      First Time Homebuyer Program
The City provides housing assistance to new homebuyers through its First Time Homebuyer Program.
Up to $30,000 in housing assistance in the form of a low interest second mortgage loans is provided
to qualified lower-income homebuyers. While this program is currently funded by HOME, a
revolving fund has been set up that utilizes repayments of prior Agency-assisted second mortgage
loans to fund new loans.
      Objective:               Offer 10 to 12 loans per year. Conduct outreach to major employers
                                (e.g., hospital, school district, and prisons) regarding the availability of
                                the program.
      Responsible Agency:      Community Development Department
      Funding:                 HOME and revolving loan fund
      Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
2.9      Redevelopment Agency (RDA) Closing Costs Assistance Program
The RDA Closing Costs Assistance Program is designed to assist moderate-income families to
purchase a home. This program is designed to assist families that do not qualify for the HOME-
funded First Time Homebuyer Program. The objective of the program is to assist households by
providing up to $5,000 toward the closing costs of purchasing a new home. The City will actively
work with major employers in Corcoran, including the hospital, school district and prisons, and
provide publications and advertisements, to ensure that they are aware of the program.
      Objective:               Initiate new program and assist 10 households annually. Conduct
                                outreach to major employers regarding the program.
      Responsible Agency:      RDA
      Funding:                 RDA Funds
      Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
2.10     Purchase and Rehabilitation Homeownership Program
The purpose of the Purchase and Rehabilitation Homeownership Program is to improve the
condition of housing for families that live in substandard or overcrowded conditions and assist very-
low- and low-income families purchase quality homes. The City will provide a zero percent deferred
loan to assist homebuyers purchase and rehabilitate a substandard home. Applicants must provide a
$1,000 down payment and attend a home ownership education workshop. The City will advertise
the program in local newspapers and create English and Spanish flyers advertising the program.
      Objective:               Conduct outreach to major employers (e.g., hospital, school district,
                                and prisons) regarding the program; assist 4 households per year
      Responsible Agency:      Community Development Department and RDA
2009-2014                                           5-16                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                         Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                     B.2 Corcoran Housing Programs
       Funding:                   RDA Funds and CDBG Funds
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
2.11     Section 8 Rental Vouchers
Corcoran will continue to participate in the Section 8 rental
assistance program, which is administered by the Kings
County Housing Authority. The Section 8 program provides
rent subsidies to extremely-low- and very-low-income
households that spend more than 30% of their income on
rent. The rent subsidy is the difference between 30% of the
household’s monthly income and the allowable rent
determined by the federal government.
       Objective:                 Assist the Housing Authority in
                                  promoting the Section 8
                                  program.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department, County Housing Authority
       Funding:                   HUD
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
2.12     Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing
State law requires jurisdictions to provide for a variety of housing types including emergency shelters
and transitional/supportive housing. Senate Bill 2 of 2007 requires all jurisdictions to allow
emergency shelters by-right in at least one zone, and stipulates that transitional and supportive
housing is a residential use subject only to the same standards and procedures as for other residential
uses of the same type in the same zone. The Corcoran Zoning Ordinance will be updated consistent
with the requirements of SB 2 within one year of Housing Element adoption. The C-S (Service
Commercial) zone will be amended to include shelters as a permitted use subject to appropriate
development standards. The C-S zone encompasses approximately 181 acres, is located near
transportation routes and commercial services, and provides the capacity for at least one emergency
shelter.
       Objective:                 Amend the Zoning Ordinance with regard to emergency shelters and
                                  transitional/supportive housing in conformance with SB 2.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Revise the Zoning Ordinance within one year of Housing Element
                                  adoption
Kings County and Cities of                          5-17                                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
2.13     Farmworker and Employee Housing
The Corcoran Zoning Ordinance permits mobile
homes as farm employee housing and conditionally
permits farm employee housing in excess of five units
in the A-zone. Farmworkers receive the majority of
homeownership and home rehabilitation loans each
year and occupy a large share of assisted multi-family
units in Corcoran. Corcoran also supported the develop-
ment of the Whitely Avenue project. To further assist
farmworker housing needs, the City will:
       Objectives:                1.    Amend the Zoning Code to incorporate §17021.5 and
                                        §17021.6 of the Health and Safety Code
                                  2.    Develop an inventory of suitable sites for farmworker housing
                                  3.    Assist interested developers by identifying sites and supporting
                                        funding applications
                                  4.    Provide, to the extent feasible, regulatory and financial
                                        incentives; and
                                  5.    Ensure that zoning and development standards facilitate
                                        farmworker housing
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Provide site inventory and amend the Zoning Code by 2010
2.14     Housing for Persons with Disabilities
State law requires jurisdictions to analyze and remove potential constraints to housing for persons
with disabilities. As part of this Housing Element update the City conducted an analysis of its zoning
and land use requirements, permit processing procedures, and building codes to identify potential
impediments. In order to address the potential constraints identified in Chapter 4, the City will
amend the Zoning Code to allow licensed residential care facilities for six or fewer persons in any
residential zone as a permitted use, and allow residential care facilities for more than six persons by
conditional use permit in the R-1 and RM zones. In addition, the City will adopt a reasonable
accommodation ordinance in conformance with SB 520.
       Objectives:                1.    Amend the Zoning Code regarding residential care facilities;
                                        and
                                  2.    Adopt an ordinance to establish administrative procedures for
                                        reviewing and approving modifications to land use or building
                                        regulations necessary to provide reasonable accommodation for
                                        persons with disabilities.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
2009-2014                                            5-18                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                         Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                     B.2 Corcoran Housing Programs
       Timeline:                  Ordinance adoption by 2010
2.15     Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
Corcoran currently refers fair housing complaints to HUD and the Tulare/Kings County Legal Aid
Foundation. However, other communities within Kings County refer fair housing complaints to
different agencies. Therefore, it may be confusing to residents to know the appropriate agency to
handle fair housing complaints or issues.
       Objective:                 Corcoran will coordinate with Kings County to select a local fair
                                  housing agency to provide landlord/tenant mediation services and fair
                                  housing investigations. The City will develop a fair housing brochure
                                  in Spanish and English or acquire one from a local fair housing
                                  provider. To broadly disseminate information, the City will distribute
                                  the brochure at the City Hall, library, post office, and appropriate
                                  shopping areas.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Select a local provider by 2010
2.16     Multi-Family Permit Processing
The City currently requires approval of a conditional use permit (CUP) for multi-family projects with
20 units or more. Although the CUP requirement has not been a significant constraint to housing
development in the past, in order to increase development certainty the City will amend the Zoning
Code to eliminate the CUP requirement in favor of a site plan review (SPR) by the Planning
Commission. The SPR process will focus on ensuring compliance with applicable development
standards.
       Objective:                 Amend the Zoning Code to increase development certainty by
                                  requiring SPR rather than a CUP for multi-family projects of 20 or
                                  more units.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Zoning Code amendment in 2010-2011
2.17     Weatherization and Energy-Efficient Home Improvements
The purpose of this program is to reduce energy use by providing financial assistance to lower-
income households for weatherization and energy-efficient heating (including solar photovoltaic
water heaters) and cooling systems. The City will refer lower-income households to the Kings
Community Action Organization and other community services agencies that provide financial
assistance to qualifying households for these improvements.
Kings County and Cities of                          5-19                                          2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                        Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
      Objective:          Reduce residential energy use and carbon footprint by providing
                          financial assistance to lower-income households for weatherization
                          and energy-efficient heating and cooling systems.
      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
      Funding:            Nominal funding required
      Timeline:           Throughout the planning period
2009-2014                                    5-20                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                   B.3 Hanford Housing Programs
3.       Hanford Housing Programs
Hanford had its roots in the expansion of the Central
and Southern Pacific Railroad system in the 1870s.
Hanford was incorporated in 1891. As the County seat,
Hanford has developed into the residential, commercial,
and industrial center of the County. Hanford is known to
embrace growth and change, while preserving the
integrity of its past. Hanford’s progressive business
community coupled with the quaint, comfortable
lifestyle continues to attract new people to Hanford,
young or old.
                                                                      Hanford Civic Auditorium
                                            Hanford’s location along Highway 198 and pro- business
                                            climate is responsible for the City’s success. Hanford is
                                            home to the County’s largest employers such as Kings
                                            County Government Center, Del Monte, Hanford
                                            Elementary, Wal-Mart, Hanford Community Medical,
                                            Central Valley Hospital, Marquez Brothers, and others.
                                            West Hills College, Chapman University, College of the
                                            Sequoias, and Kings County Workforce Investment Board
                                            provide educational opportunities. The City’s Enterprise
                                            Zone, Foreign Trade Zone, and Industrial Park offer
                                            incentives for new business.
          Downtown Hanford
The Housing Element plays a key role in shaping the
City’s future. Continued development of housing is
important to accommodate expected population and
employment growth within the city. Community
development programs strengthen neighborhoods by
providing assistance to maintain and upgrade
housing. Housing assistance programs ensure that all
residents of all income levels have the opportunity to
live in the community. The 2009-2014 Housing
Element sets the framework for building upon the
City’s past successes in providing a diverse living
environment.
3.1      Code Compliance
Code compliance is an important means to preserve public health and safety and ensure that the
character and quality of neighborhoods and housing is maintained. To that end, the City’s Code
Compliance staff under the Community Development Department will work to enforce state and
local regulations. In conjunction with code compliance activities, City staff will provide information to
homeowners regarding the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program.
Kings County and Cities of                       5-21                                            2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
       Objective:               Continue to work with the community concerning code violations.
                                Refer property owners to the Housing Rehabilitation Program.
       Responsible Agency:      Code Compliance staff
       Funding:                 General Fund
       Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
3.2      Paint Programs
The City offers two paint assistance programs for low- and moderate-income homeowners. Through
the Do-It-Yourself Paint Program, the City assists qualified homeowners with the cost of the paint,
while materials and labor are provided by the homeowner. The New Looks Summer Paint Program
assists extremely-low-, very-low-, low- and moderate-income senior and/or disabled residents by
providing assistance in paint supplies and materials.
       Objective:               Do-It-Yourself Paint Program - 10 units per year
                                New Looks Summer Paint Program – 10 to 15 units per year
       Responsible Agency:      Community Development Department
       Funding:                 RDA Funds
       Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
3.3      Housing Rehabilitation Program
The City will continue providing rehabilitation
loans to lower-income households. Initiated
in 1985, the Housing Rehabilitation Program
provides loans for up to $90,000 for housing
repairs, energy conservation improvements,
and handicapped accessibility devices.
Hanford has designated southwest and
central Hanford as “target areas” for this
program. Since 2004, 46 homeowners have
benefited from this program.
       Objective:               Assist 10 to 15 units per year
       Responsible Agency:      Community Development Department
       Funding:                 CDBG Funds; CalHome
       Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
3.4      Preservation of At-Risk Affordable Housing
The City will continue to work with interested agencies and community organizations to preserve at-
risk units by monitoring their status, providing technical and/or financial assistance in return for
extended affordability controls, and ensuring proper tenant notification prior to project conversion.
Hanford has approximately 815 units of affordable housing for low- and moderate-income
households created through City, state, and federal programs. One project – Cedarbrook - is
2009-2014                                         5-22                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                      B.3 Hanford Housing Programs
considered to be at high-risk of converting to market-rate housing during the next 10 years. The City
will work with the project owner and interested non-profit organizations to preserve this project, if
feasible.
       Objective:                 Continue to monitor the status of publicly-assisted affordable units.
                                  The City will contact the property owners to determine their
                                  intentions, contact qualified nonprofits regarding potential opt-out
                                  projects, ensure that property owners comply with noticing
                                  requirements, support the acquisition of at-risk properties by
                                  nonprofits, and pursue grants to support the preservation of
                                  affordable at-risk housing.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department and interested affordable
                                  housing providers/developers
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
3.5      Adequate Sites
The City will facilitate construction of new housing to accommodate projected employment and
population growth to meet the needs of the City’s residents. To that end, the Housing Element
identifies “adequate” sites to accommodate the City’s share of the regional housing needs allocation
identified as 5,758 units (1,446 very-low, 1,015 low, 938 moderate, and 2,359 above-moderate)
from 2007-2014. Adequate sites are those with sufficient development and density standards, water
and sewer services, and other infrastructure. Staff will monitor development affordability and report
annually on progress toward the City’s share of the regional housing need.
In order to enhance the feasibility of affordable housing development, the City will review current
land use and zoning designations as part of the next General Plan update and increase the maximum
density in the Medium Density category above 15 units/acre and/or redesignate additional sites to
High Density Residential.
The City will also encourage affordable housing development on small parcels by facilitating lot
consolidation through expedited processing, density bonus and/or reduced processing fees.
       Objective:                 Facilitate the construction of new housing through the provision of
                                  adequately zoned sites to meet Hanford’s housing needs allocation of
                                  5,758 units.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Provide adequate sites throughout the planning period; initiate a
                                  General Plan update by 2012 if funding is available
3.6      Density Bonus Program
In accordance with state law, Hanford adopted a local density bonus ordinance in 2008 that is in
conformance with state law. The City will continue to implement this program to encourage and
Kings County and Cities of                           5-23                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
facilitate development of affordable housing through the provision of density bonuses or other
incentives for qualifying projects.
        Objective:                Continue to publicize and implement the density bonus ordinance to
                                  assist development of affordable housing.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
        Funding:                  General Fund
        Timeline:                 Throughout the planning period
3.7       Planned Unit Development
The Hanford 2002 General Plan Update
includes a Planned Unit Development Zone
process whereby a project proponent can
propose a concept that may change or remove
many of the conventional zoning restrictions.
For example, housing units could be clustered
around large open space areas or other
development amenities resulting in higher
localized “net” densities.
        Objective:                Continue to utilize the PUD process to encourage unique design and
                                  develop housing that addresses site constraints.
        Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department
        Funding:                  General Fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
3.8       First Time Homebuyer Programs
The City offers the RDA First-Time Homebuyers Program that provides financing assistance to very-
low-, low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers. The program has been revised to increase
the loan limit to $100,000, reduce the interest rate to 2% and extend the term to 45 years. Payment
is deferred for the entire loan term.
The City also offers the HOME Sweet Home Program, which has also increased its loan limit to
$100,000, as well as reduced the interest rate to 2%. Payment is deferred for the entire loan term.
       Objective:                 Assist 10 households each year for the RDA First-Time Homebuyer
                                  Program and assist 20 households annually for the HOME Sweet
                                  Home Program
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   HOME and RDA set-aside funds
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
2009-2014                                           5-24                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                      B.3 Hanford Housing Programs
3.9      Section 8 Rental Assistance Program
Administered by the Kings County Housing Authority, Hanford will continue to participate in the
Section 8 rental assistance program. The Section 8 rental assistance program extends rental subsidies
to extremely-low- and very-low-income households equal to the difference between 30% of the
monthly income and the allowable rent determined by the program.
       Objective:                 Assist Kings County Housing Authority in promoting the Section 8
                                  program.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department, County Housing Authority
       Funding:                   HUD funds
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
3.10     Residential Infill Construction Program
The City offers very-low-, low- and moderate-income
homebuyers the opportunity to purchase a newly
constructed home on an infill lot. City funds are used
to purchase infill lots and finance construction of
affordable single-family homes. The City oversees the
construction of the home while qualified buyers are
required to obtain primary financing from a bank or
mortgage company to purchase the home upon
completion of construction.
       Objective:                 Continue to implement program and assist construction of 4 homes
                                  per year
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General fund and RDA set-aside funds
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
3.11     Affordable Housing Assistance
The City promotes affordable housing through various programs - home ownership assistance,
rehabilitation assistance, new construction/infill, and grant application programs. The City currently
receives CDBG and HOME funds for much of its program activities. Affordable housing is being
developed under existing zoning and development standards. To continue supporting affordable
housing production, the City will undertake the following actions.
       Objective:                 Seek applicable grants under Proposition 1C and federal sources
                                  including funding specifically targeted to ELI housing, provide an
                                  inventory of housing sites to interested developers, continue to
                                  provide a density bonus to qualifying projects, provide financial and
                                  regulatory assistance such as reduced fees and/or modified
                                  development standards, and continue to pursue housing production
                                  and rehabilitation with nonprofits including assistance in preparing
Kings County and Cities of                          5-25                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
                                  grant applications. Housing for very-low- and extremely-low-income
                                  persons will be prioritized where feasible. In addition, the City’s
                                  affordable housing incentives will be promoted on the website and in
                                  handouts provided at the Planning counter.
      Responsible Agency:         Community Development Department and affordable housing
                                  developers
      Funding:                    Local, state, and federal funds
      Timeline:                   Ongoing
3.12     Farmworker and Employee Housing
To address farmworker housing needs, the City permits farmworker housing in the AG zone.
However, in order to remove potential constraints identified in Chapter 4 the City will amend the
Zoning Code in conformance with Health and Safety Code §17021.5 and §17021.6. In addition, the
City will assist interested developers by providing incentives, identifying suitable sites, and assisting in
preparation of funding applications.
      Objectives:                 1.   Amend the Zoning Code to incorporate §17021.5 and §17021.6
                                       of the Health and Safety Code
                                  2.   Assist interested developers in identifying sites and preparing
                                       funding applications
                                  3.   Provide, to the extent feasible, regulatory incentives; and
                                  4.   Ensure that zoning and development standards facilitate farm-
                                       worker housing
      Responsible Agency:         Community Development Department
      Funding:                    General Fund
      Timeline:                   Amend the Zoning Code by 2010; provide assistance throughout the
                                  planning period
3.13     Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing
State law requires jurisdictions to provide adequate sites for a variety of housing types including
emergency shelters and transitional/supportive housing. Emergency shelters and transitional housing
are currently permitted subject to site plan review in the OR zone. The Zoning Code will be
amended to clarify that emergency shelters are a non-discretionary permitted use in the OR zone
and identify appropriate development standards consistent with SB 2.
The Zoning Code will also be amended to clarify that transitional and supportive housing facilities are
permitted uses subject only to the same regulations and procedures that apply to other residential
uses of the same type in the same zone.
      Objective:                  Amend the Zoning Code to clarify the zoning regulations for
                                  emergency shelters and transitional/supportive housing in
                                  conformance with SB 2; continue to support efforts with surrounding
2009-2014                                            5-26                               Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                           Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                       B.3 Hanford Housing Programs
                                   Kings County jurisdictions to meet the needs of people who are
                                   homeless or transitioning to independence.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Amend the Zoning Code within one year of Housing Element
                                   adoption; facilitate establishment of emergency shelters and
                                   transitional/supportive housing throughout the planning period
3.14     Housing for Persons with Disabilities
State law requires jurisdictions to analyze and remove potential constraints to housing for persons
with disabilities. As part of this Housing Element update the City conducted an analysis of its zoning
and land use processes, permitting processing procedures, and building codes. That analysis
concluded that the City will amend the Zoning Code to allow residential care facilities for more than
six persons by conditional use permit in the R-1 zone (the Code already allows large care facilities in
the RM and OR zones by CUP). The City will continue to monitor legal requirements and local
conditions and will update local regulations and procedures as necessary to encourage and facilitate
the development, maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities.
       Objective:                 Amend the Zoning Code to allow residential care facilities for more
                                   than six persons by conditional use permit in the R-1 zone.
                                  Continue to monitor legal requirements and local conditions and
                                   update local regulations, if necessary, to remove any impediments to
                                   housing for persons with disabilities.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Code amendment by 2010
3.15     Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
Hanford currently refers fair housing complaints to the Fair Housing Enforcement Center in San
Francisco. These offices are far removed from Hanford and may be difficult to access. Referrals to a
local agency could offer residents better access to services as well as allow the City to benefit from
other fair housing services.
       Objective:                 Hanford will coordinate with Kings County to select a local fair
                                   housing agency to provide landlord/tenant mediation, fair housing
                                   investigations and testing. The City will develop a fair housing
                                   brochure in Spanish and English or acquire one from a local fair
                                   housing provider. To broadly disseminate information, the City will
                                   distribute the brochure at the City Hall, library, post office, and
                                   appropriate shopping areas.
       Responsible Agency:        Planning Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
Kings County and Cities of                            5-27                                           2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                           Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
      Timeline:                  Select a local provider by 2010.
3.16     Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Housing
To ensure development standards do not constrain the development of SROs, the City will adopt
development standards for SRO housing which may include:
         •   Requirements for a management plan outlining policies and procedures and annual
             review of services by the Planning Department
         •   24-hour on-site management
         •   Room limitation to single occupancy, with allowance for overnight guests
         •   Requirements for monthly tenancies
         •   Units must be 250–300 square feet in size and include kitchen or bathroom
         •   Parking ratio of one space per unit and bicycle rack storage of one rack per 5 units
      Objective:                 Address the needs of extremely-low-income persons through SRO
                                 housing.
      Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
      Funding:                   General Fund
      Timeline:                  Code amendment in 2010-2011
2009-2014                                          5-28                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                       Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                   B.4 Lemoore Housing Programs
4.       Lemoore Housing Programs
Lemoore is a city preparing for the future while preserving
the best of its past. Incorporated in 1900, Lemoore has
undergone significant changes over its 109-year history.
Although the City’s major employers are still rooted in
agriculture, economic development has paved the way for
a more diversified economy. Yet despite change, Lemoore
retains the charm and beauty of a small rural town with its
turn-of-the-century buildings, residences and causal
environment.
                                        Lemoore is committed to a sustainable economy and quality
                                        of life. Lemoore Naval Air Station provides a significant
                                        component of the City’s economic base. West Hills College,
                                        Chapman University, College of the Sequoias, and Kings
                                        County Job Training Office all provide workforce training. The
                                        City’s Enterprise Zone, Foreign Trade Zone, and Industrial
                                        Park offer incentives for new business. Upcoming projects
                                        include a Wal-Mart Super Center, major expansion to Leprino
                                        Foods west facility, and a new full highway interchange at SR
                                        198 and 19th Avenue.
To accommodate economic growth, 1,721 new
homes have been built in Lemoore between 2000
and 2008. At the same time, Lemoore pursues
innovative strategies to provide housing for those with
special needs. The City’s downtown revitalization
efforts focus on mixed-use opportunities and
converting historic structures for housing. In 2006 the
City formed a Redevelopment Division (RDA) with a
full-time housing specialist to better carry out the
RDA’s housing programs. The City has previously
worked with Self-Help Enterprises to rehabilitate
single-family residences for lower-income families,
and plans to restart this program in the near future. The RDA also has formed housing partnerships
on multi-family housing projects, and taken the lead on infill projects and other programs.
The 2009-2014 Housing Plan represents Lemoore’s efforts to continue to build upon past successes
by providing additional housing to accommodate employment growth, providing housing assistance
to residents in need, and maintaining the charm of Lemoore’s past.
4.1      Code Enforcement
The City will continue to provide code enforcement services and refer property owners to City
rehabilitation programs. Code enforcement is an important means to ensure that the character and
quality of neighborhoods and housing is maintained. The City’s Code Enforcement staff will work to
enforce state and local regulations. In conjunction with code enforcement activities, City staff will
Kings County and Cities of                        5-29                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
provide information to homeowners regarding Lemoore’s Exterior Home Improvement (Paint-Up/Fix-
Up) Program and Housing Rehabilitation Program.
      Objective:                Continue to work with the community on code violations. Refer
                                property owners to City programs for rehabilitation assistance.
      Responsible Agency:       RDA Code Enforcement coordinated with Police, Business License,
                                Planning, Building and Fire Departments
      Funding:                  RDA, General Fund and grant funds
      Timeline:                 Throughout the planning period
4.2      Exterior Home Improvement (Paint-Up/Fix-Up) Program
The City offers the Exterior Home Improvement (Paint-Up/Fix-Up) Program that provides
rehabilitation assistance for minor repairs for extremely-low, very-low-, low- and moderate-income
households. The Program provides grants of up to $8,000 to make exterior home repairs such as
painting, minor roof work, carpentry, porch steps repair, concrete work for driveways, and front
sidewalks.
      Objective:                Assist 10-15 households annually with grant amounts up to $8,000.
      Responsible Agency:       RDA
      Funding Source:           RDA LMIH funds
      Timeline:                 Throughout the planning period
4.3      Housing Rehabilitation Program
The City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program would assist, as generally identified in the housing
conditions survey, lower-income households with substantial home repairs or reconstruction. This
program will only be implemented should HOME grant funds be awarded. In the past, loans of up to
$70,000 for rehabilitation and $116,000 for home reconstruction were provided to qualified
applicants. All loans were deferred for 50 years with a zero percent interest rate as long as the
residence remained the owner’s primary home.
      Objective:                Initiate program and assist households during the grant cycle based on
                                available funding.
      Responsible Agency:       RDA
      Funding Source:           HOME funds
      Timeline:                 As HOME funding is made available
4.4      Emergency Home Repair Program
The City initiated the Emergency Home Repair Program in 2006 to provide rehabilitation assistance
for emergency health and safety repairs and accessibility improvements for the disabled and for
extremely-low-, very-low-, and low-income households. The program provides grants of up to
$2,500 for home repairs to correct problems such as unsafe electrical, unsanitary plumbing, broken
2009-2014                                         5-30                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                      Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                     B.4 Lemoore Housing Programs
windows, doors and locks, non-working heating and cooling systems, wheelchair ramps, bathroom or
kitchen modifications, etc.
       Objective:                 Assist up to 10 households annually.
       Responsible Agency:        RDA
       Funding Source:            RDA LMIH funds
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
4.5      Do-It-Yourself and Senior House Painting Program
In 2007 the City initiated the Do-It-Yourself House Painting Program that pays for paint and materials
needed for house painting. In addition, in 2008 the City partnered with West Hills Community
College to implement a Senior House Painting Program for individuals 55 years or older and/or
disabled persons to have their homes painted by students at no charge. Both programs are available
to extremely-low-, very-low-, low- and moderate-income households.
       Objective:                 Assist up to 20-30 households annually.
       Responsible Agency:        RDA
       Funding Source:            RDA LMIH funds
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
4.6      Preservation of At-Risk Affordable Housing
The City will continue to work with interested agencies and community organizations to preserve at-
risk units by monitoring their status, providing technical and/or financial assistance in return for
extended affordability controls, and ensuring proper tenant notification prior to project conversion.
Lemoore has 13 assisted projects with 624 units of affordable housing for extremely-low, very-low-,
low-, and moderate-income households created through various City, state, and federal programs.
One project in Lemoore is at risk of converting to market rents during the next 10 years – Lucerne
Hotel which has 7 units with restrictions expiring in 2015. In addition, the Country Club Apartments
tax credit funding restriction has already expired on 107 of their units; however, they have continued
to restrict 55-units to low-income persons through another program.
       Objective:                 Continue to monitor the status of publicly-assisted affordable units.
                                  The City will contact the property owners to determine their
                                  intentions, contact qualified nonprofits regarding potential opt-out
                                  projects, ensure that property owners comply with noticing
                                  requirements, support the acquisition of at-risk properties by
                                  nonprofits, and pursue grants to support the preservation of
                                  affordable at-risk housing.
       Responsible Agency:        RDA
       Funding:                   General Fund; various federal, state and local funding sources
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
Kings County and Cities of                           5-31                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
4.7       Zoning for Adequate Sites
The City will facilitate the construction of new housing to accommodate projected employment and
population growth and to meet the needs of residents. To that end, the Housing Element identifies
adequate sites to accommodate the City’s share of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation of 3,021
units (374 extremely-low-, 374 very-low, 534 low, 502 moderate, and 1,237 above-moderate) from
January 1, 2007 to June 30, 2014. Adequate sites are those with sufficient development and density
standards, water and sewer services, and adequate infrastructure. The City will continue the Zoning
Code update process to bring the Code into conformance with the new General Plan, which was
adopted in 2008. During the interim period until the Zoning Code update is completed, the General
Plan is the controlling land use designation. In cases where an inconsistency between the new
General Plan and zoning exists for a proposed development project, the City will process a zone
change concurrently with other development applications (e.g., subdivision map) at no additional
cost to the applicant, and the project must conform to the General Plan and the development
standards for the new zoning designation. Any proposed development that conforms to the old
zoning but is inconsistent with the new General Plan designation would require a General Plan
amendment.
Mixed-use development represents one of the City’s key land use strategies not only for meeting its
housing needs, but also for achieving other planning objectives such as economic development,
walkable communities, and reductions in vehicular trips and greenhouse gas emissions. The new
Zoning Code will include regulations and incentives to implement the mixed-use policies contained
in the Land Use Element of the General Plan, including incentives to encourage the inclusion of a
residential component in projects located in mixed-use districts. Where necessary, the City will
facilitate the subdivision of large parcels for development. The City will monitor and report annually
on its progress toward these objectives.
        Objectives:               Provide adequate sites to meet the housing needs allocation of 3,021
                                  units.
                                  Revise the Zoning Code in conformance with the new General Plan
        Responsible Agency:       Planning Department
        Funding:                  General Fund
        Timeline:                 Zoning Code update during 2010-2011
                                  Annual implementation progress reports
                                  Continue to accommodate the City’s housing needs through 2014
2009-2014                                          5-32                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                       Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                    B.4 Lemoore Housing Programs
4.8.      Downtown Revitalization
As part of the City’s 1992 Downtown Revitalization Plan, the
City has been encouraging and facilitating the development
and redevelopment of its downtown core. An important
component of these efforts has been mixed residential-
commercial uses in the C-C district. The City has converted
two historic hotels in the downtown to provide low-income
and senior housing above commercial uses. Such projects
have assisted the City in meeting revitalization objectives,
historic preservation, and the need for lower-income
housing.
                                                                              Lucerne Hotel
       Objective:                 Facilitate additional mixed-
                                  use projects in the downtown as opportunities arise.
       Responsible Agency:        RDA
       Funding:                   CDBG, RDA, and grants
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
4.9       Density Bonus Program
In accordance with state density bonus law, Lemoore adopted a local ordinance in 1992 that
provided incentives to encourage the development of affordable housing. The City has not yet
completed its comprehensive update of the Zoning Code following adoption of the new General
Plan in 2008. The Zoning Code update will include a revision to the City’s density bonus regulations
consistent with state law.
       Objective:                 Update the City’s density bonus ordinance in conformance with state
                                  law and continue to offer a density bonus and other incentives for
                                  qualified projects.
       Responsible Agency:        Planning Department
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Density bonus ordinance update by 2010
4.10      Planned Unit Development (PUD)
The City implements a PUD overlay zone to provide
flexibility in setback requirements and other
regulations, increase residential densities in certain
areas through techniques such as clustering, provide
flexible site requirements, and stimulate creative,
flexible and more affordable development. A PUD
Livable Neighborhood booklet has been prepared
and is available to interested developers at the
Planning Department counter.
Kings County and Cities of                           5-33                                     2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
       Objective:               Continue to promote the benefits of PUD alternatives to traditional
                                development.
       Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
       Funding Source:          General Fund
       Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
4.11     First Time Homebuyer Programs
The City offers first-time home ownership assistance to very-low-, low- and moderate-income
homebuyers through two First Time Homebuyer Programs. One program offers assistance as a
deferred second mortgage loan of up to $30,000, and the other up to $100,000 for down payment
and closing cost assistance. Assistance under these programs may include foreclosed properties.
Buyers must provide a $1,000 down payment, qualify with a primary lender and comply with their
requirements.
       Objective:               Assist 20 households annually.
       Responsible Agency:      RDA
       Funding:                 RDA LMIH and HOME funds
       Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
4.12     Infill Housing Program
This program was initiated in 2008-09 for the purpose of constructing affordable housing in
predominately developed neighborhoods for sale to low- and moderate-income families. Initially, the
Redevelopment Agency had contracted to have new homes built on vacant lots, which were then
sold to qualifying households at affordable prices. This program may be expanded to identify vacant
lots or severely dilapidated houses in the City’s core area, purchase them and build homes on them
for low/moderate-income families.
       Objective:               Assist 1 to 2 households annually.
       Responsible Agency:      RDA
       Funding:                 RDA LMIH funds
       Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
4.13     Section 8 Rental Assistance
Administered by the Kings County Housing Authority, Lemoore will continue to participate in the
Section 8 rental assistance program. This program extends rental subsidies to extremely-low- and
very-low-income households that spend more than 30% of their income on rent. The rent subsidy is
the difference between 30% of monthly income and allowable rent determined by HUD.
       Objective:               Assist the Housing Authority in promoting the Section 8 program.
       Responsible Agency:      RDA and Kings County Housing Authority
       Funding:                 HUD
2009-2014                                         5-34                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                      Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                     B.4 Lemoore Housing Programs
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
4.14     Affordable Housing Project Assistance
The RDA considers assisting specific affordable
housing projects separate and apart from its
regular programs. In the past, this has included
assistance for multi-family or single-family
subdivision projects. The RDA recently awarded
$1.2 million to one multi-family project and has
earmarked funds for two affordable housing
projects in this planning period - $850,000
remaining for Oleander Terrace and $1,650,000
for Village at Acacia.
       Objective:                 Assist affordable housing projects on a case-by-case basis, including
                                  priority for extremely-low-income units where feasible.
       Responsible Agency:        RDA
       Funding:                   RDA and other funds
       Timeline:                  As funding becomes available (reviewed annually)
4.15     Senior and Special Needs Housing
The City supports development of affordable
housing for special needs households,
including elderly and disabled. The City has
been supportive of special needs housing
including affordable senior housing develop-
ment, housing rehabilitation programs, and
development of second units, all of which
serve the needs of very-low- and extremely-
low-income households. The City also
supported the conversion of the Antlers Hotel
into senior housing. The City will pursue the
development of senior housing, special needs
housing, and/or a senior assisted living facility
in the Lemoore Market Area.
       Objective:                 Continue to support the development of senior/disabled/assisted living
                                  housing.
       Responsible Agency:        RDA
       Funding:                   RDA, CDBG, state and federal funds
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
Kings County and Cities of                           5-35                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
4.16     Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing
State law requires jurisdictions to provide adequate
sites for a variety of housing types including
emergency shelters and transitional/supportive
housing. This type of housing is particularly important
in addressing the needs of very-low- and extremely-
low-income persons. The Zoning Code will be
amended to allow emergency shelters by-right in the
RSC (Recreation, School and Conservation) zone
subject to objective development standards. The RSC
zone encompasses 730 acres, has the capacity for at
least one shelter, and provides access to transit and
other services used by homeless persons. In addition, the Code amendment will clarify that
transitional and supportive housing is a residential use subject only to the same requirements as other
residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
       Objectives:              Amend Zoning Code to permit emergency shelters by-right in the RSC
                                zone subject to objective development standards and clarify that
                                transitional and supportive housing are residential uses subject only to
                                the same requirements as other residential uses of the same type in
                                the same zone.
       Responsible Agency:      Planning Department
       Funding:                 General Fund
       Timeline:                Amend Zoning Code within one year of Housing Element adoption
4.17     Employee and Farmworker Housing
As the second most urbanized city in
Kings County, Lemoore has few
resident farmworkers, no farmland
within its boundaries and no agri-
cultural zoning. As a result, Lemoore is
not directly affected by the provisions
of Health and Safety Code §17021.5
and §17021.6.The City’s Zoning Code
does not explicitly allow farmworker
housing. However, in the past decade
Lemoore worked with Self-Help
Enterprises to create 36 affordable
single-family units by providing land and home ownership assistance while families provided “sweat
equity” towards constructing their homes. Occupants were primarily very-low-income farmworker
families. In addition, the RDA has recently purchased land for an affordable multi-family complex,
Oleander Terrace, that will provide 39 units for farmworker housing. To further support farmworker
housing needs, the City will:
2009-2014                                          5-36                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                        Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                        B.4 Lemoore Housing Programs
       Objectives:                  1.    Assist interested affordable housing developers by identifying
                                          sites and supporting funding applications for farmworker
                                          housing, and
                                    2.    Provide, to the extent feasible, regulatory incentives to
                                          encourage the construction of farmworker housing
       Responsible Agency:          Planning Department and RDA
       Funding:                     RDA LMIH funds and General Fund
       Timeline:                    Throughout the planning period
4.18     Housing for Persons with Disabilities and Special Needs
State law requires jurisdictions to analyze and remove potential constraints to housing for persons
with disabilities, who often have very-low or extremely-low incomes. As part of this Housing Element
update the City conducted an analysis of its zoning and land use processes, permit processing
procedures, and building codes to identify impediments. In order to comply with state requirements
and reduce potential constraints, the City will amend the Zoning Code in the following areas:
             1.      Licensed community care facilities serving 6 or fewer persons, excluding staff, will be
                     included as a permitted use by-right in any residential district;
             2.      Large community care facilities serving more than 6 persons will be identified as a
                     conditional use in appropriate district(s);
             3.      A reasonable accommodation ordinance establishing administrative procedures for
                     reviewing and approving modifications to land use and building regulations that are
                     reasonably necessary to ensure accessibility and use by persons with disabilities.
             4.      A definition and development standards for Single Room Occupancy (SRO) units will
                     be added to the Zoning Code.
             5.      A definition of “family” will be added in conformance with current law.
       Objectives:                  Amend the Zoning Ordinance to remove potential constraints on
                                    community care facilities, housing for persons with disabilities, SROs,
                                    and amend the definition of “family” consistent with current law.
       Responsible Agency:          Planning Department
       Funding:                     General Fund
       Timeline:                    Amend the Zoning Code by 2010
4.19     Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
The City provides information on fair housing laws, landlord/tenant rights and responsibilities and
refers complaints of housing discrimination to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), the Department of Fair Housing, and Tulare/Kings Legal Aid. Information on
housing discrimination is available at City Hall and flyers on fair housing are distributed to
participants in the City’s First Time Homebuyer Program. HUD’s address and toll-free number are
provided on the flyer. However, since the closest HUD representative is located in San Francisco, it is
Kings County and Cities of                             5-37                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                          Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
an inconvenient distance for Lemoore residents to receive fair housing counseling. A fair housing
service organization in the Central Valley would provide more direct services.
      Objective:               Lemoore will coordinate with Kings County to select a local fair
                                housing agency to provide landlord/tenant mediation, fair housing
                                investigations, and testing. The City will develop a fair housing
                                brochure in Spanish and English or acquire one from a local fair
                                housing provider. To broadly disseminate fair housing information,
                                the City will make the brochure available at City Hall and on the City
                                website.
      Responsible Agency:      RDA
      Funding:                 General Fund
      Timeline:                Select a local provider by 2010
2009-2014                                         5-38                              Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                       Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                              B.5 Kings County Housing Programs
5.       Kings County Housing Programs
Kings County was formed in 1893 from the separation of
the western portion of Tulare County and from an
additional 100 square miles added from Fresno County in
1908. Located in the fertile agricultural valley floor along
the Kings River, Kings County quickly began to establish
itself as a prominent agricultural region. With the
construction of the Southern Pacific Railroad – Alcade
branch in 1877, the community of Armona soon began to
flourish as a central fruit packing and shipping point.
Growth of the smaller rural communities diminished as
Hanford grew rapidly and later developments in Lemoore
prospered.
More than 100 years after its founding, Kings County continues to remain strongly based in its
agriculture roots. Today, Kings County is ranked as the 8th leading agricultural county in California
(25th in the nation), and has risen to one of the top fifteen milk producing counties in the nation.
With the County’s prominent agricultural resources and vast distribution network to move agricultural
goods to national and international markets, the County has remained dedicated towards supporting
agriculture while directing urban development to cities and community areas where services are
more efficiently provided.
The 2009-2014 Housing Plan reflects the County’s
historical population trends and policies that direct urban
development to existing cities or community service
districts, while also providing opportunities for affordable
housing development. The Housing Plan sets forth
policies to encourage the production of housing where
adequate infrastructure and services are available,
preserve and rehabilitate residential structures, and
provide housing assistance to low- and moderate-income
households to meet their housing needs.
5.1      Code Enforcement
Code enforcement is an important means to ensure that the character and quality of neighborhoods
and housing is maintained. The Kings County Code Compliance staff will continue to work to enforce
state and local regulations regarding building and property maintenance. In conjunction with code
enforcement activities, staff will provide information to homeowners regarding the County’s Housing
Rehabilitation Program.
       Objective:                 Continue to address code violations in the County unincorporated
                                  areas. Refer property owners to rehabilitation assistance.
       Responsible Agency:        Code Compliance Division
       Funding:                   General Fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
Kings County and Cities of                         5-39                                          2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
5.2      Housing Rehabilitation Program
Working through nonprofit organizations and
jurisdictions, the County offers housing rehabilitation
assistance through the Housing Rehabilitation
Program. Kings County offers housing rehabilitation
assistance throughout County unincorporated areas,
including and in the Corcoran fringe, Hanford fringe,
Lemoore fringe, Armona, Home Gardens, Kettleman
City, Stratford and other small community areas. The
County provides low- or no-interest loans up to
$190,430 to correct health and safety hazards and
make more routine repairs. The loan can be deferred
until the owner sells the home, moves out of the home, or is able to begin making payments.
       Objective:               Provide 5 to 10 loans per year.
       Responsible Agency:      Community Development Agency
       Funding:                 HOME and CDBG
       Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
5.3      Preservation of At-Risk Affordable Housing
The County will continue to work with interested agencies and community organizations to preserve
at-risk units by monitoring their status, providing technical and/or financial assistance in return for
extended affordability controls, and ensuring proper tenant notification prior to project conversion.
Unincorporated Kings County has four projects with approximately 197 units of affordable housing
created through various County, state, and federal programs. None are at risk for conversion to
market rate.
       Objective:               Continue to monitor at-risk units.
       Responsible Agency:      Community Development Agency
       Funding:                 General fund
       Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
2009-2014                                         5-40                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                     Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                               B.5 Kings County Housing Programs
5.4      Adequate Sites
The County will ensure that an adequate supply of
residential land is designated in unincorporated areas
to accommodate projected growth needs. Appendix B
of the Housing Element identifies adequate sites
within unincorporated areas to accommodate the
County’s share of the regional housing needs
allocation, which is identified as 1,094 units (69
extremely-low, 68 very-low, 193 low, 316 moderate,
and 448 above-moderate) for the new planning
period. Adequate sites are those with appropriate
zoning and development standards and adequate
water and sewer services and other infrastructure.
       Objective:                 Designate adequate sites to meet Kings County’s housing needs of
                                  1,094 units for the new planning period.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Agency
       Funding:                   General fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
5.5      Density Bonus Program
The County granted density bonuses for 14 homes during the previous planning period, however, the
Zoning Ordinance has not yet been amended to reflect the latest changes to state density bonus law.
The County will amend the Zoning Ordinance to include the current density bonus standards in
Government Code §65915, et seq.
       Objective:                 Amend the density bonus ordinance in conformance with current
                                  state law.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Agency
       Funding:                   General funds
       Timeline:                  Code amendment by 2010
Kings County and Cities of                          5-41                                     2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                   Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
5.6       First-Time Homebuyer Program
The County’s First-Time Homebuyer Program provides
qualified first-time homebuyers up to $20,000 towards a
home purchase. The loan is deferred for the life of the
first loan or until the home owner sells the house. This
program is available in all the unincorporated areas of
Kings County and is administered by Self-Help
Enterprises. During the previous planning period the
County assisted an average of 10 first-time homebuyers
per year.
        Objective:               Provide 10 to 15 loans
                                 per year.
        Responsible Agency:      Community Development Agency and Self-Help Enterprises
        Funding:                 HOME
        Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
5.7       Section 8 Rental Assistance
Administered by the Kings County Housing Authority, unincorporated communities will continue to
participate in the Section 8 rental assistance program. The Section 8 program extends rental subsidies
to extremely-low- and very-low-income households that spend more than 30% of their income on
rent. The rent subsidy is the difference between 30% of monthly income and allowable rent
determined by HUD.
        Objective:               Support the Housing Authority’s Section 8 program by promoting the
                                 program via the County website and brochures at County offices.
        Responsible Agency:      Kings County Housing Authority
        Funding:                 HUD
        Timeline:                Throughout the planning period
2009-2014                                          5-42                            Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                      Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                 B.5 Kings County Housing Programs
5.8      Foster Youth Transitional Program
The County supports the Housing Authority in the
provision of transitional homes for foster youth.
Foster children are a top priority for Kings County.
Working with the Kings County Housing Authority,
various agencies and organizations have established
two transitional homes for aged-out foster children.
The homes each accommodate six residents. The
Hanford boys’ home was completed in 2001 by
refurbishing a dilapidated HUD home with the
assistance of donations of material and labor. The
Lemoore girls’ home was built in 2002 from a
historical dwelling that was refurbished.
       Objective:                 Continue to support the Housing Authority in the provision of
                                  transitional homes for foster youth.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Agency and the Kings County Housing
                                  Authority
       Funding:                   General fund
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
5.9      Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing
Housing Element Law requires jurisdictions to provide adequate sites for a variety of housing
including emergency shelters and transitional/supportive housing through appropriate zoning and
development standards. The Kings County Zoning Ordinance allows emergency shelters in the RM
and PF zones subject only to a ministerial Site Plan Review, consistent with SB 2. The Zoning
Ordinance does not explicitly address transitional or supportive housing, however. The Code will be
amended to specify that transitional/supportive housing is a residential use subject only to the same
requirements and procedures as for other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
       Objective:                 Amend the Zoning Code to permit transitional/supportive housing
                                  subject to the same requirements and procedures as for other
                                  residential uses of the same type in the same zone, as required by
                                  state law. Continue to support the Kings/Tulare Continuum of Care
                                  Plan to develop transitional and emergency housing programs for
                                  homeless individuals and families.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Agency
       Funding:                   General fund
       Timeline:                  Amend the Zoning Code within one year of Housing Element
                                  adoption
Kings County and Cities of                           5-43                                       2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
5.10      Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing
Mobile homes and manufactured housing can provide an important source of affordable housing in
rural areas. Pursuant to state law, all jurisdictions must allow for the development of manufactured
housing/mobile homes as a permitted use in all residential zones where single-family homes are
permitted. County codes are consistent with state law in this regard, and the County will continue to
facilitate this type of housing to address the needs of low- and moderate-income households.
        Objective:                Continue to allow manufactured housing by right in all R zones which
                                  allow “one-family dwellings.”
        Responsible Agency:       Community Development Agency
        Funding:                  General fund
        Timeline:                 Throughout the planning period
5.11      Farmworker and Employee Housing
Kings County administratively permits mobile homes
as farm employee housing in the AL-10, AG-20, AG-
40 and AX zones. Farmworker housing not exceeding
5 units per parcel is permitted in the AL-10, AG-20
and AG-40 zones with larger facilities in the same
zones requiring a conditional use permit. Although no
farm labor camps currently are present in Kings
County, the County routinely permits mobile homes
used as employee housing and smaller farmworker
housing units. The County works with the Housing
Authority and non-profit developers to develop rental
and ownership housing for farmworkers. The County
also facilitated renovation of a former motel into
temporary and/or long-term, permanent agricultural employee housing for 24 farmworker families.
To further assist in meeting housing needs, the County will:
        Objective:                Continue to support farmworker housing as follows:
                                  1.    Amend the Zoning Code to incorporate §17021.5 and
                                        §17021.6 of the Health and Safety Code
                                  2.    Assist interested developers by identifying sites and supporting
                                        funding applications
                                  3.    Provide, to the extent feasible, regulatory incentives; and
        Responsible Agency:       Community Development Agency, Kings County Housing Authority,
                                  and interested affordable housing providers/developers
        Funding:                  General fund
        Timeline:                 Amend Zoning Code by 2010
2009-2014                                            5-44                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                         Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                  B.5 Kings County Housing Programs
5.12      Housing for Persons with Disabilities
State law requires jurisdictions to analyze and remove potential constraints to housing for persons
with disabilities. As part of this Housing Element update, the County conducted an analysis of its
zoning and land use processes, permit processing procedures, and building codes to identify
impediments. In order to comply with state requirements and reduce potential constraints, the
County will amend the Zoning Code in the following areas:
       1.    Large community care facilities serving more than 6 persons will be identified as a
             conditional use in the RR, R and RM zones; and
       2.    A reasonable accommodation ordinance establishing administrative procedures for
             reviewing and approving modifications to land use and building regulations that are
             reasonably necessary to ensure accessibility and use by persons with disabilities.
       Objective:                  Amend Zoning Code to remove potential constraints on community
                                   care facilities and housing for persons with disabilities
       Responsible Agency:         Community Development Agency
       Funding:                    General fund
       Timeline:                   Code amendment by 2010
5.13     Promote Equal Housing Opportunities
Kings County currently refers fair housing complaints to the Human Rights/Fair Housing Commission
at the Fresno office. However, since a number of communities within Kings County refer fair housing
complaints to different agencies it may be confusing to residents to know the appropriate agency to
handle fair housing complaints
       Objective:                  The County will coordinate with the communities of Avenal,
                                   Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore to select a local fair housing
                                   provider that will provide centralized fair housing services for all
                                   jurisdictions within Kings County. The County will develop a fair
                                   housing brochure in Spanish and English or acquire one from a local
                                   fair housing provider or HUD. To broadly disseminate fair housing
                                   information, the County will distribute the brochure at the City Hall,
                                   library, post office, appropriate shopping areas, and primary
                                   government offices within each Community Service District.
       Responsible Agency:         Community Development Agency
       Funding:                    General fund
       Timeline:                   Select a local agency by 2010
5.14     Assist Affordable Housing Development
The County promotes the development of housing for extremely-low-, very-low-, low- and
moderate-income persons through direct financial assistance such as CDBG and HOME, priority
entitlement processing, regulatory incentives such as density bonus and modified development
standards, administrative support to developers on grant applications. Programs 5.7 (Section 8 Rental
Assistance),      5.9      (Emergency     Shelters     and    Transitional/Supportive      Housing),     5.10
Kings County and Cities of                             5-45                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                         Housing Element
Chapter 5. Housing Plan
(Mobile/Manufactured Housing), 5.11 (Farmworker and Employee Housing), 5.12 (Housing for
Persons with Disabilities) and 5.17 (SRO Housing) are all intended to address the needs of extremely-
low-income (ELI) households. In order to further assist in the development of ELI units, the following
actions will be taken:
    •    The County shall apply for State and Federal funds for direct support of low-income housing
         construction and rehabilitation. Potential funding sources include CDBG and HOME. The
         County shall also seek State and Federal funding specifically targeted for the development of
         housing affordable to ELI households, such as Proposition 1C funds. The County shall
         promote the benefits of this program to the development community by posting information
         on its web page and creating a handout to be distributed with land development
         applications.
      Objective:                Seek applicable grants under Proposition 1C and federal sources,
                                provide an inventory of housing sites to interested developers, adopt
                                a local density bonus ordinance, and continue to pursue housing
                                production and rehabilitation with nonprofits.
      Responsible Agency:       Community Development Agency and affordable housing developers
      Funding:                  Local, state, and federal funds
      Timeline:                 Throughout the planning period; apply for grant funding on an annual
                                basis as available.
5.15     Energy Conservation and Greenhouse Gas/Particulate Matter Reduction
The Community Development Agency recently adopted this new program that includes expediting
plan check and permit processing for residential projects designed to comply with the voluntary
residential requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code. Expedited plan
check/permit processing is also provided for photovoltaic systems that generate energy for residential
uses.
      Objective:                Increase energy conservation and reduce greenhouse gases/particulate
                                matter in Kings County by encouraging developers to comply with the
                                California Green Building Standards Code. Developers receive
                                expedited plan check/permit processing if their project meets or
                                exceeds the California Green Building Standards Code or if the
                                project incorporates a photovoltaic system that provides energy for
                                residential uses. This program will be publicized through postings
                                within the Community Development Agency office and on the
                                Agency’s webpage.
      Responsible Agency:       Community Development Agency and housing developers
      Funding:                  No additional County funding required
      Timeline:                 Throughout the planning period
2009-2014                                          5-46                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                       Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore

                                                                 B.5 Kings County Housing Programs
5.16     Weatherization and Energy-Efficient Home Improvements
The purpose of this program is to reduce energy use by providing financial assistance to lower-
income households for weatherization and energy-efficient heating (including solar photovoltaic
water heaters) and cooling systems. The County will refer lower-income households to the Kings
Community Action Organization and other community services agencies that provide financial
assistance to qualifying households for these improvements.
       Objective:                 Reduce residential energy use and carbon footprint by providing
                                  financial assistance to lower-income households for weatherization
                                  and energy-efficient heating and cooling systems.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Agency
       Funding:                   Nominal funding required
       Timeline:                  Throughout the planning period
5.17     Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Housing
To ensure development standards do not constrain the development of SROs, the County will adopt
development standards for SRO housing which may include:
         •   Requirements for a management plan outlining policies and procedures and annual
             review of services by the Planning Department
         •   24-hour on-site management
         •   Room limitation to single occupancy, with allowance for overnight guests
         •   Requirements for monthly tenancies
         •   Units must be 250–300 square feet in size and include kitchen or bathroom
         •   Parking ratio of one space per unit and bicycle rack storage of one rack per 5 units
       Objective:                 Address the needs of extremely-low-income persons through SRO
                                  housing.
       Responsible Agency:        Community Development Agency
       Funding:                   Nominal funding required
       Timeline:                  Code amendment in 2010-2011
5.18     Promote Fair and Balanced Fee Structures
Kings County promotes the development of affordable housing. However, such properties are often
owned by non-profit organizations that are exempt from property taxes, which are necessary to
provide funding for the public services and facilities required by residents. As a result, non-profit
developments can have a negative fiscal impact on the County. In the event that affordable housing
production by non-profit developers exceeds the level of need identified in the Regional Housing
Needs Allocation Plan for this planning period, the County will initiate a study to assess the fiscal
impacts of additional non-profit affordable housing development, and consider appropriate
mechanisms such as in-lieu fees to mitigate such impacts. Prior to implementation of such mitigation,
Kings County and Cities of                           5-47                                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

Chapter 5. Housing Plan
the County shall conduct an evaluation of its effect on the cost and supply of housing, and process an
amendment to the Housing Element.
      Objective:              The objective of this program is to balance the benefits of non-profit
                              affordable housing tax benefits with the importance of maintaining
                              local funding mechanisms for the continuance of essential County
                              services.
      Responsible Agency:     Community Development Agency
      Funding:                No funding required at this time.
      Timeline:               To be determined
2009-2014                                         5-48                             Kings County and Cities of
Housing Element                                                      Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                                                C.    Quantified Objectives
  C. Qua ntified Obj ecti ves
Table 5-1 below summarizes the quantified objectives for housing construction, rehabilitation, and
conservation for Kings County jurisdictions for the 2009–2014 planning period. Construction
objectives do not reflect past building activity, but rather reflect housing needs based on
demographic trends as determined by the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD).
  Table 5-1
  Quantified Objectives for 2009-2014
                                                                        Kings County Jurisdictions
                                           Avenal            Corcoran            Hanford           Lemoore     Kings County
  Construction1
      Extremely Low                          40                  40                 140              374            68
      Very Low                               40                  40                1,306             374            69
      Low                                   126                 160                1,015             534           193
      Moderate                              214                 295                 938              502           316
      Above-Moderate                        291                 370                2,359            1,237          448
  Rehabilitation
      Extremely Low                           5                  10                  20               12            12
      Very Low                                5                  20                  80               13            13
      Low                                    10                  45                 100               25            25
      Moderate                                0                   0                   0               25             0
      Above-Moderate                          0                   0                   0                0             0
  Conservation2
      Extremely Low
      Very Low
                                            317                 593                 718              624           197
      Low
      Moderate
      Above-Moderate                          0                   0                   0                0             0
  1 Construction objectives are for 2007-2014 commensurate with the RHNA
  2 Conservation objectives refer to existing units with affordability covenants (see Table 2-32)
  Source: 2007-2014 Kings County Regional Housing Needs Plan
Kings County and Cities of                                       5-49                                               2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                                          Housing Element


Chapter 6. Glossary of Terms
Acre: A unit of land measure equal to 43,560 square feet. Net acreage refers to the portion of a site
           exclusive of existing or planned public or private road rights-of-way.
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit accessory to a main single-family dwelling on a parcel of
           land and which meets the requirements of state law.
Affordability Covenant: A property title agreement which places resale or rental restrictions on a
           housing unit.
Affordable Housing: Under state and federal statutes, housing which costs no more than 30% of
           gross household income. Housing costs include rent or mortgage payments, utilities, taxes,
           insurance, homeowner association fees, and related costs.
Assisted Housing: Housing that has received subsidies (such as low interest loans, density bonuses,
           direct financial assistance) by federal, state, or local housing programs in exchange for
           restrictions requiring a certain number of housing units to be affordable to very–low-, low-,
           and moderate-income households.
Kings County Association of Governments (KCAG): The regional government agency authorized by
           the federal and state government to address regional transportation, housing, and other
           planning issues in Kings County.
At-Risk Housing: Assisted rental housing that is at risk of losing its status as housing affordable for
           very–low-, low-, and moderate-income residents due to the expiration of federal, state or
           local agreements.
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD): The state department
           responsible for administering state-sponsored housing programs and for reviewing housing
           elements to determine compliance with state housing law.
Census: The official United States decennial enumeration of the population conducted by the
           federal government.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): A grant program administered by the U.S.
           Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). This grant allots money to cities
           and counties for housing rehabilitation and community development activities, including
           public facilities and economic development.
Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually, but the
           structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all owners on a proportional,
           undivided basis.
Density: The number of dwelling units per unit of land. Density usually is expressed “per acre,” e.g.,
           a development with 100 units located on 20 acres has density of 5.0 units per acre.
Density Bonus: The allowance of additional residential units beyond the maximum for which the
           parcel is otherwise permitted usually in exchange for the provision or preservation of
           affordable housing units at the same site or at another location.
Development Impact Fees: A fee or charge imposed on developers to pay for a jurisdiction’s costs
           of providing services to a new development.
Kings County and Cities of                          6-1                                        2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                     Housing Element

Chapter 6. Glossary of Terms
Development Right: The right granted to a land owner or other authorized party to improve a
           property. Such right is usually expressed in terms of a use and intensity allowed under
           existing zoning regulation. For example, a development right may specify the maximum
           number of residential dwelling units permitted per acre of land.
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate
           living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the unit for the
           exclusive use of a household.
Dwelling, Multi-family: A building containing two or more dwelling units for the use of individual
           households; e.g., an apartment or condominium building.
Dwelling, Single-family Attached: A one-family dwelling attached to one or more other one-family
           dwellings by a common vertical wall. Row houses and town homes are examples of this
           dwelling unit type.
Dwelling, Single-family Detached: A dwelling, not attached to any other dwelling, which is
           designed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or
           yards.
Elderly Household: Elderly households are one- or two- member (family or non-family) households
           in which the head or spouse is age 65 or older.
Emergency Shelter: An emergency shelter is a facility that provides shelter to homeless families
           and/or homeless individuals on a limited short-term basis.
Fair Market Rent (FMR): Fair Market Rents (FMRs) are freely set rental rates defined by HUD as the
           median gross rents charged for available standard units in a county or Standard
           Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA). Fair Market Rents are used for the Section 8 Rental
           Program and other HUD programs.
First-Time Home Buyer: Defined by HUD as an individual or family who has not owned a home
           during the three-year period preceding the HUD-assisted purchase of a home. Jurisdictions
           may adopt local definitions for first-time home buyer programs which differ from non-
           federally funded programs.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area; usually
           expressed as a numerical value (e.g., a building having 10,000 square feet of gross floor
           area located on a lot of 5,000 square feet in area has a floor area ratio of 2:1).
General Plan: The General Plan is a legal document, adopted by the legislative body of a city or
           county, setting forth policies regarding long-term development. California law requires the
           preparation of seven elements or chapters in the General Plan: Land Use, Housing,
           Circulation, Conservation, Open Space, Noise, and Safety. Additional elements are
           permitted, such as Economic Development, Urban Design and similar local concerns.
Group Quarters: A facility that houses groups of unrelated persons not living in households (U.S.
           Census definition). Examples of group quarters include institutions, dormitories, shelters,
           military quarters, assisted living facilities and other quarters, including single-room
           occupancy (SRO) housing, where 10 or more unrelated individuals are housed.
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA): The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act requires larger
           lending institutions making home mortgage loans to publicly disclose the location and
Kings County and Cities of                          6-2                                          2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element
           disposition of home purchase, refinance and improvement loans. Institutions subject to
           HMDA must also disclose the gender, race, and income of loan applicants.
HOME Program: The HOME Investment Partnership Act, Title II of the National Affordable Housing
           Act of 1990. HOME is a Federal program administered by HUD which provides formula
           grants to states and localities to fund activities that build, buy, and/or rehabilitate affordable
           housing for rent or home ownership or provide direct rental assistance to low-income
           people.
Homeless: Unsheltered homeless are families and individuals whose primary nighttime residence is a
           public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, regular sleeping
           accommodation for human beings (e.g., the street, sidewalks, cars, vacant and abandoned
           buildings). Sheltered homeless are families and persons whose primary nighttime residence
           is a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter (e.g., emergency, transitional, battered
           women, and homeless youth shelters; and commercial hotels or motels used to house the
           homeless).
Household: The US Census Bureau defines a household as all persons living in a housing unit
           whether or not they are related. A single person living in an apartment as well as a family
           living in a house is considered a household. Household does not include individuals living
           in dormitories, prisons, convalescent homes, or other group quarters.
Household Income: The total income of all the persons living in a household. Household income is
           commonly grouped into income categories based upon household size, and income,
           relative to the regional median family income. The following categories are used in the
           Housing Element:
                •         Extremely Low: Households earning less than 30% of County median family
                          income;
                •         Very low: Households earning less than 50% of County median family income;
                •         Low: Households earning 51% to 80% of the County median family income;
                •         Moderate: Households earning 81% to 120% of County median family income;
                •         Above Moderate: Households earning above 120% of County median family
                          income
Housing Problems: Defined by HUD as a household which: (1) occupies a unit with physical
           defects (lacks complete kitchen or bathroom); (2) meets the definition of overcrowded; or
           (3) spends more than 30% of income on housing cost.
Housing Subsidy: Housing subsidies refer to government assistance aimed at reducing housing sales
           or rent prices to more affordable levels. Two general types of housing subsidy exist:
           1) where a housing subsidy is linked to a particular house or apartment, the housing
           subsidy is “project” or “unit” based; or 2) In Section 8 rental assistance programs the
           subsidy is provided to the family (called “tenant-based”) who can then use the assistance to
           find suitable housing in the accommodations of their choice.
Housing Unit: A room or group of rooms used by one or more individuals living separately from
           others in the structure, with direct access to the outside or to a public hall and containing
           separate toilet and kitchen facilities.
Inclusionary Unit. An ownership or rental dwelling unit which is required to meet affordability
           criteria established by local ordinance.
Large Household: A household with 5 or more members.
Kings County and Cities of                           6-3                                            2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                          Housing Element

Chapter 6. Glossary of Terms
Manufactured Housing: Housing that is constructed of manufactured components, assembled partly
           at the site rather than totally at the site. Also referred to as modular housing.
Market-Rate Housing: Housing which is available on the open market without any subsidy. The
           price for housing is determined by the market forces of supply and demand and varies by
           location.
Median Income: The annual income (adjusted for household size) within a region for which half of
           the households have incomes above the median and half have incomes below the median.
           The “Areawide Median Income” (AMI) is established annually by HUD and HCD for each
           county as the basis for affordable housing programs.
Mobile Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is at least 8 feet in width
           and 32 feet in length, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
           unit when connected to the required utilities, either with or without a permanent
           foundation.
Mortgage Revenue Bond (MRB): A state, county or city program providing financing for the
           development of housing through the sale of tax-exempt bonds.
Overcrowding: As defined by the U.S. Census, a household with greater than 1.01 persons per
           room, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, hallways, and porches. Severe overcrowding is
           defined as households with greater than 1.51 persons per room.
Overpayment: The extent to which gross housing costs, including utility costs, exceed 30% of gross
           household income, based on data published by the U.S. Census Bureau. Severe
           overpayment, or cost burden, exists if gross housing costs exceed 50% of gross income.
Parcel: The basic unit of land entitlement. A designated area of land established by plat, subdivision,
           or otherwise legally defined and permitted to be used, or built upon.
Public Housing: A project-based low-rent housing program operated by independent local public
           housing authorities. A low-income family applies to the local public housing authority in the
           area in which they want to live.
Redevelopment Agency: California Community Redevelopment Law provides authority to establish
           a Redevelopment Agency with the scope and financing mechanisms necessary to remedy
           blight and provide stimulus to eliminate deteriorated conditions. The law provides for the
           planning, development, redesign, clearance, reconstruction, or rehabilitation, or any
           combination of these, and the provision of public and private improvements as may be
           appropriate or necessary in the interest of the general welfare by the Agency.
           Redevelopment law requires an Agency to set aside 20% of all tax increment dollars
           generated from each redevelopment project area for the purpose of increasing and
           improving the supply of housing for low-moderate income households.
Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP): The Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP) is based on State
           of California projections of population growth and housing unit demand and assigns a share
           of the region’s future housing need to each jurisdiction within the KCAG. These housing
           needs numbers serve as a basis for the update of the Housing Element.
Rehabilitation: The upgrading of a building previously in a dilapidated or substandard condition for
           human habitation or use.
Kings County and Cities of                              6-4                                       2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                        Housing Element

Section 8 Rental Voucher/Certificate Program: A tenant-based rental assistance program that
           subsidizes a family’s rent in a privately owned house or apartment. The program is
           administered by local public housing authorities. Assistance payments are based on 30% of
           household annual income. Households with incomes of 50% or below the area median
           income are eligible to participate in the program.
Senior: The Census Bureau defines a senior as a person who is 65 years or older. For persons of
           social security eligibility, a senior is defined as a person age 62 and older. Other age limits
           may be used for eligibility for housing assistance or retired communities.
Service Needs: The particular services required by special populations, typically including needs
           such as transportation, personal care, housekeeping, counseling, meals, case management,
           personal emergency response, and other services preventing premature institutionalization
           and assisting individuals to continue living independently.
Small Household: Pursuant to HUD definition, a small household consists of two to four non-elderly
           persons.
Special Needs Groups: Those segments of the population which have a more difficult time finding
           decent affordable housing due to special circumstances. Under California Housing Element
           statutes, these special needs groups consist of the elderly, people with disabilities, large
           families with five or more members, single-parent families with children, farmworkers and
           the homeless. A jurisdiction may also choose to consider additional special needs groups in
           the Housing Element, such as students, military households, other groups present in their
           community.
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act
           (California Government Code §66410, et seq.).
Substandard Housing: Housing which does not meet the minimum standards in the California
           Housing Code. Jurisdictions may adopt more stringent local definitions of substandard
           housing. Substandard units which are structurally sound and for which the cost of
           rehabilitation is economically warranted are considered suitable for rehabilitation.
           Substandard units which are structurally unsound and for which the cost of rehabilitation is
           considered infeasible are considered in need of replacement.
Supportive Services: Services provided to residents of supportive housing for the purpose of
           facilitating the independence of residents. Some examples are case management, medical
           or psychological counseling and supervision, child care, transportation, and job training.
Tenant-Based Rental Assistance: A form of rental assistance in which the assisted tenant may move
           from a dwelling unit with a right to continued assistance. The assistance is provided for the
           tenant, not for the project.
Transitional Housing: Transitional housing is temporary (often six months to two years) housing for a
           homeless individual or family who is transitioning to permanent housing. Transitional
           housing often includes a supportive services component (e.g., job skills training,
           rehabilitation counseling) to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of
           independent living.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD): The cabinet level department of
           the federal government responsible for housing, housing assistance, and urban
           development at the national level. Housing programs administered through HUD include
           Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), HOME and Section 8, among others.
Kings County and Cities of                              6-5                                     2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                      Housing Element

Chapter 6. Glossary of Terms
Zoning: A land use regulatory measure enacted by local government. Zoning district regulations
           governing lot size, building bulk, placement, and other development standards vary from
           district to district, but must be uniform within the same district. Each city and county adopts
           a zoning ordinance specifying these regulations.
Kings County and Cities of                           6-6                                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element
Appendix A Evaluation of the Prior
                                  Housing Element
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate the effectiveness of the
existing Housing Element, the appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies, and the progress in
implementing programs for the previous planning period. This appendix contains a review each
jurisdiction’s housing goals, policies, and programs of the previous housing element, and evaluates
the degree to which these programs have been implemented during the previous planning period.
This analysis also includes an assessment of the appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies. The
findings from this evaluation have been instrumental in crafting the 2009 Housing Plan.
Tables A-1a through A-1e summarize the programs contained in the previous Housing Element along
with the source of funding, program objectives, accomplishments, and implications for future policies
and actions.
Table A-2 summarizes the goals and policies contained in the previous Housing Element along with
an assessment of their appropriateness for the new planning period.
Tables A-3a through A-3e summarize new units built during the previous Housing Element period.
Tables A-4a through A-4e present each jurisdiction’s progress in meeting the quantified objectives
from the previous Housing Element.
Kings County and Cities of                    Appendix A - 1                                  2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element

m Evaluation
                                                                Program Objectives                                                     Future Policies
               Responsible Agency      Funding Source                and Timeline                    Accomplishments                     and Actions
             Code Enforcement Staff/  General Fund       Continue to work with the community    Code enforcement staff is       The City will continue to use
s to         Public Works Department                     to address code violations. Refer      partially funded by CDBG        Code Enforcement to improve
 sure that                                               property owners to the Housing         funds. Information regarding    the quality of housing in
ds and                                                   Rehabilitation Program.                rehab has been provided to      Avenal. CDBG funds will also
  ity’s                                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)                    homeowners.                     be used to partially fund Code
  Works                                                                                                                         Enforcement.
d local
orcement
  n to
 g
             Community Development    CDBG; HOME; CAL- Continue to provide between 6 and 12     The City has continued to       The City will continue to apply
   City will Department and Self-Help HOME               loans per year. Continue to market the receive HOME, CDBG and          for and implement HOME and
 lower       Enterprises                                 program through brochures at the       CalHome grants each year        CDBG grants. The amount
h CDBG                                                   public counter.                        during the reporting period.    available to applicants for
 m will                                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)                    The City has rehabilitated or   rehab will increase as needed
 5,000 for                                                                                      reconstructed approximately     with inflation.
  of                                                                                            40 homes during the period.
ibility
$600,000
12 loans
e            Community Development    General Fund       Continue to monitor at-risk units.     One low income apartment        The City will continue to work
             Department                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)                    complex became at-risk during   with interested agencies and
es and                                                                                          the reporting period. The City  community organizations to
risk units                                                                                      cooperated in a Tax Credit      preserve at-risk units.
 nical                                                                                          application to save the at-risk
 xtended                                                                                        housing. The outcome of the
 r tenant                                                                                       application is not known.
venal has
hrough
are
 rate from
                                                 Appendix A - 2                                                                                    2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                        Housing Element

                                                             Program Objectives                                                         Future Policies
              Responsible Agency   Funding Source                 and Timeline                         Accomplishments                    and Actions
            Community Development General Fund       Maintain appropriate land use              The City has maintained          The City will continue to
ew          Department                               designations to provide adequate           “adequate” sites to develop the  provide adequate sites to
emand                                                sites appropriate for new housing to       580 units identified in the      provide housing for low and
  t and                                              meet Avenal’s housing needs                RHNA. During the reporting       moderate income housing
  ing                                                allocation of 580 units.                   period the City developed 240    commensurate with the RHNA
                                                     (Timeline: 2003-2008)                      units for very low income        for the new planning period.
 ion’s                                                                                          residents and 23 units for
 0 units                                                                                        moderate or low income
d 232                                                                                           residents.
m 2001-
 cient
er and
 ure.
            Community Development General Fund       Provide the location and zoning of         172 Single family homes have     The City will continue to
  elopment  Department                               residential infill sites in the community. been built during the reporting  encourage the use of infill lots.
 al zones.                                           (Timeline: Ongoing)                        period almost exclusively on     However, the inventory of
venal for                                                                                       infill lots. The City works with available lots is shrinking.
gle-family                                                                                      developers to complete
   over the                                                                                     variances that allow more infill
  on infill                                                                                     lots to be created and used.
ll provide
 location
  y
            Community Development General Fund       In accordance with State law, Avenal       The City’s Zoning Ordinance      The City will continue to
  adopt a   Department                               will adopt a local ordinance that          was amended to meet State        answer inquiries and work
 o                                                   provides incentives to encourage the       Law regarding Density Bonus.     with developers on Density
e housing.                                           development of affordable housing. If      However, its use by              Bonus.
 nt of the                                           a developer allocates at least 20% of      developers has been limited.
  e                                                  the units in a housing project for lower
 me                                                  income households, 10% for very low-
 idents                                              income households, 50% for
rcent of                                             qualifying residents such as senior
                                                     citizens, or at least 20% of condo-
y bonus of                                           minium units for moderate income
 ulatory                                             households, the City must grant a
  f                                                  density bonus of 25%, along with one
and cost                                             additional regulatory concession, or
                                                     provide other incentives of equivalent
                                                     financial value based on the land cost
                                                     per dwelling unit.
                                                     (Timeline: End of 2004)
                                             Appendix A - 3                                                                                          2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                        Housing Element

                                                                   Program Objectives                                                     Future Policies
               Responsible Agency        Funding Source                and Timeline                     Accomplishments                     and Actions
nce          Community Development      General Fund       Continue to defer/reduce fees and       The City expedited two CUP      The City will continue to
h density    Department                                    expedite processing for affordable      applications for multi-family   expedite and assist low
 mit for                                                   housing. Annually evaluate conditional  low income projects during the income multi-family projects.
 also                                                      use applications for multi-family       reporting period. The City also
 by                                                        residential projects to determine the   assisted the developers with
and                                                        impact on the timing, cost, and supply  Tax Credit applications. The
 tly                                                       of multi-family housing. If the process City continues to use the CUP
ion of the                                                 constrains multi-family development,    process for large apartment
   ill                                                     adopt mitigation, which could include   applications.
 al                                                        eliminating the conditional use
of                                                         process, within 6 months.
moderate                                                   (Timeline: Annually evaluate the
                                                           impact of the conditional use process
                                                           as part of the general plan progress
                                                           report required under Government
                                                           Code §65400.)
             Community Development      HOME               Assist 10-15 new homebuyers on an       The City assisted 54            The City will continue to apply
 enal will   Department and Self-Help                      annual basis.                           applicants with the purchase of for and administer the HOME
 ortunities  Enterprises                                   (Timeline: Ongoing)                     homes under the First Time      program for use in its First
 the First                                                                                         Homebuyer program during        Time Homebuyer program.
000, this                                                                                          the reporting period.
erred
must
  lify for a
d 12 very
 ng 6 farm
             Community Development      Department of      Assist Kings County Housing Authority The City does not administer      Avenal will continue to
Section 8    Department, County Housing Housing and Urban  in promoting the Section 8 program.     the Section 8 program but       participate in the Section 8
8 rental     Authority                  Development        (Timeline: Ongoing)                     does support the Kings County rental assistance program.
dies to                                                                                            Housing Authority.
more than
ent
cent of
nt
urrently
n 8
                                                   Appendix A - 4                                                                                     2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                          Housing Element

                                                                   Program Objectives                                                      Future Policies
               Responsible Agency      Funding Source                  and Timeline                     Accomplishments                      and Actions
            Community Development     Local, state, and    Seek applicable grants under            The City has rehabilitated 40    The City will continue to
ch as Self- Department and interested federal funds        Proposition 46 and federal sources,     homes and provided 54 first      rehabilitate homes and
tate        affordable housing                             provide an inventory of housing sites   time homebuyer loans using       provided first time homebuyer
 come       providers/developers                           to interested developers, adopt a local CDBG, HOME and CalHome           loans using CDBG, HOME
 d HOME                                                    density bonus ordinance, and            during the reporting period.     and CalHome. The City will
 g is being                                                continue to pursue housing production   The City has waived building     continue to waive building
velopment                                                  and rehabilitation with nonprofits.     fees for housing rehabilitation. fees for housing rehabilitation.
 ity                                                       (Timeline: Ongoing)
in the
tives.
r and       Community Development     General Fund         Continue fee reductions and             The City expedited one           The City will continue to work
            Department                                     expedited site plan review for          application for a senior         with developers in the
ng                                                         affordable housing.                     housing apartment complex        completion of a senior project
ups such                                                   (Timeline: Develop housing by 2005)     and assisted the developer       as well as for the disabled by
ty’s                                                                                               with a tax credit application.   expediting applications and
 indicated                                                                                         The project was not successful   assisting with grant
  rs and                                                                                           in obtaining tax credits.        applications.
 eveloper
ar
op senior
th
disabled
roviding
            Community Development     General Fund         Revise second unit ordinance to         The City amended its Zoning      The City will assist property
sing        Department                                     comply with AB 1866.                    Ordinance to allow second        owners with second unit
 ups,                                                      (Timeline: 2004)                        units by right in residentially  applications by providing
 r groups.                                                                                         zoned areas.                     information and expediting
permits                                                                                                                             their applications.
 -1 and A-
mit
 nit
s pursuant
dential
es to
 icter than
                                                   Appendix A - 5                                                                                       2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                           Housing Element

                                                            Program Objectives                                                    Future Policies
              Responsible Agency   Funding Source                and Timeline                     Accomplishments                   and Actions
ters        Community Development General Fund       Amend the Avenal Zoning Ordinance       The City amended its Zoning   The City will amend the
tion to     Department                               to conditionally permit emergency       Ordinance to allow an         Zoning Ordinance pursuant to
 using                                               shelters and transitional facilities in Emergency and Transitional    SB 2 and work with Kings
nal                                                  the Public Facilities zone.             Shelters in a PF zone via the Community Action
                                                     (Timeline: 2004)                        CUP process.                  Organization and other
 ing                                                                                                                       organizations to provide
 sitional                                                                                                                  Emergency and Transitional
 ress                                                                                                                      Shelters.
 it
sing in the
nal use
cilitate
  nt land
 her
ng          Community Development General Fund       1) Amend the Zoning Code to             The City allows by right      The City will expedite and
 nt and     Department                                   incorporate Section 17021 of the    Farmworker Housing in the R-  assist developers of
s. Avenal                                                Health and Safety Code              2 and R-3 Zones. An           Farmworker Housing projects
abor                                                 2) Inventory suitable sites for farm    application for Farmworker    if applied for in the R-2 and R-
nction with                                              worker housing with the update of   Housing was not submitted     3 zones.
  . Farm                                                 the Land Use Element                during the reporting period.
  perations                                          3) Assist interested developers by
   labor                                                 identifying sites and supporting
  ones.                                                  funding applications
 f                                                   4) Provide, to the extent feasible,
 loans                                                   financial and regulatory
sisted                                                   incentives; and
                                                     5) Ensure that zoning and
                                                         development standards facilitate
                                                         farm worker housing
                                                     (Timeline: Provide site inventory by
                                                     2004 and amend Zoning Code by
                                                     2005 following update of the General
                                                     Plan Land Use Element.)
                                             Appendix A - 6                                                                                    2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                   Housing Element
                                                             Program Objectives                                                          Future Policies
             Responsible Agency   Funding Source                 and Timeline                      Accomplishments                         and Actions
           Community Development General Fund       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to            The City amended its Zoning         The City will continue to assist
ons to     Department                               permit the siting of residential care    Ordinance to allow the siting of    Disabled Persons by providing
s to                                                facilities serving six or fewer persons, residential care facilities for six funds for rehabilitation of
  City                                              second units, and employee housing       units or less. The City has         homes, including handicapped
 and use                                            by right in residential zones, and       assisted Disabled Persons by        facilities, using CDBG,
s, and                                              emergency shelters and transitional      providing funds for                 CalHome and HOME funds. It
 everal                                             housing in the P-F zone. Continue to     rehabilitation of homes,            will expedite applications for
permitting                                          review City ordinances, policies, and    including handicapped               Residential Care Facilities and
                                                    practices and remove impediments         facilities, using CDBG,             adopt a Reasonable
                                                    when found.                              CalHome and HOME funds.             Accommodation ordinance.
                                                    (Timeline: 2004)
  ities    Community Development General Fund       Avenal will coordinate with Kings        The City has not accomplished Avenal will coordinate with
sing       Department                               County to select a local fair housing    this program due to staffing        Kings County to select a local
  is                                                agency to provide landlord and tenant    limitations.                        fair housing agency to provide
 ndlord                                             mediation and fair housing investiga-                                        landlord and tenant mediation
 priate                                             tions. The City will develop a fair                                          and fair housing investiga-
  ill                                               housing brochure in Spanish and                                              tions. The City will develop a
  vide                                              English or acquire one from a local fair                                     fair housing brochure in
er                                                  housing provider. To broadly                                                 Spanish and English or
he                                                  disseminate fair housing information,                                        acquire one from a local fair
                                                    the City will distribute the brochure at                                     housing provider. To broadly
                                                    the City Hall, library, post office, and                                     disseminate fair housing
                                                    appropriate shopping areas.                                                  information, the City will
                                                    (Timeline: 2004)                                                             distribute the brochure at the
                                                                                                                                 City Hall, library, post office,
                                                                                                                                 and appropriate shopping
                                                                                                                                 areas.
                                            Appendix A - 7                                                                                            2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                         Housing Element
m Evaluation
                                                             Program Objectives                                                 Future Policies
             Responsible Agency    Funding Source                 and Timeline                   Accomplishments                  and Actions
           Code Enforcement Staff General Fund        Continue to work with the community    2003 Prop Maint     65 cases Continue to work with the
ns to                                                 code violations. Refer property owners 2003 Weed Abate 231 cases    community on code
 nsure                                                to the Housing Rehabilitation          2003 Vehicle Abate 289 cases violations. Refer property
 tial                                                 Program.                               Substd Bldg (SSB)    3 cases owners to the Housing
ed. The                                               (Timeline: Ongoing)                                                 Rehabilitation Program.
e                                                                                            2004 Prop Maint     55 cases (Timeline: Ongoing)
  ill work                                                                                   2004 Weed Abate 122 cases
n                                                                                            2004 Veh Abate     216 cases
vities,                                                                                      SSB                  2 cases
 wners
tion                                                                                         2005 Prop Maint     42 cases
                                                                                             2005 Weed Abate 55 cases
                                                                                             2005 Veh Abate     109 cases
                                                                                             SSB                  8 cases
                                                                                             2006 Prop Maint     15 cases
                                                                                             2006 Weed Abate     90 cases
                                                                                             2006 Veh Abate      37 cases
                                                                                             2006 SSB             2 cases
                                                                                             2007 Prop Maint 199 cases
                                                                                             2007 Weed Abate 236 cases
                                                                                             2007 Veh Abate     269 cases
                                                                                             2007 SSB            38 cases
                                                                                             2008 thru 11-30-08
                                                                                             2008 Prop Maint     67 cases
                                                                                             2008 Weed Abate    258 cases
                                                                                             2008 Veh Abate      41 cases
                                                                                             SSB                 49 cases
                                              Appendix A - 8                                                                                 2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                 Housing Element
                                                                Program Objectives                                                 Future Policies
              Responsible Agency      Funding Source                and Timeline                   Accomplishments                   and Actions
            Community Development    CDBG               City Paint Program: 20-25 annually    2004- 19 homes regular.        Continue program. City Paint
 oderate    Department, Job Training                    Senior/Handicapped Paint Program:             10 homes senior.       Program: 20-25 annually
rior        Office, Kings County                             10 homes annually                2005- 19 homes regular         Senior/Handicapped Paint
 City’s     Planning Department, and                    Kings County Paint Program: 5-10              10 homes senior        Program: 15 homes annually
only.       Kings County Office of                           homes annually-as funding        2005- 16 homes regular         (Timeline: Ongoing)
 ogram,     Education                                        permits                          2006-9 homes regular
ome                                                     (Timeline: Ongoing)                   2007- 0
  paint,                                                                                      2008- 9 homes regular
s usually                                                                                             19 homes senior
pervised
  . Low
 ing in the
  e Kings
 Fringe.
            Community Development    HOME; CDBG         Provide 12-15 loans annually and 10-  2004- 25 homes rehabbed        Continue program. Provide
tation      Department                                  15 grants annually. Continue to              19 grants-emergency rpr 5 to 10 loans annually and
  gh the                                                market the program through            2005- 26 homes rehabbed        up to 10 health and safety
  d in                                                  brochures at the public counter.             24 grants emergency rpr grants per year. Continue to
am                                                      Conduct outreach to major employers   2006- 17 homes rehabbed        market the program.
st                                                      (e.g., hospital, school district, and        8 grants-emergency rpr  (Timeline: Ongoing)
on,                                                     prisons) regarding the program.       2007 – 4 homes rehabbed
d                                                       (Timeline: Ongoing)                   2008 – 8 homes rehabbed
002, the
unds
 3. Health
 ovided to
ap
e
 le         Community Development    General Fund       Continue to monitor at-risk units.    The City continues to monitor  One project (Saltair) is at-risk
            Department                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)                   the potential units at-risk.   during the next 10 years. The
ed                                                                                                                           City will continue to monitor
 to                                                                                                                          at-risk units and assist with
 r status,                                                                                                                   their preservation, if feasible.
stance in                                                                                                                    (Timeline: Ongoing)
  , and
 to
 nits of
d
hrough
 s. None
 nversion
                                                Appendix A - 9                                                                                  2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                    Housing Element

                                                            Program Objectives                                                   Future Policies
            Responsible Agency   Funding Source                  and Timeline                   Accomplishments                    and Actions
          Community Development General Fund       Maintain appropriate land use           The City has promoted new       Maintain appropriate land
 w        Department                               designations to provide adequate        housing development by fast     use designations to provide
ployment                                           sites appropriate for new housing to    tracking development            adequate sites appropriate
needs of                                           meet Corcoran’s housing needs           applications. The City will     for new housing to meet
sing                                               allocation of 854 units.                maintain appropriate land use   Corcoran’s housing needs
                                                   (Timeline: Ongoing)                     designations to provide         allocation.
gion’s                                                                                     adequate sites appropriate for  (Timeline: Ongoing)
 54 units                                                                                  new housing to meet
and 341                                                                                    Corcoran’s housing needs.
quate
ent and
vices,
          Community Development General Fund       Adopt a density bonus ordinance to      The Density Bonus Ordinance     Continue to implement the
          Department                               facilitate affordable housing.          was included as part of the     density bonus program.
 ment. In                                          (Timeline: End of 2005)                 overall Zoning Ordinance
er                                                                                         Amendment completed in
   in a                                                                                    January 2008.
holds, 10
s, 50
 senior
minium
 the City
nt, along
on, or
nancial
ng unit.
 ves      Community Development General Fund       Continue to defer/reduce fees and       The City annually evaluates the Continue program.
  t of    Department                               expedite processing for affordable      impact on timing, cost and
  tools                                            housing. Annually evaluate conditional  supply of multi-family housing
                                                   use applications for multi-family       and to date there has been no
D                                                  residential projects to determine the   constraint on the multi-family
 1 unit                                            impact on the timing, cost, and supply  development.
 nder a                                            of multi-family housing. If the process
uced                                               constrains multi-family development,
g in                                               adopt mitigation, which could include
 al use                                            eliminating the conditional use
                                                   process, within 6 months.
 cilitate                                          (Timeline: Annually evaluate the
sing                                               impact of the conditional use process
 te                                                as part of the general plan progress
                                                   report required under Government
                                                   Code §65400.)
                                           Appendix A - 10                                                                                  2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                  Housing Element

                                                            Program Objectives                                             Future Policies
             Responsible Agency   Funding Source                 and Timeline                    Accomplishments             and Actions
           Community Development HOME and revolving Offer 10 to 12 loans per year. Conduct  2004- 26 loans           Continue program.
   new     Department            loan fund          outreach to major employers (e.g.,      2005- 7 loans
 ebuyer                                             hospital, school district, and prisons) 2006- 11 loans
istance in                                          regarding the availability of the       2007- 9 loans
age loans                                           program.                                2008- 5 loans
  income                                            (Timeline: Ongoing)
ently
 been set
ncy-
   new
  rogram   RDA                   RDA Funds          Initiate new program and assist 10      2004-    5 loans         Continue program.
                                                    households annually. Conduct            2005-    3 loans
 gram is                                            outreach to major employers (e.g.,      2006-    1 loan
milies to                                           hospital, school district, and prisons) 2007-    3 loans
gned to                                             regarding the program.                  2008-    4 loans
  HOME-                                             (Timeline: Initiate program by 2004)
. The
 seholds
urchasing
 with
 prisons,
ments, to
am.
 Lots (in  Community Development RDA Funds          Initiate program and assist             2004- 1 loan             The City determined that the
           Department and RDA                       construction of five affordable single- 2005- 2 loans            grant funds should focus on
 rogram is                                          family homes.                           2006- 2 loans            the Housing Rehabilitation
-time                                               (Timeline: Initiate program by 2004)    2007-Program completed-  Program and the First-Time
  le                                                                                        Funding source no longer Homebuyer Program. The
 ns up to                                                                                   available                First Time Homebuyer
cent                                                                                                                 Program assists in the
 minimum                                                                                                             development of new housing
nd a two-                                                                                                            by offering a silent second
 nds are                                                                                                             loan. Therefore, the new
                                                                                                                     construction program has
ction of                                                                                                             been discontinued.
                                           Appendix A - 11                                                                              2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                            Housing Element
                                                                    Program Objectives                                                    Future Policies
              Responsible Agency        Funding Source                   and Timeline                    Accomplishments                    and Actions
me-         Community Development      RDA Funds and        Initiate program. Conduct outreach to   2004- 4 loans approved
ment)       Department and RDA         CDBG Funds           major employers (e.g., hospital,        2005- 4 homes in progress
 bilitation                                                 school district, and prisons) regarding 2006- 4 homes completed
 the                                                        the program.                            The program was completed-
e in                                                        (Timeline: Initiate program by 2004)    funds expended
  and
rovide a
mebuyers
d home.
  payment
 cation
ogram in
  d
            Community Development      HUD                  Assist the Housing Authority in         There are approximately 69      Continue program.
sing        Department, County Housing                      promoting the Section 8 program.        families that receive Section 8
 icipate in Authority                                       (Timeline: Ongoing)                     assistance.
  . The
  vides
 seholds
 r income
ce
 me and
deral
 n
            Community Development      Local, state, and    Seek applicable grants under            The City has continued to       These activities are included
hrough its  Department                 federal funds        Proposition 46 and federal sources,     pursue CDBG, HOME and Cal-      in other programs, and
stance,                                                     provide an inventory of housing sites   HOME grants. The City works     therefore this program will be
ion/infill,                                                 to interested developers, adopt a local with Self Help Enterprises to   continued but not listed
  ceives                                                    density bonus ordinance, and            provide decent affordable       separately.
 program                                                    continue to pursue housing production   housing.
eveloped                                                    and rehabilitation with nonprofits.
                                                            (Timeline: Ongoing)
City
atory
 ntinue
  n, the
                                                    Appendix A - 12                                                                                   2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                           Housing Element
                                                             Program Objectives                                                     Future Policies
              Responsible Agency   Funding Source                and Timeline                      Accomplishments                    and Actions
ional       Community Development General Fund       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to           The comprehensive zoning         SB 2 of 2007 strengthened
            Department                               permit emergency shelters in the C-S    ordinance revision approved in   the planning requirements
  e                                                  zone pursuant to a conditional use      2008 allows SROs in all          regarding emergency
 ypes                                                permit.                                 commercial zone districts        shelters and transitional
itional                                              (Timeline: Revise Ordinance by end of   except the CN district.          housing. The City will amend
ce                                                   2004)                                                                    the Municipal Code in
g in                                                                                                                          conformance with SB 2.
t directly
 s.
gency
al uses
 ) and is
s, and
  rmit will
with
 e
 .
  ing       Community Development General Fund       1. Amend the Zoning Code to             The City amended the Zoning      A Code amendment is
s mobile    Department                                  incorporate Section 17021 of the     Ordinance on March 24, 2005,     necessary to ensure
                                                        Health and Safety Code               Ordinance 581, to incorporate    compliance with the
using in                                             2. Develop an inventory of suitable     Section 17021 of the Health      employee housing provisions
  workers                                               sites for farm worker housing        and Safety Code. The Single      of Health & Safety Code
and                                                  3. Assist interested developers by      Family and Multi-Family zone     Sections 17021.5 and
d occupy                                                identifying sites and supporting     district permits Employee        17021.6
  its in                                                funding applications                 housing as defined by Section
                                                     4. Provide, to the extent feasible,     17021 of the Health and Safety
 ject. To                                               regulatory and financial incentives; Code. The Saltair rental project
  s, the                                                and                                  (40 units) was built in 2002
                                                     5. Ensure that zoning and               using tax credits and Joe Serna
                                                        development standards facilitate     Farmworker Housing Funds.
                                                        farm worker housing
                                                     (Timeline: Provide site inventory by
                                                     2004 and amend Zoning Code by
                                                     2005)
                                             Appendix A - 13                                                                                    2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                    Housing Element
                                                             Program Objectives                                                    Future Policies
            Responsible Agency     Funding Source                 and Timeline                      Accomplishments                  and Actions
          Community Development   General Fund       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to             The City amended the Zoning   A Code amendment is
tions to  Department and Corcoran                    permit residential care facilities        Ordinance on March 24, 2005,  necessary to ensure
ts to     City Council                               serving six or fewer persons and          Ordinance 581, to incorporate conformance with current
 e City                                              employee housing by right in              residential care facilities,  state law.
 land use                                            residential zones, conditionally permit   emergency shelters and
dures,                                               emergency shelters in the C-S zone,       employee housing, and the
 nts.                                                and revise the definition of a family.    revised the definition of
espect to                                            Continue to review City ordinances,       families.
nd uses,                                             policies, and practices and remove
de for                                               impediments when found.
elters,                                              (Timeline: 2004)
standard
ts.
 nities   Community Development   General Fund       Corcoran will coordinate with Kings       The City has developed a fair Continue program.
omplaints Department                                 County to select a local fair housing     housing brochure which is
 gal Aid                                             agency to provide landlord/tenant         available in English and
es within                                            mediation services and fair housing       Spanish.
nts to                                               investigations. The City will develop a
                                                     fair housing brochure in Spanish and
opriate                                              English or acquire one from a local fair
ts or                                                housing provider. To broadly
                                                     disseminate information, the City will
                                                     distribute the brochure at the City Hall,
                                                     library, post office, and appropriate
                                                     shopping areas.
                                                     (Timeline: Ongoing)
                                             Appendix A - 14                                                                                 2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                   Housing Element
m Evaluation
                                                                    Program Objectives                                              Future Policies
                Responsible Agency         Funding Source                and Timeline                   Accomplishments               and Actions
              Code Enforcement Staff      General Fund       Continue to work with the community The city currently employs 3   Continue program.
 s to                                                        concerning code violations. Refer   full time code enforcement
nsure that                                                   property owners to the Housing      officers. Since 2004, the city
  ds and                                                     Rehabilitation Program.             has received 2,521 new cases
City’s Code                                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)                 and resolved or closed 2,166
                                                                                                 cases.
 force state
   code
vide
e City’s
              Community Development       RDA Funds          Do-It-Yourself Paint Program - 10   The City has since budgeted to Continue program.
grams for low Department and Job Training                    units per year                      hire part-time employees to
 ough the Do- Program                                        New Looks Summer Paint Program –    paint through the Summer
 ts qualified                                                10 to 15 units per year             Paint Program. Since 2004,
while                                                        (Timeline: Ongoing)                 the City has assisted 95
homeowner.                                                                                       homeowners through the two
 assists very                                                                                    paint programs.
  d/or
ce in paint
heir homes
 gional
                                                  Appendix A - 15                                                                             2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                  Housing Element

                                                                         Program Objectives                                                     Future Policies
                   Responsible Agency          Funding Source                 and Timeline                     Accomplishments                   and Actions
                Community Development         CDBG Funds;        Assist 10 to 15 units per year           Loan limits have increased to   Continue program.
ation loans to  Department and Self Help      CalHome            (Timeline: Ongoing)                      $90,000 with the emphasis
 85, the        Enterprises                                                                               being the elimination of health
s loans for                                                                                               and safety hazards.
                                                                                                          The city pursues various
  pairs,                                                                                                  funding sources to fund this
                                                                                                          program annually including
 02, the                                                                                                  CDBG Entitlement, HOME and
nds which                                                                                                 CalHome funding.
ford has
  rd as “target                                                                                           Since 2004, the city has
ceived                                                                                                    assisted 46 homeowners
 ng                                                                                                       through the housing
project target                                                                                            rehabilitation program.
le Housing      Community Development         General Fund       Continue to monitor the status of        One low income apartment        The City will continue to
 sted           Department and interested                        publicly-assisted affordable units. The  complex became at-risk during   work with interested
to preserve     affordable housing providers/                    City will contact the property owners    the reporting period. The City  agencies and community
 roviding       developers                                       to determine their intentions, contact   cooperated in a Tax Credit      organizations to preserve
eturn for                                                        qualified nonprofits regarding potential application to save the at-risk at-risk units.
  ring proper                                                    opt-out projects, ensure that property   housing. The outcome of the
 sion.                                                           owners comply with noticing              application is not known. The
affordable                                                       requirements, support the acquisition    City was awarded a home
  income                                                         of at-risk properties by nonprofits, and grant during this period for an
and federal                                                      pursue grants to support the             additional affordable complex.
risk of                                                          preservation of affordable at-risk
                                                                 housing.
                                                                 (Timeline: Ongoing)
                Community Development         General Fund       Facilitate the construction of new       The City has maintained         The City will continue to
w housing to Department                                          housing through the provision of         “adequate” sites to develop the provide adequate sites to
 d population                                                    adequately zoned sites to meet           5,758 units identified in the   provide housing for low
esidents. To                                                     Hanford’s housing needs allocation of    RHNA.                           and moderate income.
 “adequate”                                                      4,414 units.
 f the regional                                                  (Timeline: Meet housing needs by
 414 units                                                       2008)
  and 1,766
 uate sites
  d density
  d other
                                                      Appendix A - 16                                                                                     2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                              Housing Element

                                                               Program Objectives                                                     Future Policies
                Responsible Agency   Funding Source                 and Timeline                   Accomplishments                      and Actions
              Community Development General Fund       Adopt density bonus ordinance to       City of Hanford adopted an        Continue to implement the
 ill adopt a  Department                               assist development of affordable       ordinance including Density       current Density Bonus
to                                                     housing.                               Bonus and other incentives on     ordinance.
e housing.                                             (Timeline: End of 2005)                May 6, 2008.
ates at least
ect for lower
 low-income
sidents such
 of
  households,
 eloper. The
  of 25
  tory
s of
and cost per
              Community Development General Fund       Continue to utilize the PUD process to The City has not yet had any      The City will continue to
 includes a   Department                               encourage unique design and develop    applications for density          utilize the PUD process.
s whereby a                                            housing that addresses site            bonuses. However, we have
 t that may                                            constraints. Amend General Plan and    processed PUD applications
onal zoning                                            Zoning Ordinance to allow for density  for smaller-lot subdivisions that
could be                                               bonuses for projects complying with    maximize the density allowed.
s or other                                             criteria in State law.
er localized                                           (Timeline: December 2004)
cates that
 to allow for
ects meeting
al Plan does
ed Unit
                                            Appendix A - 17                                                                                     2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                     Housing Element
                                                                      Program Objectives                                                  Future Policies
                  Responsible Agency        Funding Source                and Timeline                     Accomplishments                  and Actions
                Community Development      HOME and RDA set- Assist 10 households each year for      The RDA program has been        Continue to implement the
 ebuyers        Department                 aside funds         the RDA First-Time Homebuyer          revised to increase the loan    program.
  moderate-                                                    Program and assist 20 households      limit to $100,000, reduce the
 0 for down                                                    annually for the HOME Sweet Home      interest rate to 2% and extend
 of the loan is                                                Program                               the term to 45-years. Payment
and                                                            (Timeline: Ongoing)                   is deferred for the entire loan
 rs of the                                                                                           term.
 eet Home                                                                                            The HSH program has also
 wn payment                                                                                          increased its loan limit to
ears, the                                                                                            $100,000, as well as reduced
 are deferred                                                                                        the interest rate to 2%.
                                                                                                     Payment is deferred for the
                                                                                                     entire loan term.
                                                                                                     Since 2004, the city has
                                                                                                     assisted 58 first-time
                                                                                                     homebuyers in obtaining
                                                                                                     homeownership is Hanford.
                Community Development      HUD funds           Assist Kings County Housing Authority The City continued to support   Hanford will continue to
ing Authority,  Department, County Housing                     in promoting the Section 8 program.   the Section 8 program, which    participate in the Section 8
e Section 8     Authority                                      (Timeline: Ongoing)                   is administered by the Kings    rental assistance program.
8 rental                                                                                             County Housing Authority.
idies to very
erence
me and the
m. As of May
Section 8
ogram           Community Development      General fund and    Continue to implement program and     To date 7 homes have been       Continue to implement the
ate-income      Department                 RDA set-aside funds assist construction of 4 homes per    constructed and sold to         program.
  a newly                                                      year                                  qualifying first-time
nds are used                                                   (Timeline: Ongoing)                   homebuyers.
uction of
  oversees
 while
rimary
pany to
construction.
                                                    Appendix A - 18                                                                                   2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                         Housing Element
                                                                   Program Objectives                                                   Future Policies
                  Responsible Agency    Funding Source                  and Timeline                    Accomplishments                   and Actions
                Community Development  Local, state, and   Seek applicable grants under            In 2004, the City of Hanford    Continue to implement the
 rough          and affordable housing federal funds       Proposition 46 and federal sources,     became an entitlement CDBG      program.
 istance,       developers                                 provide an inventory of housing sites   jurisdiction and now receives
on/infill, and                                             to interested developers, adopt a local funding directly from HUD.
 rently                                                    density bonus ordinance, and            Above that the city applies for
uch of its                                                 continue to pursue housing production   HOME Investment Partnership
  being                                                    and rehabilitation with nonprofits.     Program and Cal Home
velopment                                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)                     Program funds annually to
dable                                                                                              fund it various housing
 ke several                                                                                        programs.
ing             Community Development  General Fund        1) Amend the Zoning Code to             The City currently allows by    The Zoning Code will be
 the City       Department                                     incorporate Section 17021 of the    right Farmworker Housing in     amended in conformance
  one. By right                                                Health and Safety Code              the AG zones district as an     with the Health & Safety
   family                                                  2) Develop an inventory of suitable     Administrative Approval. A      Code. The City will
  bile home                                                    sites for farm worker housing       CUP is required for more than   continue to identify sites
  yee                                                      3) Assist interested developers by      3 units per parcel. No          suitable for farmworker
  to 3 units                                                   identifying sites and supporting    applications for farmworker     housing.
t, however,                                                    funding applications                housing have been received.
ts per parcel                                              4) Provide, to the extent feasible,
                                                               regulatory incentives; and
                                                           5) Ensure that zoning and
                                                               development standards facilitate
                                                               farm worker housing
                                                           (Timeline: Provide site inventory by
                                                           2004 and amend Zoning Code by end
                                                           of 2005)
lters           Planning and Community General Fund        Continue to support efforts with        In 2007, City of Hanford        The Zoning Code is
e adequate      Development Department                     surrounding Kings County jurisdictions  approved a conditional use      consistent with SB 2
ding                                                       to meet the needs of people who are     permit to provide transitional  regarding emergency
 sing. The                                                 homeless or transitioning to            housing for women and           shelters; however, some
 ws                                                        independence.                           children.                       amendments may be
 ones and                                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)                     City of Hanford adopted an      necessary to ensure that
 in the O-R                                                                                        ordinance including             transitional and supportive
 recently                                                                                          Emergency and Transitional      housing are subject to the
ome for 6 or                                                                                       Housing/Shelters as permitted   same standards and
onal use                                                                                           uses on April 15, 2008.         procedures as other
h uses with                                                                                                                        residential uses of the
                                                                                                                                   same type in the same
                                                                                                                                   zone.
                                                Appendix A - 19                                                                                    2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                       Housing Element
                                                                Program Objectives                                                   Future Policies
                 Responsible Agency   Funding Source                 and Timeline                       Accomplishments               and Actions
               Community Development General Fund       Continue to review City ordinances,       City of Hanford adopted a     Continue to implement the
ions to        Department                               policies, and practices and remove        Reasonable Accommodations     reasonable
s to housing                                            identified impediments to housing for     Ordinance in September,       accommodation ordinance.
nducted an                                              persons with disabilities.                2004.
esses,                                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)
 uilding
diments were
cally update
ce to ensure
  adequately
ce, and
 sons.
nities         Planning Department   General Fund       Hanford will coordinate with Kings        The City continued to support The City of Hanford is in
mplaints to                                             County to select a local fair housing     fair housing.                 the process of completing
 San                                                    agency to provide landlord/tenant                                       the Impediments to Fair
d from                                                  mediation, fair housing investigations                                  Housing analysis.
Referrals to a                                          and testing The City will develop a fair
 access to                                              housing brochure in Spanish and
efit from                                               English or acquire one from a local fair
                                                        housing provider. To broadly
                                                        disseminate information, the City will
                                                        distribute the brochure at the City Hall,
                                                        library, post office, and appropriate
                                                        shopping areas.
                                                        (Timeline: Select a local agency by
                                                        2004.)
 ce            Planning Department   General Fund       Continue implementation                   Program completed.            This program was
y dwelling                                              (Timeline: Ongoing)                                                     completed and is no longer
 nges in                                                                                                                        necessary.
 will continue
 n of
                                             Appendix A - 20                                                                                   2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                   Housing Element
m Evaluation
                                                                Program Objectives                                                        Future Policies
               Responsible Agency          Funding Source           and Timeline                      Accomplishments                       and Actions
             Code Enforcement staff and   RDA and grant     Continue to work with the      From 1999 through January of 2006, the    Change Responsible
             Police Department            funds             community on code violations.  Police Department has carried out code    Agency to RDA; Code
y owners                                                    Refer property owners to City  enforcement activity through a            Enforcement coordinate
                                                            programs for rehabilitation    community service officer in coordination with Police, Business
  nsure                                                     assistance.                    with Planning and Fire Departments.       License, Planning,
orhoods                                                     (Timeline: Ongoing)            -Full time code enforcement officer hired Building, and Fire
  ode                                                                                      under the Redevelopment Agency            Departments.
 tate and                                                                                  February 2006 to fully dedicate time to   Continue prior Program
de                                                                                         this activity and coordinate with PD and Objectives in addition to
 vide                                                                                      Fire Departments regularly and Planning providing homeowner’s
 emoore’s                                                                                  when needed.                              information for the Paint-
                                                                                            -Code enforcement referred applicants Up/Fix-Up Program,
                                                                                           to City’s “Paint-Up Fix-Up” program.      Emergency Home Repair,
                                                                                                                                     Do-It-Yourself-Paint and
                                                                                                                                     Senior House Painting
                                                                                                                                     Programs.
             Community Development        RDA               Assist 14 households annually. -2003 assisted 25 ($111,207)              Change Responsible
gram that    Dept /Planning prior to 2006                   Increase grant amount to       -2004 assisted 19 ($86,314)               Agency to RDA.
inor                                                        $8,000.                        -2005 assisted 18 ($122,329)              Continue the program to
 ncome       RDA Housing Specialist                         (Timeline: Ongoing)            -2006 assisted 36 ($247,966)              serve 15 persons per year
nts of up    thereafter                                                                    -2007 assisted 11 ($82,509)               with $100,000 annual
s such as                                                                                  -2008 assisted 11 ($67,805)               funding.
  ps repair,
                                                                                           -Raised max. grant amount to $8,000 in
                                                                                           2005/06
                                                     Appendix A - 21                                                                                  2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                          Housing Element

                                                            Program Objectives                                                              Future Policies
              Responsible Agency    Funding Source               and Timeline                         Accomplishments                          and Actions
            Planning and Community  HOME funds         Initiate program and assist nine    Assisted eight (8) households during the    Change Responsible
  e City’s  Development, Self-Help                     households during the grant         grant cycle – six with rehabilitation loans Agency to RDA.
  owner-    Enterprises                                cycle.                              of $20,000 - $70,000 and two
                                                       (Timeline: 2003-2006)               reconstructions of $110,000-$116,000,       Additional grant funds will
ion. This                                                                                  utilizing a total of $508,127 of funds.     be applied for in upcoming
  arded                                                                                                                                fiscal years to resume
$50,000                                                                                    Raised maximum loan to $70,000 for          program.
                                                                                           rehabilitation and $125,000 for
ied                                                                                        reconstruction in 2005.
  years
  as the
ome.
ct          Planning and Community  RDA               Rehabilitate one home per year.      None                                        Change responsible
e           Development Department,                   (Timeline: Initiate program by                                                   agency to the RDA.
stitutions, RDA, and interested                       2004)
nnual       community groups                                                                                                           This program was
                                                                                                                                       researched and has been
 service                                                                                                                               abandoned due to the fact
   working                                                                                                                             that it would be an
non code-                                                                                                                              insurance issue for the
  ould                                                                                                                                 school. It has not been
   or low                                                                                                                              included in the new
home of                                                                                                                                Housing Element.
isition                                                                                                                                Armona Charter School
students                                                                                                                               may have some
 e skills.                                                                                                                             opportunities in the future.
  le        Planning and Community  General Fund       Continue to monitor the status      Accomplished – Ongoing.                     Change Responsible
            Development Department                     of publicly-assisted affordable                                                 Agency to RDA and
ested                                                  units. The City will contact the                                                continue annual evaluation.
 to                                                    property owners to determine
 r status,                                             their intentions, contact qualified
 stance in                                             nonprofits regarding potential
s, and                                                 opt-out projects, ensure that
  to                                                   property owners comply with
ximately                                               noticing requirements, support
 low, low,                                             the acquisition of at-risk
ted                                                    properties by nonprofits, and
                                                       pursue grants to support the
  re are at                                            preservation of affordable at-
                                                       risk housing.
                                                       (Timeline: Ongoing)
                                               Appendix A - 22                                                                                          2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                            Housing Element

                                                         Program Objectives                                                       Future Policies
              Responsible Agency    Funding Source           and Timeline                      Accomplishments                      and Actions
            Planning and Community General Fund      Provide adequate sites to meet  Appropriately Zoned property already in Update the entire Zoning
 f new      Development Department                   the housing needs allocation of place prior to 2003 Housing Element     Ordinance to be consistent
ployment                                             3,010 units.                    adopted.                                with the New General Plan
needs of                                             (Timeline: Meet housing needs                                           lead by the Planning
ment                                                 by 2008)                        New General Plan adopted May 2008       Department in conformity
date the                                                                             added additional land area              with the RHNA.
  ds
 very low,
ve
 ites are
 ensity
nd
            Planning and Community CDBG, RDA, and    Provide additional mixed use    No additional mixed-use projects have   Responsible Agency
            Development Department grants            projects in the downtown.       been done since the Lucerne and         should be changed to
                                                     (Timeline: Ongoing)             Antlers Hotel projects.                 RDA.
  ment
 e. An                                                                                                                       -Proposed 2030 General
as been                                                                                                                      Plan update changed
 e C-C                                                                                                                       downtown to a “Mixed-Use”
 oric                                                                                                                        land use designation to
ncome                                                                                                                        encourage policy.
uses.                                                                                                                        -City RDA may want to
 meeting                                                                                                                     take on future renovation
  ation,                                                                                                                     projects that renovate
                                                                                                                             under-utilized areas.
            Planning and Community General Fund      Continue to offer a density     Montgomery Crossings project approved   Ongoing.
  law,      Development Department                   bonus for qualified projects.   an 8% Density Bonus from 53 allowed
  992 that                                           (Timeline: Ongoing)             units to 57 units (17*3.13 acres= 53    Change Responsible
                                                                                     allowed units) for affordable housing   Agency to the Planning
der this                                                                             project which has been under            Department.
st 20                                                                                construction since 11/2008.
  for lower
  low-                                                                               Eastgate Village project approved a 25%
lifying                                                                              PUD density bonus from 118 units to
 east 20                                                                             147 (allowing 15 additional units) in
rate                                                                                 2005.
t
ves can
, along
on, or
 financial
                                              Appendix A - 23                                                                                 2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                  Housing Element

                                                            Program Objectives                                                         Future Policies
             Responsible Agency        Funding Source            and Timeline                     Accomplishments                        and Actions
           Planning and Community     General Fund      Continue to promote the         All new residential single family         Ongoing.
ned to     Development Department                       benefits and advantages to      subdivisions over 10 acres in size and
 ts and                                                 developing PUD at the public    multi-family over 5 acres in size are     Responsible Agency to
 ensities                                               counter.                        zoned with a PUD overlay requiring        change to the Planning
vide                                                    (Timeline: Ongoing)             small and larger house sizes.             Department.
 creative,
 nt.                                                                                    Have made PUD Livable Neighborhood
                                                                                        booklet and PUD short list available for
                                                                                        free at the counter for those considering
                                                                                        PUD
           Planning and Community     RDA and HOME      Assist 5-10 households          Ongoing. Program name changed to          Change Responsible
 ip        Development (prior to      Fund              annually. Increase loan amount  First-Time Homebuyer Program. Have        Agency to the RDA.
 te        2006).                                       to $30,000.                     assisted 7-14 households annually.
buyer                                                   (Timeline: Ongoing)             Grant amount increased to $30,000 per     Continue program and may
red as a   RDA Housing Specialist                                                       household 3/2006                          consider applying for other
  $20,000  thereafter.                                                                                                            funds to augment program.
 st                                                                                     -2003 assisted 4 ($79,300 total)
                                                                                        -2004 assisted 1 ($29,927 total)          New HOME grant funds
 00 down                                                                                                                          approved to spend 2009-
and                                                                                     -2005 assisted 1 ($20,000 total)
                                                                                        -2006 assisted 22 ($444,727)              2012. Program initiated to
                                                                                        -2007 assisted 10 ($298,021)              assist 10 households
                                                                                        -2008 assisted 19 ($ 559,696)             during the grant cycle.
                                                                                        In addition, a new program was recently
                                                                                        started offering very-low- and low-
                                                                                        income households up to $100,000
                                                                                        each. To date 2 households have been
                                                                                        assisted for a total of $154,000.
           Planning / Community       HUD               Assist the Housing Authority in Accomplished – Ongoing.                   Change Responsible
sing       Development / Kings County                   promoting the Section 8                                                   Agency to RDA and Kings
icipate in Housing Authority                            program.                                                                  County Housing Authority.
  . The                                                 (Timeline: Ongoing)
tends                                                                                                                             Ongoing program.
 seholds
 r income
ce
 and
of May
ive
                                                 Appendix A - 24                                                                                  2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                      Housing Element

                                                             Program Objectives                                                          Future Policies
              Responsible Agency    Funding Source                and Timeline                       Accomplishments                       and Actions
            Planning and RDA       Local, state, and    Seek applicable grants under      The RDA has committed $3,050,000 to       Change Responsible
consists                           federal funds        Proposition 46 and federal        two affordable multi-family projects that Agency to RDA.
ation                                                   sources, continue providing an    will provide 121 affordable units.
nd                                                      inventory of housing sites to     In 2009 the RDA has earmarked             Continue working with
 the City                                               interested developers, modify a   $1,650,000 to another affordable project  developers to complete
 ants, of                                               local density bonus ordinance,    of 80 additional units plus a managers    these projects.
  using. In                                             and pursue housing production     unit.
  elp to                                                and rehabilitation with
 by                                                     nonprofits.                       The City has joined with developers to
sistance.                                               (Timeline: Ongoing)               apply for 1 HOME and 1 CDBG grant but
ssist                                                                                     has been unsuccessful to augment the
 he City                                                                                  program dollars.
  tlers
            Planning and Community RDA, CDBG, state     Support the development of        None.                                     Change Responsible
dable       Development Department and federal funds    senior/disabled housing                                                     Agency to the RDA.
including                                               (Timeline: Ongoing)
                                                                                                                                    Should consider assisting
 luding                                                                                                                             an affordable senior
, housing                                                                                                                           housing project.
  nt of
he
 ior
   Senior
  lopment
  t Area.
  lters     Planning and Community General Fund         Amend Zoning Code to permit       Since the fully updated General Plan      Change Responsible
  e         Development Department                      emergency shelters in the RSC     was not adopted until May 2008, the       Agency to the Planning
 ypes                                                   zone and transitional shelters in Zoning Ordinance has not yet been         Department to complete
 itional                                                the RM zone pursuant to a         updated to make all the changes.          task by 2010.
  g                                                     conditional use permit. The
 must                                                   conditional use permit will
                                                        facilitate and encourage the
itional                                                 development of such facilities.
  ning                                                  (Timeline: Amend Zoning Code
 nsitional                                              by 2005)
ugh a
  fewer
 . To
ore will
   and
one.
                                                 Appendix A - 25                                                                                    2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                        Housing Element
                                                           Program Objectives                                                        Future Policies
             Responsible Agency     Funding Source             and Timeline                    Accomplishments                        and Actions
using      RDA and the Kings County                                                  The City continues to support the          Ongoing ownership and
 homes     Housing Authority                                                         Housing Authority in the provision of      maintenance by the RDA.
 County                                                                              transitional homes for foster youth with
d                                                                                    the ownership of an aged-out foster
                                                                                     youth home that the City completed
                                                                                     2002. The home houses six female
                                                                                     residents.
g          Planning and Community   General Fund      1) Amend the Zoning Code to    Since the fully updated General Plan       Change Responsible
 ngs       Development Department                          incorporate Section 17021 was not adopted until May 2008, the        Agency to the Planning
  workers.                                                 of the Health and Safety  Zoning Ordinance has not yet been          Department to complete
worker                                                     Code                      updated to make all the changes.           task by 2010.
 nd                                                   2) Develop an inventory of
 emoore                                                    suitable sites for farm   In addition, one of the multi-family
 dable                                                     worker housing            projects (Oleander Terrace) that the
d home                                                3) Assist interested           RDA has committed funds and has also
 primarily                                                 developers by identifying received a Joe Serna Farmworker Grant
                                                           sites and supporting      for $1 million. This project will have 39
                                                           funding applications
                                                                                     units available for farmworker
                                                      4) Provide, to the extent
                                                                                     households. The RDA has purchased
                                                           feasible, regulatory
                                                           incentives; and           the land for this project and will provide
                                                      5) Ensure that zoning and      a ground lease to the developer for $1
                                                           development standards     per year.
                                                           facilitate farm worker
                                                           housing
                                                      (Timeline: Provide land
                                                      inventory by 2004 and revise
                                                      Zoning Code by end of 2005
                                                      following update of the City’s
                                                      General Plan)
                                               Appendix A - 26                                                                                 2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                    Housing Element

                                                          Program Objectives                                                            Future Policies
              Responsible Agency   Funding Source             and Timeline                        Accomplishments                        and Actions
            Planning and Community General Fund      Amend the Zoning Ordinance to       Since the fully updated General Plan      Change Responsible
tions to    Development Department                   codify the allowance of             was not adopted until May 2008, the       Agency to the Planning
 ts to                                               community care facilities for six   Zoning Ordinance has not yet been         Department to complete
 e City                                              or fewer person and employee        updated to make all the changes.          task by 2010.
  land use                                           housing by right in all residential
 dures,                                              zones, conditionally permit
 nts.                                                emergency shelters and trans-
 rmitted                                             itional housing in appropriate
                                                     zones and revise the definition
                                                     of a family. Continue to review
                                                     City ordinances, policies, and
                                                     practices and remove impedi-
                                                     ments to housing for persons
                                                     with disabilities.
                                                     (Timeline: Amend Zoning Code
                                                     by 2005)
  nities    Planning and Community                   Select a local provider by 2004     The City has fair housing posters in both Change Responsible
 nty to     Development Department                                                       English and Spanish posted at City Hall. Agency to the RDA.
  vide                                                                                   Posters contain an 800 number to
                                                                                         contact with complaints. In addition,     Once set up, ongoing.
ll develop                                                                               residents who call with complaints are
 English                                                                                 assisted and/or referred to the Dept. of
 provider.                                                                               Fair Housing, Tulare/Kings Legal Aid,
ormation,                                                                                and Kings County Environmental Health.
 ity Hall,
pping
  ious Housing Element
 m          RDA Housing Specialist RDA               Assist 10 households annually.      Program began 7/06                        Program should be added
 epair                                               (Timeline: Ongoing)                 -2006 assisted 3 ($4,290)                 to Housing Element
sistance                                                                                 -2007 assisted 8 ($18,469)                projects list and continue
s and                                                                                    -2008 assisted 5 ($9,536)                 as currently setup as an
bled for                                                                                                                           ongoing program.
 he
0 to make
doors and
 systems,
                                              Appendix A - 27                                                                                       2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                        Housing Element
                                                      Program Objectives                                                 Future Policies
            Responsible Agency    Funding Source          and Timeline              Accomplishments                        and Actions
e          RDA Housing Specialist RDA             Assist 20-30 households Do-It-Yourself House Painting Program     These programs were
                                                  annually.               began 7/07                                added in the 2007-2008
e Painting                                        (Timeline: Ongoing)     -2007 assisted 1 at $564                  and 2008-2009 fiscal
  ls                                                                      -2008 assisted 1 at $598                  years.
 the City
ity                                                                       Senior House Painting Program             Program should be added
 r House                                                                  (began 9/08)                              to Housing Element
rs or                                                                     -2008 assisted 1 at $2,500                projects list and continue
es                                                                                                                  as currently setup as an
                                                                                                                    ongoing program.
 and
           RDA Housing Specialist RDA                                     Program started in 2008/09 fiscal year.   Program should continue
 inately                                                                                                            while land and construction
w and                                                                     2 units constructed at a cost of $280,508 costs are low, especially if
                                                                          for both. Selling prices were $220,000    they can help fill in
                                                                          and $170,000 -- assistance of $60,000     unfinished neighborhoods.
                                                                          and $90,000 was provided to make the
                                                                          homes affordable.
                                           Appendix A - 28                                                                           2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                         Housing Element
m Evaluation
                                                                       Program Objectives                                                Future Policies and
                 Responsible Agency          Funding Source                   & Timeline                     Accomplishments                    Actions
               Code Compliance Division     General Fund        Continue to address code violations in  The Code Enforcement           This program will be
 ns to         staff                                            the County unincorporated areas.        program was successfully       continued.
f                                                               Refer property owners to rehabilitation implemented throughout the
  ed. The                                                       assistance.                             period.
  ill continue                                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)
 ations
nance.
               Community Development        HOME, CDBG, and     Provide 5 to 10 loans per year.         The Kings County Community This program will be
rganizations   Agency                       CalHome             (Timeline: Ongoing)                     Development Agency             continued.
 sing                                                                                                   (KCCDA) has been completing
ousing                                                                                                  an average of 6 Housing
offers                                                                                                  Rehabilitation loans per year.
tywide and                                                                                              2004 – 7 units
 inge, Home                                                                                             2005 – 11 units
 ty provides                                                                                            2006 – 4 units
ally allowed                                                                                            2007 – 4 units
hazards and                                                                                             2008 – 5 units
an be
 til the
 r a 30 year
               Community Development        Local, state, and   Seek applicable grants under            The Kings County Community This program will be
 ance efforts  Agency and affordable        federal funds       Proposition 46 and other federal, state Development Agency             continued.
 n program,    housing providers/developers                     and local funding sources, provide an   (KCCDA) has been completing
and a                                                           inventory of housing sites to           an average of 10 Housing
esently                                                         interested developers, amend the        Rehabilitation loans per year.
 administer                                                     County density bonus ordinance, and     An average of 10 households
  rograms.                                                      pursue housing production and           were assisted through the
                                                                rehabilitation with nonprofits.         FTHB program (see Program 7
                                                                (Timeline: Ongoing)                     below) and 14 homes were
                                                                                                        approved under the Density
                                                                                                        Bonus Program (see Program
                                                                                                        6 below).
                                                      Appendix A - 29                                                                                 2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                           Housing Element

                                                                      Program Objectives                                                  Future Policies and
                 Responsible Agency     Funding Source                      & Timeline                     Accomplishments                        Actions
ble            Community Development   General, local, state, Continue to monitor at-risk units.      Kings County has been             This program will be
               Agency                  and federal funds      Seek applicable grants under federal,   successful in obtaining grants    continued.
nterested                                                     state, and local funding sources to     through the CDBG program,
  to                                                          assist targeted income qualified        HOME Partnership program,
 ir status,                                                   individuals to be able to purchase at   and CalHome Program which
istance in                                                    risk units. (Timeline: Ongoing)         have been used to assist
s, and                                                                                                individuals with the purchase
r to project                                                                                          of at risk units.
mately 190
 orporated
ncome
  unty, state,
               Community Development   N/A                    Update the Kings County Housing         Adequate sites were identified    Update the Housing
eas of land    Agency                                         Element to ensure that adequate sites in the Housing Element.             Element by 2009 to ensure
ction in                                                      are designated to provide for the new                                     that adequate sites
 projected                                                    housing construction needs, of                                            continue to be designated.
d to meet                                                     residents within the unincorporated
 ement                                                        areas of Kings County from 2009-
orporated                                                     2014 and update every 5 years.
  are of the
 ified as
   moderate,
015.
t zoning and
  er services,
               Community Development   N/A                    Update the density bonus ordinance      The Density Bonus Ordinance       Amend local Density
   density     Agency                                         to be consistent with state law         was not updated due to            Bonus Ordinance by the
s. However                                                    amendments.                             staffing limitations, although 14 end of 2010 and continue
 y bonus for                                                  (Timeline: Amend by the end of 2010)    homes were approved under         maintenance as State law
  Bonus will                                                                                          the density bonus program         amendments become
state law.                                                                                            since 2003.                       effective.
               Community Development   CalHome                Provide 10 to 15 loans per year.        On average of 9 first time        This program will be
ce to first-   Agency and the County’s                        Continue to seek additional federal,    homebuyers were assisted per      continued.
 First-Time    Consultant                                     state, and local funds to expand the    year.
 al and state                                                 assistance which is currently available 2004 – 17 units
 tion                                                         (Timeline: Ongoing)                     2005 – 1 unit
qualified                                                                                             2006 – 9 units
   allowed                                                                                            2007 – 10 units
chase. This                                                                                           2008 – 7 units
 ted areas of
                                                 Appendix A - 30                                                                                        2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                              Housing Element

                                                                      Program Objectives                                             Future Policies and
                Responsible Agency        Funding Source                    & Timeline                    Accomplishments                   Actions
              Kings County Housing       HUD                  Support the Housing Authority’s        The Kings County Housing      This program will be
 sing         Authority                                       Section 8 program and project based    Authority has continued to    continued.
 will                                                         developments.                          provide Section 8 program and
 the Section                                                  (Timeline: Ongoing)                    project based developmental
am. The                                                                                              assistance through funds
ce program                                                                                           provided by HUD.
  ome
ercent of
is the
hly income
. As of April
 ted Kings
am            Kings County Housing       Funded by donations  Continue to support the Housing        Two homes have been           This program will be
  Housing     Authority and Kings County from individuals and Authority in the provision of          established to support aged   continued.
  homes for   Management Development     nominal service fee  transitional homes for foster youth.   out foster youth.
priority for  Corporation                from patrons         (Timeline: Ongoing)
County
  d
g
goals and
al housing
elters        Community Development      TBD:                 Amend the Zoning Code to permit        The Zoning Code has not yet   This issue will be
de Section    Agency and Kings Tulare    Emergency FESG       emergency and transitional shelters in been amended due to staffing  addressed in the 2009
675.2, a      Continuum of Care          administered by      the R-1, R-M, and various C zone       limitations.                  Housing Plan.
  ate sites                              HCD                  districts as required by State law.
gency and                                Transitional FHP     Continue to support the Kings/Tulare
e zoning                                 funds through HUD    Continuum of Care Plan to develop
   County                                FEHT                 transitional and emergency housing
  ermit                                  HUD, Men’s shelter   programs for homeless individuals
using. The                               beds TBD, general    and families.
rmit                                     area in Hanford      (Timeline: to be included in 269.66)
 such
  quire the
 ousing. In
are Core
hat set forth
   and
on
  s
                                                   Appendix A - 31                                                                                  2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                       Housing Element

                                                                     Program Objectives                                               Future Policies and
                Responsible Agency          Funding Source                 & Timeline                      Accomplishments                    Actions
 sing        Community Development         General fund       Continue to allow for the development   The Kings County Zoning       Continue to monitor State
must allow   Agency                                           of manufactured housing/mobile          Ordinance allows the          law and update local
                                                              homes within residential zone districts development of manufactured   policies as needed.
  se in all                                                   as described in the Kings County        housing/mobile homes within
omes are                                                      Zoning Ordinance.                       residential zone districts.
 wed as
 s.
 es area
cts when
 d require a
mporary
Housing      Community Development         General Fund       Continue to support farm worker         This program has not yet been Carry forward into the
mobile       Agency, Kings County                             housing as follows:                     implemented due to staffing   2009 Housing Element
e AG-20,     Housing Authority, and                           1) Amend the Zoning Code to             limitations.
 s the units interested affordable housing                        incorporate Section 17021 of the
uant to a    providers/developers                                 Health and Safety Code
ng in                                                         2) Develop an inventory of suitable
 g require                                                        sites for farm worker housing
rm labor                                                      3) Assist interested developers by
 ounty, the                                                       identifying sites and supporting
  used as                                                         funding applications
                                                              4) Provide, to the extent feasible,
                                                                  regulatory incentives; and
                                                              5) Ensure that zoning and
                                                                  development standards facilitate
                                                                  farm worker housing
                                                              (Timeline: Provide a site inventory by
                                                              2004 and amend the Zoning Code by
                                                              2004)
                                                    Appendix A - 32                                                                                 2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                         Housing Element
                                                             Program Objectives                                               Future Policies and
              Responsible Agency   Funding Source                  & Timeline                    Accomplishments                     Actions
            Community Development General fund       Amend Zoning Code to permit            This program has not yet been   Carry forward into the
 tions to   Agency                                   residential care facilities for six or implemented due to staffing     2009 Housing Element
 ts to                                               fewer persons by right in residential  limitations.
he County                                            zones, conditionally permit emergency
  land use                                           shelters in the RM zone and
 dures, and                                          conditionally permit transitional
 Several                                             housing in the R-1 zones. Continue to
                                                     review County ordinances, policies,
nce of                                               and practices and remove identified
 g,                                                  impediments to housing for persons
fewer                                                with disabilities
nufactured                                           (Timeline: Revise by end of 2010)
 ral laws,
 actions
unities     Community Development General fund       The County will refer the public to a  The Community Development       This program will be
 ng         Agency                                   fair housing provider                  Agency continues to             continued.
ousing                                                                                      successfully refer fair housing
                                                                                            complaints to the Human
                                                                                            Rights/Fair Housing
                                                                                            Commission at the Fresno
                                                                                            Office.
                                           Appendix A - 33                                                                                  2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                                Housing Element
 Housing Element Goals and Policies
 es of Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore
                                                                                          Appropriateness
 Conservation
ntain the quality of housing and residential neighborhoods.                               Appropriate - continue
 .1. Promote and improve the quality of residential properties by ensuring compliance     Appropriate - continue
using and property maintenance standards.
 .2. Assist in the repair, rehabilitation, and improvement of residential structures;     Appropriate - continue
h structures which are dilapidated and beyond repair.
 .3. Invest in infrastructure and public facilities to ensure that adequate water, sewer, Appropriate - continue
 arks, and other needed services are in place to serve future and present residential
ments.
 .4. Preserve assisted rental housing for long-term occupancy by low- and moderate-       Appropriate - continue
 households.
ourage the provision of a range of housing types and prices to meet the diverse           Appropriate - continue
  .
 .1. Provide adequate sites for housing through appropriate land use, zoning and          Appropriate – continue but update for the
ment standards to accommodate the regional housing needs goals for 2003-2008.             2009-2014 planning period
 .2. Work collaboratively with nonprofit and for-profit developers to seek state and      Appropriate - continue
  rants to support the production of affordable housing.
 .3. Ensure the adequate provision of water, sewer, roads, public facilities, and other   Appropriate - continue
 cture necessary to serve new housing.
 .4. Support the construction of high quality single- and multi-family housing which is   Appropriate - continue
 igned and energy efficient.
te, to the extent feasible and appropriate, potential governmental constraints to         Appropriate - continue
 aintenance, improvement and affordability of housing.
 .1. Offer regulatory and/or financial incentives, as available and appropriate, to       Appropriate - continue
 ge the construction of quality housing.
                                                 Appendix A - 34                                                              2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                   Housing Element

                                                                                         Appropriateness
 .2. Periodically review local ordinances and building regulations to ensure that they   Appropriate - continue
  nduly impede housing investment.
 .3. Utilize planned developments and other creative mechanisms to facilitate the        Appropriate - continue
 tion of more creative, well-designed, housing projects.
 .4. Ensure that developments are processed efficiently to minimize holding costs and    Appropriate - continue
with the Permit Streamlining Act.
 ssistance to very low-, low-, and moderate income households and those with             Appropriate - continue
eeds.
 .1. Support the provision of rental assistance to provide affordable housing options    Appropriate - continue
 low- and low-income households.
 .2. Participate in efforts to expand homeownership opportunities to lower- and          Appropriate - continue
te-income households through downpayment assistance and other homeownership
 s.
 .3. Support the provision of housing suitable for special needs groups, including       Appropriate - continue
 people with disabilities, homeless people, military personnel, large household, single-
amilies, and farm workers.
 .4. Develop and maintain collaborative efforts among nonprofits, for-profit             Appropriate - continue
ers, and public agencies to encourage the development, maintenance, and
 ment of housing.
 ortunities
 sing opportunities for persons, regardless of status.                                   Appropriate - continue
 .1. Support enforcement of fair housing laws prohibiting arbitrary discrimination in    Appropriate - continue
elopment, financing, rental, or sale of housing.
 .2. Periodically review City ordinances and development regulations and modify, as      Appropriate - continue
ry, to accommodate housing for disabled persons.
                                              Appendix A - 35                                                        2009-2014
moore                                                                                                           Housing Element
 Summary
                               2003 - 2006                       2007 - 2008
  General Plan/ Density
     Zoning     (du/ac) EL VL     Low      Mod Upper Total EL VL    Low      Mod Upper   Total
      R-1
                                           158        158                     14          14
      R-3        13.0      81*                         81                                  0
      R-3        14.6      81*                         81                                  0
      R-3        14.3      81*                         81                                  0
                           243             158        401                     14          14
                               Appendix A - 36                                           2009-2014
moore                                                                               Housing Element
 Summary
                              2003 - 2006                         2007 - 2008
 General Plan/ Density
   Zoning      (du/ac) EL VL     Low       Mod Upper Total EL VL     Low      Mod Upper   Total
   LDR/R-1        5                        223   3    226                      75   1       76
   LDR/R-1                                  16         16                      24           24
  MDR/RM-2       21               14                   14
 HDR/RM-2.5      17    8* 48*   24*+1                  81
  HDR/RM-2       21                                        7* 35*   13*+1                   56
   HDR/R-3       14                                        7* 17*   44*+1                   69
   LDR/R-1        5               10                   10              8                    8
                       8  48      47       241   3    347  14 52      67       99   1      233
                           Appendix A - 37                                              2009-2014
moore                                                                              Housing Element
 Summary
             General                                   2003 - 2006                                         2007 - 2008
               Plan/      Density
              Zoning       (du/ac)     EL          VL      Low        Mod       Upper      Total     EL VL    Low      Mod Upper     Total
              R-1-12         1-3                                                                                             1          1
               R-1-6         2-9                                                                                       154            154
               R-1-8         2-9                                                                                            19         19
              R-1-20         0-3                                                                                             2          2
                                                                     1,103       1,102     2,205                       154  22        176
               RM-3         7-15                              2                               2
               RM-3         7-15                              2                               2
Village)       RM-3         7-15                             54                              54
               RM-3         7-15                             39                              39
               RM-3         7-15                              2                               2
               RM-3         7-15                              4                               4
               RM-3         7-15                              4                               4
 )             RM-3         7-15                  19*       21*                              40
               RM-3         7-15                                                                                2                       2
               RM-3         7-15                                                                                3                       3
                DC          4-22                                                                                4                       4
               RM-3         7-15                                                                                2                       2
               RM-3         7-15                                                                               49*                     49
r**            RM-2         10-22                                                                              39                      39
               RM-3         7-15                                                                               81                      81
                                                            128                             147               180                     180
                                                                                                                1                       1
                                                   19       128      1,103       1,102     2,352              181      154  22        357
  jects (affordability determined by deed restrictions or market analysis (see discussion on p. B-2)
                                                       Appendix A - 38                                                           2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                       Housing Element
 Summary
      Gen. Plan/ Density        2003 - 20081                       2007 - 20082
        Zoning   (du/ac) EL  VL     Low     Mod  Upper Total EL VL    Low     Mod  Upper   Total
        LD-SFR/
                   5.48                      175  175   350                     20  19       39
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   4.94                      53   54    107                     10   9       19
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   4.72                      12   12    24
         R-1-7
    LD-SFR/LMD/
                   5.98                      11   12    23
      R-1-7/RM-3
        LD-SFR/
                   5.65                      11   11    22
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   3.52                       5    4     9
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   5.44                       3    2     5
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   6.11                      38   38    76                      14  13       27
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   5.02                       1    1     2
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   4.98                            1     1
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   5.69                      32   31    63                           1        1
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   4.91                      23   22    45                       9   9       18
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   4.94                      48   48    96                      64  63      127
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   4.96                      23   23    46                      26  26       52
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                   6.19                       1    1     2                       1   1        2
         R-1-7
        LD-SFR/
                  Varies             3        4   10    17      1      1*       2*   4        8
         R-1-7
                            Appendix A - 39                                               2009-2014
moore                                                                                Housing Element
       Gen. Plan/         Density                      2003 - 20081                                          2007 - 20082
         Zoning           (du/ac)            EL     VL      Low      Mod      Upper    Total    EL       VL     Low     Mod   Upper   Total
       Mixed Use/
                            50.6                    3*       7*                         10
           CC
        MD-MFR/
                            10.3                            120                         120
          RM-3
        MD-MFR/
                             3.6                             48                         48                       21                     21
          RM-3
        MD-MFR/
                            16.8                                                                                 73                     73
         RM-2.5
        MD-MFR/
                            18.5                                                                         20*     37*                    57
          RM-3
                                                              2                          2                        3                      3
                                                    3       180       440      445     1,065             21      135      146  145     447
Used Building Permits from 1/1/03-12/31/07 to count units that were probably completed between 7/1/03-6/30/08)
0, 2008 (These units are credited in the new RHNA period) (Used Permits for 7/1/06-12/31/08)
le-family units assumed 50% moderate and 50% above-moderate based on recent real estate data (see Chapter 2)
ers, only one of the moderate units is restricted)
                                                   Appendix A - 40                                                                   2009-2014
moore                                                                                                                           Housing Element
 Summary
      Gen. Plan/ Density        2003 - 2006                       2007 - 2008
       Zoning    (du/ac) EL  VL     Low     Mod Upper Total EL VL    Low     Mod Upper   Total
        Varies    Varies                    281        281                    72           72
        Varies    Varies             84                 84            29                   29
        RM3        20.8               4                  4
                                     88     281        369            29      72          101
                            Appendix A - 41                                             2009-2014
moore                                                                              Housing Element
Appendix A
Table A-4a
Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives
City of Avenal
2003-2008*
                                                                 Quantified
                       Program Category                          Objective  Progress
                       New Construction
                         Very Low                                    139      240
                         Low                                         116       18
                         Moderate                                     93        5
                         Above Moderate                              232      149
                       Rehabilitation
                         Very Low                                     10       30
                         Low                                          10        9
                         Moderate                                      0
                         Above Moderate                                0
                       Conservation
                         Very Low                                    151      151
                         Low                                           0
                         Moderate                                      0
                         Above Moderate                                0
                       *July 1, 2003 – June 30, 2008
Kings County and Cities of                           Appendix A - 42                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                Housing Element

Appendix A
Table A-4b
Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives
City of Corcoran
2003-2008*
                                                               Quantified
                       Program Category                         Objective Progress
                       New Construction
                         Very Low                                  205      122
                         Low                                       171      114
                         Moderate                                  137      340
                         Above Moderate                            341        4
                       Rehabilitation
                         Very Low                                   30       54
                         Low                                        45       42
                         Moderate                                    0
                         Above Moderate                              0
                       Conservation
                         Very Low                                  205
                         Low                                        44
                         Moderate                                    0
                         Above Moderate                              0
                       *July 1, 2003 – June 30, 2008
Kings County and Cities of                           Appendix A - 43                    2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                              Housing Element

Appendix A
Table A-4c
Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives
City of Hanford
2003-2008*
                                                                 Quantified
                       Program Category                          Objective  Progress
                       New Construction
                         Very Low                                  1,059       19
                         Low                                         883      140
                         Moderate                                    706     1,257
                         Above Moderate                            1,766     1,124
                       Rehabilitation
                         Very Low                                    100       18
                         Low                                         100       21
                         Moderate                                     0
                         Above Moderate                               0
                       Conservation
                         Very Low                                    515       39
                         Low                                         101      200
                         Moderate                                    34       238
                         Above Moderate                               0
                       *July 1, 2003 – June 30, 2008
Kings County and Cities of                           Appendix A - 44                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                Housing Element

Appendix A
Table A-4d
Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives
City of Lemoore
2003-2008*
                                                                    Quantified
                       Program Category                             Objective             Progress
                       New Construction
                         Very Low                                       723                   3
                         Low                                            602                 180
                         Moderate                                       481                 440
                         Above Moderate                               1,204                 445
                       Rehabilitation**
                         Very Low                                        40                  53
                         Low                                             40                  45
                         Moderate                                         0                  27
                         Above Moderate                                   0                   -
                       Conservation
                         Very Low                                       275                 275
                         Low                                            127                   74***
                         Moderate                                        80                  80
                         Above Moderate                                   0
                       Notes:
                       *July 1, 2003 – June 30, 2008
                          (Used Building Permits from 1/1/03-12/31/07 to count units that were
                          probably completed between 7/1/03-6/30/08)
                       **Includes both minor and substantial rehab
                       ***Reflects expiration of 53 covenants at Country Club Apts.
Kings County and Cities of                             Appendix A - 45                                   2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                               Housing Element

Appendix A
Table A-4e
Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives
Kings County Unincorporated Area
2003-2008*
                                                                  Quantified
                        Program Category                          Objective  Progress
                        New Construction
                          Very Low                                    205       --
                          Low                                         171      117
                          Moderate                                    137      353
                          Above Moderate                              342       --
                        Rehabilitation
                          Very Low                                     25
                          Low                                          25       50
                          Moderate                                      0
                          Above Moderate                                0       --
                        Conservation
                          Very Low                                    178      190
                          Low                                           0       --
                          Moderate                                      0       --
                          Above Moderate                                0       --
                        *July 1, 2003 – June 30, 2008
Kings County and Cities of                            Appendix A - 46                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                 Housing Element

Appendix B
Appendix B Land Inventory
1.       Methodology and Assumptions
State law requires each jurisdiction to include in the Housing Element an inventory of vacant parcels
having the potential for residential development, or “underutilized” parcels with potential for
additional development. The purpose of this inventory is to evaluate whether there is sufficient
capacity, based on the General Plan, zoning, development standards, and infrastructure, to
accommodate the jurisdiction’s fair share of regional growth needs as identified in the Regional
Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA).
The detailed methodology and assumptions for the residential land inventory presented in Chapter 3
are provided below and summarized in Tables B-1a through B-1e.
         Affordability Assumptions
In general, there are three alternative ways for determining the affordability level of new housing
units.
       1.    Affordability Covenants. The most definitive method is through required affordability
             covenants (i.e., requirements imposed upon or agreed to by the project sponsor) that
             establish income limits for purchasers or tenants. Such covenants are legally enforceable and
             binding upon the property owner for a specified time period.
       2.    Market Prices or Rents. When covenants are not in place, affordability levels for newly built
             units are based on actual prices or rents. Table 2-17 (p. 2-14) describes 2009 affordability
             levels along with the monthly rental costs or estimated sales prices that correspond with each
             level.
             a.      Home Prices. Like most areas of the San Joaquin Valley, new home prices are
                     generally affordable to moderate-income households. A survey of recent new home
                     sales found that nearly all projects were priced within the moderate-income category
                     of $180,000 to $275,000. Some new single-family homes on standard-sized lots sold
                     within the low-income price range. Only in Lemoore were some new home
                     subdivisions priced in the above-moderate range.
                     For purposes of the land inventory analysis, large lots of one-half acre or more were
                     allocated to the above-moderate category in all jurisdictions.
                     In Avenal, all standard-sized lots were allocated to the moderate-income category.
                     As noted in Chapter 2, all single-family homes sales and listings in Avenal, both new
                     and resale, were priced within the low- or moderate-income categories during
                     2008-09.
                     In Corcoran, all standard-sized infill lots were allocated to the moderate-income
                     category while large parcels suitable for standard-lot subdivisions were allocated
Kings County and Cities of                        Appendix B - 1                                   2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                         Housing Element

Appendix B
                       50% moderate and 50% above-moderate. As noted in Chapter 2, all single-family
                       homes sales and listings in Corcoran, both new and resale, were priced within the
                       low- or moderate-income categories during 2008-09. Half of the sites zoned for
                       single-family subdivisions were allocated upward to the above-moderate category
                       in order to accommodate the City’s RHNA allocation.
                       In Hanford, Very Low Density single-family sites were allocated to the above-
                       moderate category, while Low Density single-family sites were evenly distributed
                       between the moderate and above-moderate categories. As shown in Chapter 2,
                       70% of Hanford’s newer home listings were priced in the moderate category while
                       30% were above-moderate, and 82% of recent sales were in the moderate category
                       while 18% were above-moderate. All new single-family subdivisions were selling in
                       the moderate category at the time of the survey. Sites in the Medium designation
                       allow small-lot subdivisions, PUDs and attached product types at up to 15
                       units/acre and were allocated to the low-income category.
                       In Lemoore, Agricultural-Rural and Very Low Density Residential sites were
                       allocated to the above-moderate category. Low Density single-family sites were
                       allocated 50% moderate and 50% above-moderate. As shown in Chapter 2, 88% of
                       recent home sales were priced in the moderate category with 12% above-
                       moderate. Current single-family home listings were evenly split between the
                       moderate and above-moderate categories, and all active new home subdivisions
                       were priced in the moderate category. Sites in the Low-Medium designation allow
                       small-lot subdivisions and attached product types and were allocated to the
                       moderate category.
                       In unincorporated Kings County, the Very Low Density and Low Density
                       Residential sites allow large lots (1/2 acre or more) and were allocated to the above-
                       moderate category. The Low Medium sites allow standard size lots and were
                       allocated to the moderate category. As shown in Chapter 2, all recent home sales
                       and listings were priced in the low- and moderate-income categories.
                       Mobile homes are an affordable option for lower-income households. As noted in
                       Chapter 2, new mobile homes are available at prices ranging from $24,000 to
                       $70,000. These prices are within the lower-income affordability range, including
                       the price of a single-family lot.
               b.      Apartment Rents. As with single-family homes, apartment rents are very affordable in
                       Kings County. All newer market-rate apartments surveyed, including larger projects as
                       well as small duplex/triplex projects1, had rents within the low-income category (i.e.,
                       less than $1,100 per month), and many apartments were renting at the very-low-
                       income affordability level (i.e., less than $698 per month). Many projects built by non-
                       profit organizations using assistance such as Low-Income Housing Tax Credits include
                       apartments affordable to extremely-low- and very-low-income households. Therefore,
1
  See for example Table 2-21, which includes four small recently-built projects in Hanford, all of which are renting at rates
affordable to low- or very-low-income households. This market survey of new multi-family projects demonstrates that all
multi-family sites in Kings County, including small sites, are suitable for lower-income housing.
Kings County and Cities of                               Appendix B - 2                                          2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                                      Housing Element

Appendix B
                     vacant sites in all jurisdictions designated for multi-family or mixed-use development
                     were allocated to the lower-income category.
       3.    Density. For potential new units in a jurisdiction’s land inventory, state law establishes that
             affordability assumptions may be based on density. The “default” density for jurisdictions in
             Kings County is 20 units per acre. This means that if the General Plan and zoning allow
             development at 20 units per acre or greater, these sites are considered to be suitable for
             lower-income housing. State law also allows jurisdictions to establish an alternative to the
             default density if local market conditions and experience support a different density
             assumption for affordability.
             As discussed in Chapter 4, all of the jurisdictions in Kings County allow multi-family
             development at densities greater than 20 units/acre, excluding density bonus, in at least
             one multi-family zone. In addition to multi-family zones, Lemoore allows mixed-use
             development at densities up to 20 units/acre. However, most new multi-family develop-
             ments in Kings County – including affordable projects by non-profit developers – are built
             at densities significantly lower than the “default” density. Conversations with non-profits
             confirmed that densities in the range of 12-15 units/acre are typical and sufficient to
             make such projects feasible. This density range allows two-story projects with large units
             (3-4 bedrooms) as well as spacious community facilities such as play areas for children.
             Developers indicated that they rarely request a density bonus, but may take advantage of
             other concessions such as modifications to development standards such as setbacks.
Realistic Capacity
In order to determine the realistic capacity of vacant sites, the potential yield for each parcel was
estimated based on previous experience of recent projects rather than the maximum allowable
density for the zone. In addition, site constraints such as flood hazard zones and airport approach
and departure patterns were considered and potential yield was reduced where these constraints
would be expected to prevent full utilization of the parcel. These constraints are noted in Tables B-1a
through B-1e.
2.       Units Built or Approved 2007-2009
Tables A-3a through A-3e in Appendix A summarize new residential units built or approved during
2007 - 2009. Under State law, new housing units completed after January 1, 2007 are credited in
the new planning period. These units have been assigned to income categories based on affordability
covenants or market prices/rents.
3.       Vacant or Underutilized Land
Tables B-1a through B-1e contain a parcel-level inventory of sites with potential for residential
development in each jurisdiction during the current planning period. As noted above, the capacity of
each site has been estimated based on realistic assumptions, recent development trends and any
existing site constraints that could prevent the site from being developed to its full potential. As
discussed in Chapter 3, all jurisdictions have sufficient capacity to accommodate the housing needs
identified in the Regional Housing Needs Plan.
Kings County and Cities of                          Appendix B - 3                                  2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                          Housing Element

Appendix B
Corcoran
One significant underutilized site in Corcoran (see photos below) near the northwest corner of
Orange and Otis represents a redevelopment opportunity. The possible redevelopment project
includes four lots, two of which are in common ownership totaling 1.93 acres. One lot, in separate
ownership, is 0.42 acre and is currently vacant; while a fourth lot is 1.5 acres. The developed lots all
contain substandard housing. It is believed that the property was once a farm worker housing camp
that has been converted to rental units. APN 034-050-025 (0.20 acre) contains a 2-bedroom/1-bath
unit of 644 square feet, built in 1920. APN 034-050-026 (1.73 acres) contain seven units, which
includes the main house with 3 bedrooms, 2 bathrooms and approximately 1200 square feet and six
additional units. Of the six units, three are vacant and boarded up and the other three single-room
units are occupied. APN 034-050-018 (1.50 acres) also contains six units all built around 1949. Two
of the units are 2-bedroom/2-bath, three units are 2-bedroom/1-bath, and one unit is a 1-
bedroom/1-bath. All of these units are occupied and all appear to be substandard except one unit
which was recently remodeled. The property is zoned RM-2 (low density multi-family) and is
bordered by light industrial zone to the north, neighborhood commercial to the east and single-
family residential to the south and west. The City will encourage the redevelopment of this site
through the actions described in Program 2.7 of the Housing Plan (Chapter 5).
Kings County and Cities of                    Appendix B - 4                                  2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                    Housing Element
 Land Inventory - City of Avenal
                                               Max.      Realistic                             Potential Units
                General Plan/                Density     Density
                   Zoning     Acreage     (Units/acre) (Units/acre)     Constraints?        Lower  Mod     Upper      Total
7, 010 & 011 Low Density/R-1     6.88            10        4-5                                         20                  20
             Low Density/R-1    19.01            10        4-5                                         82                  82
 0-029       Low Density/R-1     7.85            10        4-5                                         30                  30
 ired)       Low Density/R-1      7.5            10        4-5                                         30                  30
             Low Density/R-1      1.0            10        4-5                                           4                  4
             Low Density/R-1       1             10        4-5                                           2                  2
             Low Density/R-1    12.87            10        4-5                                         58                  58
             Low Density/R-1    11.13            10        4-5                                         50                  50
             Low Density/R-1    37.84            10        4-5      This lot known to flood           150                 150
             Low Density/R-1     5.38            10        4-5                                         24                  24
             Low Density/R-1     5.38            10        4-5                                         24                  24
             Low Density/R-1    25.49            10        4-5      This lot known to flood            95                  95
             Low Density/R-1      1.0            10        4-5                                           3                  3
             Low Density/R-1    35.97            10        4-5                                        162                 162
             Low Density/R-1    19.55            10        4-5                                         88                  88
 ired)       Low Density/R-1     5.25            10        4-5                                         24                  24
 ired)       Low Density/R-1     6.09            10        4-5                                         30                  30
             Low Density/R-1    20.46            10        4-5                                         92                  92
             Low Density/R-1    20.46            10        4-5                                         92                  92
             Low Density/R-1    20.46            10        4-5                                         92                  92
             Low Density/R-1    20.46            10        4-5                                         92                  92
             Low Density/R-1      20             10        4-5                                         90                  90
             Low Density/R-1   201.57            10        4-5                                        907                 907
             Low Density/R-1    32.11            10        4-5                                        144                 144
             Low Density/R-1     3.18            10        4-5                                         14                  14
             Low Density/R-1     5.30            10        4-5                                         24                  24
 Density)                      518.45                                                               2,423        0      2,423
             High Density/R-3   18.65            29         14                                261                         280
             High Density/R-3    7.18            29         14                                101                         170
             High Density/R-3    9.08            29         14                                127                         136
             High Density/R-3    5.01            29         14                                 70                          75
             High Density/R-3    4.56            29         14                                 64                          68
             High Density/R-3    2.26            29         14                                 32                          34
 sity):                         46.74                                                         655        0       0        763
                                                                                              655   2,423        0      3,078
                                  Appendix B - 5                                                                    2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                         Housing Element
d Inventory Map
                Appendix B - 6      2009-2014
emoore                         Housing Element
Land Inventory - City of Corcoran
          General Plan/   Acreage or Vacant         Max.    Realistic                  Potential Units
            Zoning          Infill Lot (VI)        Density  Density   Constraints? Lower   Mod      Upper      Total
            LD/R-1-6       Vacant Infill Lot (VI)  1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
            LD/R-1-6                VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
                                    Appendix B - 7                                                         2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                Housing Element
       General Plan/ Acreage or Vacant         Max.    Realistic                  Potential Units
         Zoning        Infill Lot (VI)        Density  Density   Constraints? Lower   Mod      Upper      Total
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                        1                   1
                               Appendix B - 8                                                         2009-2014
emoore                                                                                           Housing Element
       General Plan/ Acreage or Vacant          Max.    Realistic                     Potential Units
         Zoning        Infill Lot (VI)         Density  Density     Constraints?  Lower   Mod      Upper      Total
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6             1 lot            1 du/lot  1 du/lot Access easement           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6             1 lot            1 du/lot  1 du/lot Access easement           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              Vl              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI              1 du/lot  1 du/lot                           1                   1
                                Appendix B - 9                                                            2009-2014
emoore                                                                                               Housing Element
       General Plan/ Acreage or Vacant         Max.    Realistic                         Potential Units
         Zoning        Infill Lot (VI)        Density  Density      Constraints?     Lower   Mod      Upper      Total
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot                               1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport                       1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport                       1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport                       1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport                       1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport                       1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport                       1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport                       1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport/Flood Plain           1                   1
         LD/R-1-6              VI             1 du/lot  1 du/lot Airport                       1                   1
                              Appendix B - 10                                                                2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                  Housing Element
           General Plan/ Acreage or Vacant           Max.    Realistic                            Potential Units
             Zoning        Infill Lot (VI)         Density    Density       Constraints?      Lower   Mod      Upper      Total
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot  Airport                         1                   1
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot  Airport                         1                   1
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot  Airport                         1                   1
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot  Airport                         1                   1
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot                                  1                   1
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot                                  1                   1
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot                                  1                   1
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot                                  1                   1
             LD/R-1-6               VI              1 du/lot   1 du/lot
 ase I)      LD/R-1-6      30 lots remaining        1 du/lot   1 du/lot                                 15        15        30
ange Ave)
             LD/R-1-6       30 vacant lots          1 du/lot   1 du/lot  Completion of Public           15        15        30
                                                                         Improvements
                                                                                                       199        30       229
 bdivision   LD/R-1-6         6.51 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                15        15        30
 bdivision   LD/R-1-6           10 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                25        25        50
             LD/R-1-6            3 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 8         7        15
             LD/R-1-6         1.97 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 5         5        10
             LD/R-1-6         1.97 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 5         5        10
             LD/R-1-6         3.78 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 9         8        17
             LD/R-1-6            1 acre            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 3         2         5
             LD/R-1-6          3.3 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 8         7        15
             LD/R-1-6            1 acre            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 2         2         4
             LD/R-1-6           .40 acre           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 1                   1
             LD/R-1-6           .60 acre           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 1                   1
             LD/R-1-6            1 acre            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 2         2         4
             LD/R-1-6          2.90 acre           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 7         7        14
 II)of TSM   LD/R-1-6      Expired portion of      7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                23        22        45
                           TTM had 45 lots
             LD/R-1-6         3.87 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                 8         7        15
             LD/R-1-6         9.07 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Developer planning                        9         9
                                                                         one acre lots
             LD/R-1-6           49 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                               125       125       250
             LD/R-1-6        29.98 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre                                75        75       150
             LD/R-1-6           97 acres           7.5 du/ac  3.5 du/ac  Proposed 97 lots               49        48        97
             LD/R-1-6        16.77 acres           7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Proposed 71 lots               36        35        71
                                   Appendix B - 11                                                                    2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                           Housing Element
                General Plan/      Acreage or Vacant             Max.    Realistic                            Potential Units
                   Zoning             Infill Lot (VI)          Density    Density       Constraints?     Lower    Mod      Upper      Total
                   LD/R-1-6             14.66 acres            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre 76 lots recorded (3            38        38        76
                                                                                     have an unfinished
                                                                                     model home)
                   LD/R-1-6                5 acres             7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Airport                        13        12        25
                   LD/R-1-6               20 acres             7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Airport                        50        50       100
                   LD/R-1-6                10 acre             7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Airport                        25        25        50
                   LD/R-1-6               9.30 acre            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Airport                        25        25        50
                   LD/R-1-6              3.75 acres            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Airport                        10        10        20
                   LD/R-1-6             39.88 acres            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Airport/Portion in            100       100       200
                                                                                     Flood Plain
                LD/R-1-6/R-1-10          14 ± acres            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Airport/Portion in
                                                                                     Flood Plain
                   LD/R-1-6             67.32 acres            7.5 du/ac 5.0 du/acre Airport/Portion in            150       150       300
                                                                                     Flood Plain
                                                                                                                   818       816      1,634
                  MD/RM 2.5                  1.26            10-15 du/ac  12 du/ac                         30                           30
                  MD/RM 2.5                  1.02            10-15 du/ac  12 du/ac                         12                           12
                  MD/RM 2.5                   .91            10-15 du/ac  12 du/ac                         12                           12
86                   MD/                 2.76 acres          10-15 du/ac  12 du/ac                         10                           10
                     RM-3
 nd King             MD/                 4.83 acres          10-15 du/ac  12 du/ac                         60                           60
                    RM-2.5
                                                                                                          124                          124
& Otis)            HD/RM-2                                     29 du/ac   20 du/ac   9 substandard SFD     30                           30
                                           1.50 ac                                   and 10 substandard
                                                                                     cottages & apts.
                   HD/RM-2                 0.42 ac             29 du/ac   20 du/ac   Vacant                 8                            8
                   HD/RM-2                   0.20              29 du/ac   20 du/ac   Vacant                 4                            4
                   HD/RM-2                 1.73 ac             29 du/ac   20 du/ac   1 deteriorated SFD    34                           34
                                         3.85 acres                                                        76                           76
                                                                                                          200     1,017      846      2,063
roviding adequate capacity for sewer and water.
e Plan
 and Flood Plain Ordinance
                                               Appendix B - 12                                                                    2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                                       Housing Element

Appendix B
Figure B-1b: City of Corcoran Land Inventory Map
Kings County and Cities of                  Appendix B - 13      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                       Housing Element
Land Inventory - City of Hanford
                          Parcel         Max.       Realistic         Potential Units
anford     General Plan/   Size         Density      Density                           Above
ess/APN)      Zoning      (sq.ft.)    (Units/acre) (Units/acre) Lower    Moderate     Moderate  Total
 9          VLD (R-1-20)     8,173        0-3           2                                     1       1
 1          VLD (R-1-20)     8,067        0-3           2                                     1       1
 2          VLD (R-1-20)     8,064        0-3           2                                     1       1
 3          VLD (R-1-20)     8,061        0-3           2                                     1       1
 4          VLD (R-1-20)     8,058        0-3           2                                     1       1
 5          VLD (R-1-20)     8,055        0-3           2                                     1       1
 6          VLD (R-1-20)     8,123        0-3           2                                     1       1
 7          VLD (R-1-20)    13,538        0-3           2                                     1       1
 8          VLD (R-1-20)    12,457        0-3           2                                     1       1
 0          VLD (R-1-20)     8,397        0-3           2                                     1       1
 1          VLD (R-1-20)     8,698        0-3           2                                     1       1
 2          VLD (R-1-20)     8,399        0-3           2                                     1       1
 3          VLD (R-1-20)     8,399        0-3           2                                     1       1
 4          VLD (R-1-20)     8,393        0-3           2                                     1       1
 5          VLD (R-1-20)     8,277        0-3           2                                     1       1
 7          VLD (R-1-20)      8061        0-3           2                                     1       1
 5          VLD (R-1-20)     8,721        0-3           2                                     1       1
 6          VLD (R-1-20)     8,672        0-3           2                                     1       1
 7          VLD (R-1-20)     8,629        0-3           2                                     1       1
 8          VLD (R-1-20)     8,629        0-3           2                                     1       1
 9          VLD (R-1-20)     8,629        0-3           2                                     1       1
 0          VLD (R-1-20)     8,629        0-3           2                                     1       1
 1          VLD (R-1-20)     9,166        0-3           2                                     1       1
 9          VLD (R-1-20)     8,360        0-3           2                                     1       1
 1          VLD (R-1-20)     9,226        0-3           2                                     1       1
 2          VLD (R-1-20)     8,805        0-3           2                                     1       1
 3          VLD (R-1-20)     8,869        0-3           2                                     1       1
 4          VLD (R-1-20)     8,422        0-3           2                                     1       1
 5          VLD (R-1-20)     8,173        0-3           2                                     1       1
 8          VLD (R-1-20)     8,173        0-3           2                                     1       1
 7          VLD (R-1-20)     8,153        0-3           2                                     1       1
 6          VLD (R-1-20)     8,356        0-3           2                                     1       1
 5          VLD (R-1-20)     8,379        0-3           2                                     1       1
 4          VLD (R-1-20)     8,884        0-3           2                                     1       1
 2          VLD (R-1-20)     9,162        0-3           2                                     1       1
 1          VLD (R-1-20)     8,625        0-3           2                                     1       1
 0          VLD (R-1-20)     8,290        0-3           2                                     1       1
 6          VLD (R-1-20)     8,173        0-3           2                                     1       1
                                   Appendix B - 14                                                           2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                  Housing Element
                         Parcel          Max.       Realistic           Potential Units
anford   General Plan/    Size          Density      Density                             Above
ess/APN)   Zoning        (sq.ft.)     (Units/acre) (Units/acre) Lower      Moderate     Moderate  Total
 7       VLD (R-1-20)        9,941        0-3           2                                       1        1
 8       VLD (R-1-20)        8,625        0-3           2                                       1        1
 9       VLD (R-1-20)        9,162        0-3           2                                       1        1
 9       VLD (R-1-20)        8,173        0-3           2                                       1        1
 1       VLD (R-1-12)  10.0 ac.           0-3           2                                     20        20
 2       VLD (R-1-12)  7.93 ac.           0-3           2                                     15        15
 3       VLD (R-1-12)  2.07 ac.           0-3           2                                       4        4
 6       VLD (R-1-12)  27.15 ac.          0-3           2                                     54        54
 0       VLD (R-1-12)  0.12 ac.           0-3           2                                       0        0
 5       VLD (R-1-12)  1.15 ac.           0-3           2                                       2        2
 9       VLD (R-1-12)  1.5 ac.            0-3           2                                       3        3
VLD                                                                   0             0        140       140
 5        LD (R-1-6)         7,614        2-9           5                                                1
 6        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                                1
 7        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                                1
 8        LD (R-1-6)         6,973        2-9           5                                                1
 9        LD (R-1-6)         6,783        2-9           5                                                1
 0        LD (R-1-6)        10,278        2-9           5                                                1
 1        LD (R-1-6)         9,220        2-9           5                                                1
 2        LD (R-1-6)        10,278        2-9           5                                                1
 3        LD (R-1-6)         6,783        2-9           5                                                1
 4        LD (R-1-6)         6,973        2-9           5                                                1
 5        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                                1
 6        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                                1
 7        LD (R-1-6)         7,614        2-9           5                                                1
 6        LD (R-1-6)         6,783        2-9           5                                                1
 7        LD (R-1-6)         6,973        2-9           5                                                1
 8        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                                1
 9        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                                1
 0        LD (R-1-6)         7,614        2-9           5                                                1
 8        LD (R-1-6)         6,034        2-9           5                                                1
 8        LD (R-1-6)         7,614        2-9           5                                                1
 9        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                                1
 0        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                                1
 1        LD (R-1-6)         6,973        2-9           5                                                1
 2        LD (R-1-6)         6,783        2-9           5                                                1
 3        LD (R-1-6)        10,244        2-9           5                                                1
 4        LD (R-1-6)         9,288        2-9           5                                                1
 5        LD (R-1-6)        10,244        2-9           5                                                1
 9        LD (R-1-6)         6,911        2-9           5                                                1
                                   Appendix B - 15                                                              2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                     Housing Element
                       Parcel         Max.       Realistic         Potential Units
anford   General Plan/  Size         Density      Density                           Above
ess/APN)   Zoning      (sq.ft.)    (Units/acre) (Units/acre) Lower    Moderate     Moderate Total
 8        LD (R-1-6)      6,512        2-9           5                                            1
 7        LD (R-1-6)      7,712        2-9           5                                            1
 6        LD (R-1-6)      6,929        2-9           5                                            1
 5        LD (R-1-6)      6,929        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      6,929        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)      6,926        2-9           5                                            1
 9        LD (R-1-6)      6,000        2-9           5                                            1
 2        LD (R-1-6)      6,891        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)      6,946        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      7,002        2-9           5                                            1
 5        LD (R-1-6)      7,057        2-9           5                                            1
 6        LD (R-1-6)      7,113        2-9           5                                            1
 7        LD (R-1-6)      7,168        2-9           5                                            1
 8        LD (R-1-6)      7,224        2-9           5                                            1
 9        LD (R-1-6)      7,279        2-9           5                                            1
 0        LD (R-1-6)      7,335        2-9           5                                            1
 1        LD (R-1-6)      7,390        2-9           5                                            1
 2        LD (R-1-6)      7,446        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)      8,417        2-9           5                                            1
 2        LD (R-1-6)      6,783        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)     10,278        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      9,220        2-9           5                                            1
 5        LD (R-1-6)      9,840        2-9           5                                            1
 6        LD (R-1-6)      6,781        2-9           5                                            1
 7        LD (R-1-6)      6,952        2-9           5                                            1
 8        LD (R-1-6)      7,007        2-9           5                                            1
 9        LD (R-1-6)      7,007        2-9           5                                            1
 0        LD (R-1-6)      8,076        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      7,361        2-9           5                                            1
 0        LD (R-1-6)      9,386        2-9           5                                            1
 9        LD (R-1-6)     10,848        2-9           5                                            1
 8        LD (R-1-6)      8,257        2-9           5                                            1
 7        LD (R-1-6)      6,920        2-9           5                                            1
 6        LD (R-1-6)      7,368        2-9           5                                            1
 1        LD (R-1-6)      6,563        2-9           5                                            1
 9        LD (R-1-6)      7,007        2-9           5                                            1
 0        LD (R-1-6)      7,007        2-9           5                                            1
 1        LD (R-1-6)      6,973        2-9           5                                            1
 2        LD (R-1-6)      6,667        2-9           5                                            1
 1        LD (R-1-6)      7,394        2-9           5                                            1
                                Appendix B - 16                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                              Housing Element
                       Parcel         Max.       Realistic         Potential Units
anford   General Plan/  Size         Density      Density                           Above
ess/APN)   Zoning      (sq.ft.)    (Units/acre) (Units/acre) Lower    Moderate     Moderate Total
 9        LD (R-1-6)      7,166        2-9           5                                            1
 8        LD (R-1-6)      7,660        2-9           5                                            1
 7        LD (R-1-6)      6,641        2-9           5                                            1
 6        LD (R-1-6)      6,646        2-9           5                                            1
 5        LD (R-1-6)      6,651        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      6,656        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)      6,662        2-9           5                                            1
 7        LD (R-1-6)      6,022        2-9           5                                            1
 6        LD (R-1-6)      7,199        2-9           5                                            1
 5        LD (R-1-6)      8,123        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      8,354        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)      6,752        2-9           5                                            1
 2        LD (R-1-6)      6,196        2-9           5                                            1
 1        LD (R-1-6)      6,201        2-9           5                                            1
 0        LD (R-1-6)      6,205        2-9           5                                            1
 5        LD (R-1-6)      7,614        2-9           5                                            1
 6        LD (R-1-6)      7,007        2-9           5                                            1
 1        LD (R-1-6)      7,361        2-9           5                                            1
 2        LD (R-1-6)      6,617        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)      6,617        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      6,617        2-9           5                                            1
 8        LD (R-1-6)      6,973        2-9           5                                            1
 7        LD (R-1-6)      7,007        2-9           5                                            1
 6        LD (R-1-6)      7,007        2-9           5                                            1
 5        LD (R-1-6)      7,614        2-9           5                                            1
 8        LD (R-1-6)      7,614        2-9           5                                            1
 5        LD (R-1-6)      7,619        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      6,398        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)      6,454        2-9           5                                            1
 2        LD (R-1-6)      6,248        2-9           5                                            1
 1        LD (R-1-6)      6,299        2-9           5                                            1
 0        LD (R-1-6)      6,796        2-9           5                                            1
 7        LD (R-1-6)      7,007        2-9           5                                            1
 8        LD (R-1-6)      6,974        2-9           5                                            1
 9        LD (R-1-6)      6,783        2-9           5                                            1
 0        LD (R-1-6)     10,245        2-9           5                                            1
 1        LD (R-1-6)      9,288        2-9           5                                            1
 2        LD (R-1-6)     10,244        2-9           5                                            1
 3        LD (R-1-6)      6,783        2-9           5                                            1
 4        LD (R-1-6)      6,973        2-9           5                                            1
                                Appendix B - 17                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                              Housing Element
                         Parcel          Max.       Realistic         Potential Units
anford   General Plan/    Size          Density      Density                           Above
ess/APN)   Zoning        (sq.ft.)     (Units/acre) (Units/acre) Lower    Moderate     Moderate Total
 5        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                             1
 6        LD (R-1-6)         7,007        2-9           5                                             1
 7        LD (R-1-6)         7,614        2-9           5                                             1
 5        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 6        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 7        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 8        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 9        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 0        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 1        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 2        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 3        LD (R-1-6)         6,617        2-9           5                                             1
 4        LD (R-1-6)         7,361        2-9           5                                             1
 0            LD       9.81 ac.           2-9           5                                            49
 6            LD       1.36 ac.           2-9           5                                             6
 7            LD       1.14 ac.           2-9           5                                             5
 4            LD       1.25 ac.           2-9           5                                             6
 3            LD       1.25 ac.           2-9           5                                             6
 7            LD           64,155         2-9           5                                             7
 2            LD             8,364        2-9           5                                             1
 0            LD           11,571         2-9           5                                             1
 6            LD           15,682         2-9           5                                             1
 4            LD           24,394         2-9           5                                             2
 8            LD             5,880        2-9           5                                             1
 9            LD             9,800        2-9           5                                             1
 6            LD       2.73 ac.           2-9           5                                            13
 2            LD           61,000         2-9           5                                             7
 5            LD            13504         2-9           5                                             1
 6            LD              1307        2-9           5                                             1
 0            LD             8,461        2-9           5                                             1
 1            LD             8,466        2-9           5                                             1
 2            LD             8,400        2-9           5                                             1
 1            LD           10,100         2-9           5                                             1
 5            LD           10,422         2-9           5                                             1
 3            LD             8,961        2-9           5                                             1
 4            LD             8,257        2-9           5                                             1
 5            LD             8,266        2-9           5                                             1
 6            LD             8,453        2-9           5                                             1
 7            LD             8,619        2-9           5                                             1
 3            LD             8,400        2-9           5                                             1
                                   Appendix B - 18                                                           2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                  Housing Element
                             Parcel          Max.       Realistic           Potential Units
anford       General Plan/    Size          Density      Density                             Above
ess/APN)       Zoning        (sq.ft.)     (Units/acre) (Units/acre) Lower      Moderate     Moderate Total
 4                LD             8,914        2-9           5                                               1
 0                LD             8,400        2-9           5                                               1
 9                LD             8,400        2-9           5                                               1
 1            LD (R-1-6)        16,997        2-9           5                                               1
 1                LD             7,532        2-9           5                                               1
 2            LD (R-1-6)         6,600        2-9           5                                               1
 0            LD (R-1-8)         9,800        2-9           5                                               1
 2            LD (R-1-8)         9,729        2-9           5                                               1
 9                LD             1,522        2-9           5                                               1
 4                LD       7.71 ac.           2-9           5                                              38
 2            LD (R-1-8)         8,775        2-9           5                                               1
 7            LD (R-1-8)         7,775        2-9           5                                               1
 1            LD (R-1-8)        12,399        2-9           5                                               1
 6                LD            14,638        2-9           5                                               1
 7                LD             9,565        2-9           5                                               1
 8                LD             6,574        2-9           5                                               1
 9                LD             6,600        2-9           5                                               1
 0                LD             6,600        2-9           5                                               1
 0                LD            13,419        2-9           5                                               1
 7                LD            13,419        2-9           5                                               1
 9                LD             8,229        2-9           5                                               1
 1            LD (R-1-6)   35.39 ac.          2-9           5                                             176
 6 (portion)  LD (R-1-6)   5.0 ac.            2-9           5                                              25
 2            LD (R-1-6)   1.38 ac.           2-9           5                                               6
 2            LD (R-1-6)   13.30 ac.          2-9           5                                              66
 9            LD (R-1-6)   21.12 ac.          2-9           5                                             105
 7            LD (R-1-6)   21.12 ac.          2-9           5                                             105
 0            LD (R-1-6)   0.63 ac.           2-9           5                                               3
 3            LD (R-1-6)   75.12 ac.          2-9           5                                             375
 2            LD (R-1-6)   75.12 ac.          2-9           5                                             375
 4            LD (R-1-6)   66.77 ac.          2-9           5                                             333
 5            LD (R-1-6)   10.70 ac.          2-9           5                                              53
 6            LD (R-1-6)   3.10 ac.           2-9           5                                              15
 4            LD (R-1-8)   10.0 ac.           2-9           5                                              50
 5            LD (R-1-8)   13.24 ac.          2-9           5                                              66
 6            LD (R-1-8)   13.24 ac.          2-9           5                                              66
 7            LD (R-1-8)   12.26 ac.          2-9           5                                              61
LD                                                                        0         1,089      1,089    2,178
 4               MD             10,748       7-15          12             2                                 2
 5               MD              9,636       7-15          12             2                                 2
                                       Appendix B - 19                                                             2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                        Housing Element
                       Parcel           Max.       Realistic            Potential Units
anford   General Plan/  Size           Density      Density                              Above
ess/APN)   Zoning      (sq.ft.)      (Units/acre) (Units/acre) Lower       Moderate     Moderate Total
 6           MD             9,635       7-15          12              2                                 2
 0        MD (RM-3)       36,600        7-15          12             10                                10
 5        MD (RM-3)       42,000        7-15          12             11                                11
 9        MD (RM-3)       63,000        7-15          12             17                                17
 2        MD (RM-3)         6,300       7-15          12              1                                 1
 0        MD (RM-3)       10,500        7-15          12              2                                 2
 3        MD (RM-3)       12,420        7-15          12              3                                 3
 2        MD (RM-3)         8,400       7-15          12              2                                 2
 0        MD (RM-3)       21,420        7-15          12              5                                 5
 1        MD (RM-3)         6,400       7-15          12              1                                 1
 3           MD           55,440        7-15          12             15                                15
 3           MD           14,050        7-15          12              3                                 3
 0           MD             6,630       7-15          12              1                                 1
 7           MD             7,143       7-15          12              1                                 1
 6           MD         217,627         7-15          12             59                                59
 7           MD           86,220        7-15          12             23                                23
 2           MD           34,848        7-15          12              9                                 9
 4           MD           20,798        7-15          12              5                                 5
 1           MD           22,596        7-15          12              6                                 6
 5           MD            78408        7-15          12             21                                21
 0        MD (RM-3)       42,700        7-15          12             11                                11
 3        MD (RM-3)        80586        7-15          12             22                                22
 4        MD (RM-3)       12,352        7-15          12              3                                 3
 2        MD (RM-3)       10,000        7-15          12              2                                 2
 9        MD (RM-3)         8,755       7-15          12              2                                 2
 1        MD (RM-3)       17,250        7-15          12              4                                 4
 9        MD (RM-3)       17,250        7-15          12              4                                 4
 7        MD (RM-3)         8,600       7-15          12              2                                 2
 6        MD (RM-3)         6,020       7-15          12              1                                 1
 6        MD (RM-3)           822       7-15          12              0                                 0
 9        MD (RM-3)         9,425       7-15          12              2                                 2
 4           MD          142877         7-15          12             39                                39
 6           MD           28,344        7-15          12              7                                 7
 7           MD           28,354        7-15          12              7                                 7
 8           MD           31,199        7-15          12              8                                 8
 2           MD           19,940        7-15          12              5                                 5
 1           MD           17,970        7-15          12              4                                 4
 0           MD           20,568        7-15          12              5                                 5
 9           MD           20,649        7-15          12              5                                 5
 4        MD (RM-3)       15,000        7-15          12              4                                 4
                                  Appendix B - 20                                                              2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                    Housing Element
                             Parcel           Max.      Realistic            Potential Units
anford       General Plan/    Size          Density      Density                              Above
ess/APN)       Zoning        (sq.ft.)     (Units/acre) (Units/acre) Lower       Moderate     Moderate  Total
 5            MD (RM-3)          5,000        7-15         12              1                                  1
 1            MD (RM-3)         13,000        7-15         12              3                                  3
 3            MD (RM-3)          7,000        7-15         12              1                                  1
 4               MD             10,416        7-15         12              2                                  2
 8               MD                792        7-15         12              0                                  0
 9               MD              4,650        7-15         12              1                                  1
 0               MD              3,375        7-15         12              0                                  0
 5               MD              6,590        7-15         12              1                                  1
 5               MD              9,863        7-15         12              2                                  2
 2               MD              6,600        7-15         12              1                                  1
 6               MD             23,124        7-15         12              6                                  6
 5               MD             13,768        7-15         12              3                                  3
 6               MD             11,150        7-15         12              3                                  3
 8               MD             30,069        7-15         12              8                                  8
 7               MD             17,203        7-15         12              4                                  4
 8            MD (RM-3)    3.84 ac.           7-15         12             46                                 46
 5            MD (RM-3)    3 ac.              7-15         12             36                                 36
 6            MD (RM-3)    1.96 ac.           7-15         12             23                                 23
 7            MD (RM-3)    .40 ac.            7-15         12              4                                  4
 3            MD (RM-3)    2.51 ac.           7-15         12             30                                 30
 0            MD (RM-3)    3.17 ac.           7-15         12             38                                 38
 5            MD (RM-3)    8.47 ac.           7-15         12           101                                 101
 4            MD (RM-3)    2.73 ac.           7-15         12             32                                 32
 2            MD (RM-3)    10.10 ac.          7-15         12           121                                 121
 3            MD (RM-3)    1.24 ac.           7-15         12             14                                 14
 4            MD (RM-3)    .33 ac.            7-15         12              3                                  3
 1            MD (RM-3)         19,166        7-15         12              5                                  5
MD                                                                      827              0           0      827
 7               MC              7,250        4-22         15              2                                  2
 8               MC              3,250        4-22         15              1                                  1
MC                                                                         3             0           0        3
 2            HD (RM-2)    9.11 ac.          10-22         15           136                                 136
 6            HD (RM-2)    9.69 ac.          10-22         15           145                                 145
 6 (portion)  HD (RM-2)    4.4 ac.           10-22         15             66                                 66
 1            HD (RM-2)    2.74 ac.          10-22         15             41                                 41
 4            HD (RM-2)    3.15 ac.          10-22         15             47                                 47
 3            HD (RM-2)    1.41 ac.          10-22         15             21                                 21
 5 (portion)  HD (RM-2)    30 ac.            10-22         15           450                                 450
 HD                                                                     906              0           0      906
                                       Appendix B - 21                                                               2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                          Housing Element
                                       Parcel           Max.      Realistic             Potential Units
anford             General Plan/        Size          Density      Density                               Above
ess/APN)              Zoning           (sq.ft.)     (Units/acre) (Units/acre)  Lower       Moderate     Moderate       Total
aster Plan          VLD (R-1-12)     22.5 ac.            0-3          3                                       60             60
                     LD (R-1-6)      160.7 ac.           2-9         5.2                          350        350            700
                     MD (RM-3)       32.6 ac.           7-15        10.4            305                                     305
                     HD (RM-2)       22.8 ac.          10-22        17.8            363                                     363
Villagio                                                                            668           350        410          1,428
Master Plan         VLD (R-1-12)     50 ac.              0-3         2.6                                     130            130
                     LD (R-1-6)      285.7 ac.           2-9         4.9                          700        700          1,400
                     MD( RM-3)       4.23 ac.           7-15         7.1             30                                      30
Live Oak                                                                             30           700        830          1,560
                                                                                  2,434        2,139       2,469         7,042
-family sites are assigned to the lower-income category
 mily sites with standard-sized lots assigned 50% moderate-income and 50% above-moderate-income categories
 mily large lots (>1/2 acre) assigned to the above-moderate-income category
Villagio project currently consists of 2 legal parcels (007-010-031 and 007-360-016). A Master Plan (PUD) was approved for this project in 2009
a subdivision map has been filed for review. Prior to commencement of construction, the project requires final recordation of the annexation
ch has been approved by the City and LAFCO), subdivision maps, and non-discretionary plan check and building permits. No phasing requirements
 been imposed by the City, therefore the property owner may commence development of the entire project within the current planning period as
 et conditions allow.
Live Oak project currently encompasses 25 legal parcels as shown in Figure B-1c. A Master Plan (PUD) and Development Agreement were
oved by the City in 2009 and 2 tentative subdivision maps have also been approved for portions of the project. A 3rd subdivision map is currently
  r review. Following recordation of final subdivision maps, only non-discretionary plan check and building permits are necessary prior to
truction. The Live Oak Master Plan allows 2nd units by-right above garages throughout the entire project, and this option will be offered by builders
e time of sale and construction. 2nd units represent a potential for over 1,500 additional lower-income units that are not counted in the approved
 ling unit totals. No phasing requirements have been imposed by the City, therefore the property owner may commence development of the entire
  ct within the current planning period as market conditions allow.
                                                Appendix B - 22                                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                                             Housing Element
Appendix B
Figure B-1c: Land Inventory Map – City of Hanford
Kings County and Cities of                Appendix B - 23      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                     Housing Element

Appendix B
                                      Assessors Parcels – Live Oak Project
Kings County and Cities of                       Appendix B - 24                2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                      Housing Element

Land Inventory - City of Lemoore
                                                       Densities                        Potential Units
                 Proposed    Existing                                FEMA
 eneral Plan      Zoning     Zoning       Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower    Mod      Upper    Total
 Low Density Res   RVLD       RA-40          0.76    3        2.5                                        1        1
 Low Density Res   RVLD       RA-20          0.40    3        2.5                                        1        1
 Low Density Res   RVLD       RA-20          5.64    3        2.5                                       14       14
 Low Density Res   RVLD       RA-20          4.84    3        2.5                                       12       12
 Low Density Res   RVLD       RA-20          1.36    3        2.5                                        3        3
 Low Density Res   RVLD       RA-20          1.06    3        2.5                                        2        2
 Low Density Res   RVLD    R-1-7, RA-20      6.98    3        2.5                                       17       17
 Low Density Res   RVLD        R-1-7         0.13    3        2.5                                        0        0
 Low Density Res   RVLD     R-1-7,RM-       26.42    3        2.5     24.65   25.15                      4        4
                            3,RSC,CC
                                            47.59                     24.65   25.15   0        0        54       54
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.26    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.09    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.06    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.43    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.37    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.38    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.71    7        4.5                                                 3
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.34    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN   R-1-7, RM-2.5     0.11    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN      R-1-10         2.75    7        4.5                                                12
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.77    7        4.5                                                 3
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR     RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                                 1
                                   Appendix B - 25                                                              2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                     Housing Element
                                                 Densities                      Potential Units
              Proposed Existing                                FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning  Zoning       Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7        12.02    7        4.5                                            54
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, CC       0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
                             Appendix B - 26                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                           Housing Element
                                                  Densities                      Potential Units
              Proposed  Existing                                FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning   Zoning       Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         1.03    7        4.5                                             4
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, RSC       0.02    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, UR        0.53    7        4.5                                             2
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, UR        2.02    7        4.5                                             9
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, UR        1.00    7        4.5                                             4
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, UR        1.31    7        4.5                                             5
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.26    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-10         0.26    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.28    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
                              Appendix B - 27                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                            Housing Element
                                                Densities                      Potential Units
              Proposed Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning  Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.27    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                             1
                            Appendix B - 28                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                          Housing Element
                                                Densities                      Potential Units
              Proposed Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning  Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
                            Appendix B - 29                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                          Housing Element
                                                Densities                      Potential Units
              Proposed Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning  Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.34    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.26    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.30    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.29    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.27    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.29    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.31    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5                                             1
                            Appendix B - 30                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                          Housing Element
                                                   Densities                      Potential Units
              Proposed   Existing                                FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning    Zoning       Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.29    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20     20.83    7        4.5                                            93
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, RM-2.5     2.20    7        4.5                                             9
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.82    7        4.5                                             3
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         2.39    7        4.5                                            10
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.48    7        4.5                                             2
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7, RM-2      6.21    7        4.5                                            27
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.48    7        4.5                                             2
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.78    7        4.5                                             3
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         3.19    7        4.5                                            14
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         5.14    7        4.5                                            23
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       UR           1.02    7        4.5                                             4
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       UR           0.46    7        4.5                                             2
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         0.09    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         2.86    7        4.5                                            12
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         3.15    7        4.5                                            14
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         3.80    7        4.5                                            17
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         0.57    7        4.5                                             2
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         0.46    7        4.5                                             2
                               Appendix B - 31                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                             Housing Element
                                                   Densities                       Potential Units
              Proposed  Existing                                 FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning    Zoning       Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         5.36    7        4.5                                             24
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         1.64    7        4.5                                              7
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         2.59    7        4.5                                             11
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         0.31    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-10         0.49    7        4.5                                              2
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     RA-20          0.73    7        4.5                                              3
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     RA-20          2.12    7        4.5                                              9
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      0.41    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.48    7        4.5                                              2
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.23    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     RA-20          0.80    7        4.5                                              3
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      0.88    7        4.5                                              3
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          1.84    7        4.5                                              8
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          3.08    7        4.5                                             13
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          2.31    7        4.5                                             10
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          1.09    7        4.5                                              4
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7, ML        2.34    7        4.5                                             10
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7, ML        5.54    7        4.5                                             24
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          8.78    7        4.5                                             39
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          5.21    7        4.5                                             23
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          4.96    7        4.5             1.621                           22
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.20    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.20    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.18    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.20    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.20    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.17    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.16    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.17    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.17    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.17    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.23    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7          0.22    7        4.5                                              1
                               Appendix B - 32                                                           2009-2014
emoore                                                                                              Housing Element
                                                Densities                       Potential Units
              Proposed Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning  Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5             0.013                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5             0.227                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5              0.25                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5              0.22                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5              0.22                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5              0.20                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.31    7        4.5              0.31                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5              0.25                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5              0.24                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5              0.24                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5              0.23                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5              0.19                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5              0.19                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5              0.19                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5             0.204                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5             0.004                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.30    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5             0.092                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5              0.23                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5              0.24                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5              0.23                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5              0.23                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5              0.22                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5              0.21                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5              0.25                            1
                            Appendix B - 33                                                           2009-2014
emoore                                                                                           Housing Element
                                                    Densities                       Potential Units
              Proposed    Existing                                FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning      Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5              0.24                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.26    7        4.5              0.26                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5              0.24                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.26    7        4.5              0.26                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5              0.24                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5              0.24                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.25    7        4.5             0.184                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5              0.18                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5              0.16                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5              0.16                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5              0.16                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5              0.16                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5              0.16                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5              0.17                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5              0.24                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5              0.17                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5              0.18                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5              0.18                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5              0.18                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5              0.18                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5              0.23                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5              0.23                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5              0.22                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5              0.18                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.16    7        4.5              0.16                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.26    7        4.5              0.26                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.26    7        4.5              0.26                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.26    7        4.5              0.26                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5              0.20                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5              0.20                            1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7, MP      21.71    7        4.5             21.71                           97
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         5.85    7        4.5              5.85                           26
w Density SFR  RLD,RN     R-1-7, MP       5.48    7        4.5              5.48                           24
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7,RM-3,MP     11.85    7        4.5             11.85                           53
w Density SFR  RLD,RN       R-1-7         4.41    7        4.5      4.41    4.41                            0
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    R-1-7, RSC      24.75    7        4.5     24.75   24.75                            0
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  R-1-7,RM-3,RM-2   30.52    7        4.5     30.52   30.52                            0
                                Appendix B - 34                                                           2009-2014
emoore                                                                                               Housing Element
                                                   Densities                       Potential Units
              Proposed    Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning     Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7        35.49    7        4.5     35.49   35.49                            0
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         1.15    7        4.5      1.15    1.15                            0
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         7.86    7        4.5      7.86    7.86                            0
w Density SFR  RLD,RN  RM-3,RM-2,RSC    11.47    7        4.5     11.47   11.47                            0
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    RM-3, RSC      13.18    7        4.5      8.74   13.18                           19
w Density SFR  RLD,RN    RM-3, RSC       5.50    7        4.5      2.28    5.50                           14
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7        23.64    7        4.5      2.70   23.64                           94
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.24    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.20    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.27    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.30    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.21    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.19    7        4.5                                              1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7        10.71    7        4.5                                             48
w Density SFR  RLD,RN      R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                              1
                               Appendix B - 35                                                           2009-2014
emoore                                                                                              Housing Element
                                                Densities                      Potential Units
              Proposed Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning  Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.13    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.13    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.17    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.22    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.13    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.13    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.13    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.13    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
                            Appendix B - 36                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                          Housing Element
                                                Densities                      Potential Units
              Proposed Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan   Zoning  Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.18    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.23    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.14    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.11    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.15    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
w Density SFR  RLD,RN   R-1-7         0.12    7        4.5                                             1
                            Appendix B - 37                                                          2009-2014
emoore                                                                                          Housing Element
                                                     Densities                        Potential Units
                Proposed   Existing                                FEMA
 eneral Plan     Zoning    Zoning       Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower    Mod      Upper   Total
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.12   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.12   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.12   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.12   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.12   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.12   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.15   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7         17.44   7        4.5                                                78
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.11   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.10   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.11   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.11   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.12   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.18   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.24   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.25   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.09   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.17   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.17   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.17   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.18   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.18   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN      R-1-7          0.22   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.28   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.19   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.20   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.17   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.17   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.16   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.18   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.17   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.18   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.23   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.16   7        4.5                                                 1
w Density SFR    RLD,RN   R-1-7, RSC        0.28   7        4.5                                                 1
ity SFR                                   478.58                   129.37  217.19   0       724       724    1,448
 Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-3,RM-2,PO      15.32  12         9              15.32           137               137
                                 Appendix B - 38                                                             2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                  Housing Element
                                                   Densities                      Potential Units
                Proposed  Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan     Zoning   Zoning       Acreage  Max   Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.20   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.39   12        9                              3               3
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.31   12        9                              2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     R-1-7         2.81   12        9                             25              25
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.19   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.17   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.09   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.07   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.37   12        9                              3               3
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.31   12        9                              2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.10   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.33   12        9                              3               3
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.85   12        9                              7               7
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     R-1-7         0.22   12        9                              2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     R-1-7         0.23   12        9                              2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     R-1-7         0.23   12        9                              2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     R-1-7         0.09   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    R-1-10         0.37   12        9                              3               3
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.24   12        9                              2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.22   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.21   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.25   12        9                              2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.02   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.15   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-3, RSC        0.11   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.39   12        9              0.39            3               3
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.24   12        9              0.24            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.23   12        9              0.23            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.24   12        9              0.24            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.26   12        9              0.26            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.27   12        9              0.27            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.28   12        9              0.28            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.29   12        9              0.29            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.30   12        9              0.30            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.32   12        9              0.32            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.32   12        9              0.32            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     R-1-7         5.14   12        9                             46              46
                                Appendix B - 39                                                         2009-2014
emoore                                                                                             Housing Element
                                                   Densities                      Potential Units
                Proposed  Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan     Zoning   Zoning       Acreage  Max   Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2 Lower   Mod      Upper  Total
 Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-3          0.32   12        9              0.32            2               2
 Medium Density RLMD,RN      CC           9.44   12        9              9.44           84              84
 Medium Density RLMD,RN      CC           3.18   12        9              3.18           28              28
 Medium Density RLMD,RN      CC           7.86   12        9              7.86           70              70
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.11   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.09   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.08   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.09   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.09   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.06   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.06   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.09   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.07   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.05   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.10   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         1.43   12        9                             12              12
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.12   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.06   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.06   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.11   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.11   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.07   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN    RM-2.5         0.07   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC      0.11   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC      0.10   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC      0.06   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC      0.06   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC      0.10   12        9                              1               1
 Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC      0.09   12        9                              1               1
                                Appendix B - 40                                                         2009-2014
emoore                                                                                             Housing Element
                                                     Densities                         Potential Units
                 Proposed   Existing                               FEMA
  eneral Plan     Zoning    Zoning       Acreage  Max   Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower     Mod      Upper   Total
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.06  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.06  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.10  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.09  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.06  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  R-1-7, RM-2.5      0.13  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN      R-1-7          0.05  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-2.5          1.49  12         9                               13                13
  Medium Density RLMD,RN       PO            0.20  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.07  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.11  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.06  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN  RM-2.5, RSC        0.07  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN     RM-2.5          0.16  12         9                                1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN   R-1-7, RM-2       4.74  12         9              4.74             42                42
  Medium Density RLMD,RN      R-1-7          9.93  12         9              9.93             89                89
  Medium Density RLMD,RN   R-1-7, RM-3       0.16  12         9     0.13                       1                 1
  Medium Density RLMD,RN      R-1-7         16.00  12         9             16.00            143               143
  Medium Density RLMD,RN   R-1-7, RM-3       3.48  12         9              3.48             31                31
  Medium Density RLMD,RN      R-1-7          0.37  12         9                                3                 3
  Medium Density RLMD,RN      R-1-7          0.37  12         9                                3                 3
  Medium Density RLMD,RN      R-1-7          1.40  12         9                               12                12
  Medium Density RLMD,RN     R-1-10          0.69  12         9                                6                 6
m Density                                  105.08                   0.13    73.42    0       860       0       860
ium Density MFR    RMD         CC            4.60  17        14     4.60     4.60    0                           0
ium Density MFR    RMD       RM-2.5          2.91  17        14                     40                          40
ium Density MFR    RMD        R-1-7          5.46  17        14                     76                          76
ium Density MFR    RMD    R-1-7, RM-2.5      3.97  17        14                     55                          55
ium Density MFR    RMD        R-1-7          2.83  17        14                     39                          39
ium Density MFR    RMD        R-1-7          0.17  17        14                      2                           2
ium Density MFR    RMD       RM-2.5          0.38  17        14                      5                           5
ium Density MFR    RMD         CS            0.13  17        14                      1                           1
ium Density MFR    RMD       RM-2.5          0.19  17        14                      2                           2
ium Density MFR    RMD         ML            0.08  17        14                      1                           1
ium Density MFR    RMD         ML            0.47  17        14                      6                           6
ium Density MFR    RMD         CH            1.24  17        14                     17                          17
ium Density MFR    RMD        RSC            3.51  17        14     2.40     3.51   15                          15
                                  Appendix B - 41                                                             2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                   Housing Element
                                                   Densities                         Potential Units
                Proposed  Existing                               FEMA
 eneral Plan     Zoning   Zoning       Acreage  Max   Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower     Mod      Upper   Total
ium Density MFR   RMD        CH           0.69   17        14                      9                           9
ium Density MFR   RMD        CH           0.76   17        14                     10                          10
ium Density MFR   RMD        CH           0.67   17        14                      9                           9
ium Density MFR   RMD       R-1-7         2.04   17        14                     28                          28
ium Density MFR   RMD       RM-3          0.55   17        14                      7                           7
ium Density MFR   RMD       RM-3          0.38   17        14                      5                           5
ium Density MFR   RMD       RM-3          0.38   17        14                      5                           5
ium Density MFR   RMD        ML           1.64   17        14                     22                          22
ium Density MFR   RMD       RM-2          2.94   17        14                     41                          41
ium Density MFR   RMD        CH           0.41   17        14              0.41    5                           5
ium Density MFR   RMD        CH           0.29   17        14              0.29    4                           4
ium Density MFR   RMD       RM-3          0.21   17        14              0.21    2                           2
ium Density MFR   RMD    RM-3, RSC        9.69   17        14      9.06    9.69    8                           8
ium Density MFR   RMD       RM-2          1.35   17        14      1.35    1.35    0                           0
ium Density MFR   RMD        CH           3.02   17        14              3.02   42                          42
ium Density MFR   RMD        ML           2.24   17        14                     31                          31
ium Density MFR   RMD        ML           2.24   17        14                     31                          31
ium Density MFR   RMD        ML           1.64   17        14                     22                          22
ium Density MFR   RMD        ML           0.43   17        14                      5                           5
ium Density MFR   RMD        ML           0.47   17        14                      6                           6
Density                                  77.01                    17.41   23.08  551        0        0       551
gh Density Res     RHD   RM-2, R-1-7      0.25   25        18                      4                           4
gh Density Res     RHD    RM-2,CC         0.35   25        18                      6                           6
ensity                                    0.61                     0.00    0.00   10        0        0        10
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CS           4.58   20         9                     41                          41
 Mixed-Use3        MU        ML           2.02   20         9      0.16           16                          16
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CH           1.29   20         9                     11                          11
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CS          12.27   20         9                    110                         110
 Mixed-Use3        MU        PO           0.67   20         9                      6                           6
 Mixed-Use3        MU        ML           4.79   20         9      0.29           40                          40
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CC           0.08   20         9                      0                           0
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CS           0.17   20         9                      1                           1
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CC           0.26   20         9                      2                           2
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CS           0.17   20         9                      1                           1
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CS           0.10   20         9                      0                           0
 Mixed-Use3        MU      CS, CC         0.26   20         9                      2                           2
 Mixed-Use3        MU        CC           0.17   20         9                      1                           1
                                Appendix B - 42                                                             2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                 Housing Element
                                                          Densities                          Potential Units
                  Proposed      Existing                                FEMA
 eneral Plan       Zoning       Zoning       Acreage Max     Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower      Mod      Upper    Total
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.18   20         9                       1                            1
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            2.21   20         9                      19                           19
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.17   20         9                       1                            1
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.13   20         9                       1                            1
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.12   20         9                       1                            1
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.09   20         9                       0                            0
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.16   20         9                       1                            1
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            0.98   20         9                       8                            8
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            3.32   20         9                      29                           29
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            4.89   20         9                      44                           44
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            0.93   20         9                       8                            8
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            2.82   20         9                      25                           25
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            0.75   20         9                       6                            6
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            3.52   20         9                      31                           31
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            0.58   20         9                       5                            5
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH            1.57   20         9                      14                           14
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            8.16   20         9                      73                           73
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.14   20         9                       1                            1
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.21   20         9                       1                            1
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.75   20         9                       6                            6
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.17   20         9                       1                            1
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CC            0.26   20         9                       2                            2
 Mixed-Use3          MU           R-1-7          2.16   20         9      2.16    2.16     0                            0
 Mixed-Use3          MU           RM-3           4.46   20         9      4.46    4.46     0                            0
 Mixed-Use3          MU        R-1-7, RM-2      11.09   20         9     11.09   11.09     0                            0
 Mixed-Use3          MU        R-1-7, RM-2       7.25   20         9      2.20    7.25    45                           45
 Mixed-Use3          MU            CH           27.34   20         9                     246                          246
 Use                                           111.21                    20.36   24.96   800        0         0       800
 HIN CITY LIMITS                               820.08                   191.92  363.80  1,361     1,584      778     3,723
  URBAN GROWTH BOUNDARY OF THE LEMOORE 2030 GENERAL PLAN
culture/Rural Res    AR                        40.51  .0.2       0.05                                         2         2
culture/Rural Res    AR                         9.00   0.2       0.05                                         0         0
culture/Rural Res    AR                         5.69   0.2       0.05                                         0         0
culture/Rural Res    AR                        19.39   0.2       0.05                                         0         0
culture/Rural Res    AR                        43.67   0.2       0.05                                         2         2
culture/Rural Res    AR                        13.06   0.2       0.05                                         0         0
culture/Rural Res    AR                         2.59   0.2       0.05                                         0         0
                                      Appendix B - 43                                                                2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                          Housing Element
                                                    Densities                        Potential Units
                  Proposed Existing                               FEMA
  eneral Plan      Zoning  Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower    Mod      Upper    Total
culture/Rural Res    AR                  33.12   0.2       0.05                                        1        1
culture/Rural Res    AR                  45.24   0.2       0.05                                        2        2
culture/Rural Res    AR                  67.51   0.2       0.05                                        3        3
re/Rural                                279.78                    232.19  413.72   0        0         10       10
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA         12.44    3         2.5                                       31       31
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA         49.45    3         2.5                                      123      123
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          0.94    3         2.5                                        2        2
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          0.93    3         2.5                                        2        2
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          0.93    3         2.5                                        2        2
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          0.94    3         2.5                                        2        2
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          1.02    3         2.5                                        2        2
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          1.21    3         2.5                                        3        3
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          1.21    3         2.5                                        3        3
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          6.00    3         2.5                                       14       14
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          8.96    3         2.5                                       22       22
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA         31.73    3         2.5                                       79       79
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA         43.45    3         2.5                                      108      108
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          3.90    3         2.5                                        9        9
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA        123.12    3         2.5                                      307      307
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          6.67    3         2.5                                       16       16
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA        168.94    3         2.5    56.49                             281      281
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA         13.85    3         2.5     7.22                              16       16
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA         75.82    3         2.5            17.47                     189      189
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA         24.05    3         2.5             0.18                      60       60
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          6.34    3         2.5             6.34                      15       15
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          1.98    3         2.5                                        4        4
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA         29.54    3         2.5                                       73       73
  Low Density Res   RVLD    UGBA          4.20    3         2.5                                       10       10
ensity Res                                                                         0        0       1,373    1,373
 w Density SFR     RLD,RN   UGBA         39.77    7         4.5            39.77                              178
 w Density SFR     RLD,RN   UGBA         43.58    7         4.5                                               196
 w Density SFR     RLD,RN   UGBA         12.93    7         4.5                                                58
 w Density SFR     RLD,RN   UGBA         18.99    7         4.5                                                85
 w Density SFR     RLD,RN   UGBA          5.05    7         4.5                                                22
 w Density SFR     RLD,RN   UGBA         27.20    7         4.5                                               122
 w Density SFR     RLD,RN   UGBA         17.03    7         4.5                                                76
 w Density SFR     RLD,RN   UGBA          3.87    7         4.5                                                17
                                Appendix B - 44                                                              2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                  Housing Element
                                                                      Densities                         Potential Units
                         Proposed            Existing                               FEMA
   eneral Plan            Zoning             Zoning      Acreage  Max    Realistic 100 yr 1 LNAS2  Lower      Mod     Upper   Total
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA          7.90    7        4.5                                                 35
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA          8.59    7        4.5                                                 38
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN                UR         44.12    7        4.5                                                198
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA         73.37    7        4.5                                                330
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA         57.47    7        4.5                                                258
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA         24.44    7        4.5                                                109
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA         31.42    7        4.5            20.909                              141
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA         85.56    7        4.5            59.235                              385
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA          2.75    7        4.5              2.75                               12
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA         19.77    7        4.5                                                 88
  w Density SFR           RLD,RN              UGBA          9.50    7        4.5                                                 42
  ity SFR                                                                                             0      1,1950   1,1950   2,390
Medium Density Res       RLMD,RN              UGBA          9.62   12         9                                 86               86
Medium Density Res       RLMD,RN              UGBA         29.60   12         9     12.39                      154              154
Medium Density Res       RLMD,RN              UGBA          2.49   12         9                                 22               22
Medium Density Res       RLMD,RN              UGBA         29.03   12         9              29.03             261              261
Medium Density Res       RLMD,RN              UGBA         26.39   12         9              26.39             237              237
Medium Density Res       RLMD,RN              UGBA          6.14   12         9                                 55               55
Medium Density Res       RLMD,RN              UGBA          0.40   12         9                                  3                3
Density Res                                                                                           0        818       0      818
   Mixed-Use3               MU                UGBA          5.43   20         9                      48                          48
   Mixed-Use3               MU                UGBA          2.57   20         9                      23                          23
 Use                                                                                                 71                  0       71
                                                          121.16                    76.10   202.09   71       2,013    2,578   4,662
  in 100-year floodplain
within a Lemoore Naval Air Station noise contour
7 regarding mixed-use development.
                                                  Appendix B - 45                                                              2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                                    Housing Element
                                                      Densities                                          Potential Units
             Proposed  Existing                                              Existing Use
 l Plan       Zoning    Zoning        Acreage     Max   Realistic       (Type/Condition)            Lower     Mod    Upper    Total
sity SFR      RLD,RN     RA-20          2.75        7        4.5  1 SFD / Substantial deterioration                              12
sity SFR      RLD,RN     RA-20          1.34        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   6
sity SFR      RLD,RN     R-1-7          2.73        7        4.5  1 SFD / Minor deterioration                                    12
sity SFR      RLD,RN     RA-20          0.56        7        4.5  1 SFD / Substantial deterioration                               2
sity SFR      RLD,RN     RA-20          0.22        7        4.5  1 SFD / Dilapidated                                             1
sity SFR      RLD,RN       ML           1.15        7        4.5  OT / Commercial                                                 5
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      0.81        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   3
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      0.77        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   3
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      1.18        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   3
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      1.01        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   4
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      1.79        7        4.5  1 SFD / Minor deterioration                                     8
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      2.61        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   9
sity SFR      RLD,RN     RA-20          1.92        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   7
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      1.16        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   4
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      1.22        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   4
sity SFR      RLD,RN  R-1-7, RA-20      1.49        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   5
sity SFR      RLD,RN     R-1-7          7.49        7        4.5  OT / Commercial                                                33
sity SFR      RLD,RN   R-1-7, ML        2.00        7        4.5  1 SFD / Minor deterioration                                     9
sity SFR      RLD,RN     RA-20          1.49        7        4.5  NA / Industrial                                                 5
sity SFR      RLD,RN     RA-20          2.44        7        4.5  1 SFD / Sound                                                   9
m Density    RLMD,RN       UR           9.93       12         9   1 SFD / Moderate deterioration               75                75
nsity MFR      RMD         ML           0.36       17        14   NA / Industrial                      4                          4
                                                                  1 SFD / Moderate deterioration /
nsity MFR      RMD       RM-3           6.94       17        14   Industrial                          82                         82
nsity MFR      RMD         ML           2.41       17        14   OT / Commercial                     33                         33
nsity MFR      RMD         ML           0.63       17        14   OT / Commercial                      8                          8
nsity MFR      RMD         ML           4.93       17        14   1 SFD / Minor deterioration         69                         69
nsity MFR      RMD         ML           1.18       17        14   NA / Industrial                     14                         14
                                                                                                     210      147       72      429
ensity Res     RVLD      UGBA          44.73        3        2.5                                                       111      111
e / Comments
                                   Appendix B - 46                                                                        2009-2014
emoore                                                                                                              Housing Element
ntory Map – City of Lemoore
                            Appendix B - 47      2009-2014
emoore                                      Housing Element

Land Inventory – Unincorporated Kings County
 GP       Zone      Allowable                   Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure       On-site
Desig.   District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity       Constraints
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.48          1         1           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.59          1         1           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.78          1         1           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        1.00          1         1           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        1.18          1         1           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        1.38          1         1           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        1.68          2         2           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        2.01          2         2           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        2.59          3         3           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        2.70          3         3           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        3.10          3         3           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        8.33          8         8           Yes             None
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.12          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.17          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.17          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.21          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.27          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.29          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.30          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.32          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.43          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.45          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.48          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.48          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.49          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.49          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.50          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.73          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.77          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.79          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.82          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.84          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.85          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.86          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD      RRE         1 du/ac        0.87          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
                                Appendix B - 48                                                      2009-2014
emoore                                                                                        Housing Element

 GP     Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure       On-site
Desig. District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity       Constraints
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.90          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.92          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.92          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.94          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.96          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.96          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.96          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.96          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.98          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.98          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.98          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         0.99          1         1       Septic & Well Variance Required
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.00          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.00          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.01          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.01          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.01          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.01          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.02          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.02          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.02          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.02          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.03          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.04          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.05          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.05          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.05          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.06          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.07          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.08          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.09          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.10          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.10          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.10          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.10          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.11          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.12          1         1       Septic & Well       None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.12          1         1       Septic & Well       None
                              Appendix B - 49                                                      2009-2014
emoore                                                                                      Housing Element
 GP     Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure   On-site
Desig. District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity     Constraints
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.12          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.13          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.13          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.13          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.13          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.13          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.13          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.14          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.14          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.14          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.14          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.15          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.17          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.18          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.19          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.20          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.20          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.20          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.21          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.21          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.21          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.21          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.21          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.22          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.22          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.22          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.25          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.25          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.25          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.25          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.26          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.32          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.35          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.44          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.45          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.47          1         1       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.55          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.63          2         2       Septic & Well    None
                              Appendix B - 50                                                 2009-2014
emoore                                                                                   Housing Element
 GP     Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure   On-site
Desig. District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity     Constraints
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.68          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.69          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.70          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.73          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.73          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.74          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.74          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.82          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.85          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.93          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         1.94          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.05          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.15          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.28          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.40          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.42          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.44          2         2       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.53          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.54          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.57          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.77          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         2.88          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.00          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.01          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.02          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.03          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.04          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.21          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.30          3         3       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.55          4         4       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.84          4         4       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         3.96          4         4       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         4.01          4         4       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         4.11          4         4       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         4.69          5         5       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         7.16          7         7       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         7.62          8         8       Septic & Well    None
 VLD    RRE        1 du/ac         7.77          8         8       Septic & Well    None
                              Appendix B - 51                                                 2009-2014
emoore                                                                                   Housing Element
 GP         Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure       On-site
Desig.     District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity       Constraints
 VLD         RRE       1 du/ac         8.20           8         8      Septic & Well       None
 VLD         RRE       1 du/ac         8.45           8         8      Septic & Well       None
 VLD         RRE       1 du/ac         9.11           9         9      Septic & Well       None
 VLD         RRE       1 du/ac        11.34           8         8      Septic & Well       None
 VLD         RRE       1 du/ac        12.82           9         9      Septic & Well       None
 VLD         RRE       1 du/ac        14.84          10        10      Septic & Well       None
 VLD         RRE       1 du/ac        47.16          33        33      Septic & Well       None
esidential                            350.1         334
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.97           2         2          Yes             None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        1.77           4         4          Yes             None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        3.68           7         7          Yes             None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.20           1         0      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.25           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.27           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.29           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.30           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.35           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.52           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.54           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.61           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.70           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.81           1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.82           1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.89           1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.90           1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        0.96           1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        1.06           1         2      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        1.15           1         2      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        1.63           1         3      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        1.98           2         4      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        2.03           2         4      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        2.75           2         6      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        4.20           4         8      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        5.32           5        11      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        6.36           6        13      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        9.31           9        19      Septic & Well       None
  LD        R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        9.97          10        20      Septic & Well       None
                                  Appendix B - 52                                                      2009-2014
emoore                                                                                          Housing Element
  GP    Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure       On-site
Desig. District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity       Constraints
   LD   R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        13.76         13        28      Septic & Well       None
   LD   R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        28.83         40        40      Septic & Well       None
   LD   R-1-20    1-2 du/ac        30.91         43        43      Septic & Well       None
 ntial                            134.09        166
tial
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 cu/ac         0.31          1         1          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 cu/ac         0.32          1         1          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 cu/ac         0.33          1         1          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 cu/ac         0.33          1         1          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 cu/ac         0.33          1         1          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 cu/ac         0.33          1         1          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 cu/ac         0.33          1         1          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 cu/ac         0.34          1         1          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         2.08          4         6          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         3.49          7        10          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         3.92          8        11          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         9.85         21        28          Yes             None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.13          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.15          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.16          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.31          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.32          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.32          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.32          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.33          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.37          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.38          1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.38          1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.43          1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.70          1         3      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.73          1         3      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         0.89          1         4      Septic & Well Variance Required
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         1.30          1         5      Septic & Well       None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         1.37          1         5      Septic & Well       None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         1.68          2         7      Septic & Well       None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         1.91          2         8      Septic & Well       None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         1.94          2         8      Septic & Well       None
  LMD   R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         3.04          3        12      Septic & Well       None
                              Appendix B - 53                                                      2009-2014
emoore                                                                                      Housing Element
 GP            Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure   On-site
Desig.        District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity     Constraints
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         3.41          3        14      Septic & Well    None
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         4.31          4        12      Septic & Well    None
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         4.31          4        12      Septic & Well    None
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac         8.46          8        24      Septic & Well    None
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac        10.74         10        30      Septic & Well    None
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac        17.65         17        49      Septic & Well    None
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac        50.91        107       143      Septic & Well    None
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac        59.03        124       165      Septic & Well    None
 LMD           R-1-12    2-4 du/ac        91.22        192       255      Septic & Well    None
y Residential                            289.16        543
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.10          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.11          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.12          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.13          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.13          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.16          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.17          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.17          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.18          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.19          1         1          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.23          1         2          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.28          2         2          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.43          3         3          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.45          3         3          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.46          3         3          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.66          4         5          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.70          4         5          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         0.71          4         5          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         1.09          7         8          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         1.49          9        10          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         1.80          8         9          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         2.39         10        12          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         2.43         10        12          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         2.44         10        12          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         3.02         13        15          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         3.82         16        19          Yes          None
  MD           R-1-6     4-7 du/ac         3.95         17        19          Yes          None
                                     Appendix B - 54                                                 2009-2014
emoore                                                                                          Housing Element
 GP     Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure       On-site
Desig. District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity       Constraints
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        7.03          30        34          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac       10.18          43        50          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac       11.96          50        59          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac       14.92          63        73          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac       16.19          68        79          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.14           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.15           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.15           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.15           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.17           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.17           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.28           2         2          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.34           2         2          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        2.55          11        12          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        4.97          21        24          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac       11.83          50        58          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.13           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.13           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.13           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.13           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.14           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.15           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.21           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.49           3         3          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.99           6         7          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        1.02           6         7          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        1.44           9        10          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        1.65           7         8          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        2.26           9        11          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        3.33          14        16          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac       15.09          63        74          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.18           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.19           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.21           1         1          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        5.99          25        29          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        6.85          29        34          Yes             None
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.15           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
 MD     R-1-6     4-7 du/ac        0.17           1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
                              Appendix B - 55                                                      2009-2014
emoore                                                                                      Housing Element
  GP       Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure       On-site
Desig.    District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity       Constraints
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.17          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.18          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.18          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.18          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.21          1         1      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.22          1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.22          1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.24          1         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.34          2         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.34          2         2      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.40          2         3      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.40          2         3      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.41          2         3      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.41          2         3      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.45          3         3      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.50          3         4      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        0.85          5         6      Septic & Well Variance Required
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        1.03          6         7      Septic & Well       None
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        2.18          9        11      Septic & Well       None
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac        2.35         10        12      Septic & Well       None
  MD       R-1-6      4-7 du/ac       13.48         57        66      Septic & Well       None
sidential                            174.76        774
tial
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.12          1         1          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.16          1         2          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.17          2         2          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.20          2         2          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        1.34         12        15          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        3.94         25        30          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        5.10         32        39          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac       11.40         72        88          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.30          3         3          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.37          3         4          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.54          5         6          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.58          5         6          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        2.78         24        29          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.10          1         1          Yes             None
 MHD       RM-3      7-11 du/ac        0.10          1         1          Yes             None
                                 Appendix B - 56                                                      2009-2014
emoore                                                                                         Housing Element
 GP     Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure  On-site
Desig. District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity    Constraints
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.15           1         2          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.17           2         2          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.27           2         3          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.35           3         4          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.42           4         5          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.45           4         5          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.46           4         5          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.50           5         6          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.62           6         7          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.89           8        10          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.94           8        10          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       1.11          10        12          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       1.11          10        12          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       1.27          11        14          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       1.31          12        14          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       1.80          11        14          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       1.95          12        15          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.15          14        17          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.24          14        17          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.55          16        20          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.81          18        22          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.83          18        22          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.87          18        22          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.89          18        22          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.93          18        23          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.93          18        23          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.12           1         1          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.24           2         3          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.28           3         3          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.29           3         3          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.31           3         3          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.41           4         5          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.57           5         6          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       0.69           6         8          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       1.35          12        15          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       1.63          10        13          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       2.48          16        19          Yes         None
 MHD    RM-3      7-11 du/ac       3.95          25        30          Yes         None
                              Appendix B - 57                                                2009-2014
emoore                                                                                  Housing Element
  GP            Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure   On-site
Desig.         District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity     Constraints
 MHD            RM-3       7-11 du/ac      4.11          26        32          Yes          None
 MHD            RM-3       7-11 du/ac      5.19          33        40          Yes          None
 MHD            RM-3       7-11 du/ac      0.35           3         4      Septic & Well    None
 MHD            RM-3       7-11 du/ac      0.93           8        10      Septic & Well    None
 MHD            RM-3       7-11 du/ac      1.53          10        12      Septic & Well    None
ty Residential                            89.60         624
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.15           2         4          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.25           4         6          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.52           8        12          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.89          13        21          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      3.89          41        65          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      1.53          16        26          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.16           2         4          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.40           6        10          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.40           6        10          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.48           7        12          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.88          13        21          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.88          13        21          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.93          14        22          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      1.05          16        25          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      1.10          17        26          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      1.16          17        28          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      1.28          19        31          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      1.30          20        31          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      2.15          23        36          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      2.20          23        37          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      2.63          28        44          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      2.75          29        46          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.52           8        12          Yes          None
  HD            RM-2      11-24 du/ac      0.56           8        13          Yes          None
ential                                    28.06         353
 VHD           RM-1.5     24-30 du/ac      0.86          21        21          Yes          None
 VHD           RM-1.5     24-30 du/ac      2.22          37        47          Yes          None
 VHD           RM-1.5     24-30 du/ac      0.40          10        12          Yes          None
 VHD           RM-1.5     24-30 du/ac      0.96          23        29          Yes          None
                                      Appendix B - 58                                                 2009-2014
emoore                                                                                           Housing Element
  GP         Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure  On-site
Desig.      District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity    Constraints
 VHD        RM-1.5     24-30 du/ac      1.30          31        39          Yes         None
 esidential                             5.74         122
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.10           1         2          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.12           1         2          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.14           1         3          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.18           2         4          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.24           2         5          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.24           2         5          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.26           3         5          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.69           7        14          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.19           2         4          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.19           2         4          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.27           3         5          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      1.70          12        24          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.16           2         3          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.16           2         3          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.17           2         3          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.19           2         4          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.29           3         6          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.54           5        11          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.56           6        11          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.78           8        16          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      0.97          10        19          Yes         None
 DMU         DMU       10-20 du/ac      1.95          14        27          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      2.02          14        28          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      2.34          16        33          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      2.79          20        39          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      3.23          23        45          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      3.34          23        47          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      3.89          27        54          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      4.27          30        60          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      5.06          35        71          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      7.47          52       105          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac     11.93          84       167          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac     12.32          86       172          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      0.10           1         2          Yes         None
  MU          MU       10-20 du/ac      0.10           1         2          Yes         None
                                   Appendix B - 59                                                2009-2014
emoore                                                                                       Housing Element
 GP     Zone     Allowable                    Realistic Maximum  Infrastructure  On-site
Desig. District Density Range     Acres       Capacity  Capacity    Capacity    Constraints
 MU      MU       10-20 du/ac      0.13          1         3           Yes         None
 MU      MU       10-20 du/ac      0.14          1         3           Yes         None
 MU      MU       10-20 du/ac      0.14          1         3           Yes         None
 MU      MU       10-20 du/ac      0.17          2         3           Yes         None
 MU      MU       10-20 du/ac      0.18          2         4           Yes         None
                                  69.71         510
                                 1141.23       3,426
                              Appendix B - 60                                                2009-2014
emoore                                                                                  Housing Element
Appendix B
Figure B-1e: Land Inventory Map – Unincorporated Kings County (Armona)
Kings County and Cities of            Appendix B - 61                       2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                  Housing Element

Appendix B
Figure B-1e: Land Inventory Map – Unincorporated Kings County (Home Garden)
Kings County and Cities of            Appendix B - 62                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                 Housing Element

Appendix B
Figure B-1e: Land Inventory Map – Unincorporated Kings County (Kettleman City)
Kings County and Cities of            Appendix B - 63                       2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                  Housing Element

Appendix B
Figure B-1e: Land Inventory Map – Unincorporated Kings County (Stratford)
Kings County and Cities of            Appendix B - 64                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                    Housing Element

Appendix C
Appendix C Public Participation
                                    Summary
Public participation is an important component of the planning process, and this update to the
Housing Element has provided residents and other interested parties numerous opportunities for
review and comment. Public notices for all Housing Element meetings and public hearings were
mailed to a list of interested persons and organizations and published in the local newspaper in
advance of each meeting, as well as posting the notices on each jurisdiction’s website. The draft
Housing Element was made available for review at City Halls, the County Government Center, the
Kings County Association of Governments office, and libraries, and was also posted on each
jurisdiction’s website.
After receiving comments on the draft Housing Element from the State Housing and Community
Development Department, a proposed final Housing Element was prepared and made available for
public review prior to public hearings and adoption by each City Council and the Board of
Supervisors.
Table C-1. Public Meeting Summary
2009-2014 Kings County Housing Element Update
 Date                Meeting
    2/26/2009        Avenal study session
     2/2/2009        Corcoran study session
    3/10/2009        Hanford study session
    3/17/2009        Lemoore study session
    3/12/2009        Kings County study session
     8/3/2009        Corcoran Planning Commission/City Council public meeting
     8/3/2009        Kings County Planning Commission public meeting
    8/12/2009        Avenal Planning Commission/City Council public meeting
    8/24/2009        Hanford Planning Commission/City Council public meeting
    8/24/2009        Lemoore Planning Commission/City Council public meeting
    8/25/2009        Kings County Board of Supervisors public meeting
    4/12/2010        Lemoore Planning Commission hearing
    4/27/2010        Hanford Planning Commission hearing
     5/3/2010        Kings County Planning Commission public hearing
     5/4/2010        Lemoore City Council hearing (adoption)
    5/10/2010        Corcoran Planning Commission public hearing
    5/17/2010        Avenal Planning Commission public hearing
    5/17/2010        Corcoran City Council public hearing (adoption)
    5/18/2010        Kings County Board of Supervisors public hearing (adoption)
    5/27/2010        Avenal City Council public hearing (adoption)
     6/1/2010        Hanford City Council public hearing (adoption)
Kings County and Cities of                        Appendix C - 1                         2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                               Housing Element

Appendix C
Table C-1 includes a list of opportunities for public involvement in the preparation of this Housing
Element update. Table C-2 provides the list of persons and organizations that were notified of the
availability of the draft Housing Element as well as public meeting notices.
Table C-3 summarizes the public comments received during the preparation of the Housing Element
update along with a description of how those comments were addressed in the element.
After receiving comments on the draft Housing Element from the state Department of Housing and
Community Development, a proposed final Housing Element was prepared and made available for
public review prior to adoption by each City Council and the Board of Supervisors.
Table C-2. Public Notice List
2009-2014 Kings County Housing Element Update
      PEGGY GREGORY                                  MARY ANNE FORD SHERMAN
      AG EXTENSION                                   BEHAVIORAL HEALTH DIRECTOR
      1400 W. LACEY BLVD.                            1400 W. LACEY BLVD.
      HANFORD, CA 93230                              HANFORD, CA 93230
      ROMAN V. BENITEZ                               TIM NISWANDER
      SR. COMMUNITY PLANNER & LIAISON                AGRICULTURAL COMMISSIONER
      OFFICER                                        1400 W. LACEY BLVD.
      750 ENTERPRISE AVENUE                          HANFORD, CA 93230
      NAS LEMOORE, CA 93246
      KETTLEMAN CITY CSD                             ARMONA COMMUNITY SERVICES DISTRICT
      P.O. BOX 179                                   P.O. BOX 486
      KETTLEMAN CITY CA 93239                        ARMONA, CA 93202
      HOME GARDEN CSD                                STRATFORD PUD
      11677 2ND PLACE                                19681 RAILROAD AVENUE
      HANFORD, CA 93230                              P. O. BOX 85
                                                     STRATFORD, CA 93266
      LEMOORE ADVANCE                                JAY SALYER
      339 W. ‘D’ STREET                              KINGS COUNTY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      LEMOORE, CA 93245                              CORP.
                                                     120 N. IRWIN STREET
                                                     HANFORD, CA 93230
      CORCORAN JOURNAL                               SALVATION ARMY
      P.O. BOX 487                                   380 E IVY STREET
      CORCORAN, CA 93212                             HANFORD, CA 93230
      LOUISE CARDOSA                                 DIWATA FONTE
      HANFORD SENTINEL                               FRESNO BEE
      P.O. BOX 9                                     525 W. MAIN STREET, SUITE F
      HANFORD, CA 93232                              VISALIA, CA 93291-6149
Kings County and Cities of                    Appendix C - 2                                2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                 Housing Element

Appendix C
      KINGS TIMBERLAND                       DIANA PECK
      1220 JEPSON AVENUE                     KINGS COUNTY FARM BUREAU
      CORCORAN, CA 93212                     870 GREENFIELD AVENUE
                                             HANFORD, CA 93230
      CAROLINE FARRELL                       RANDY MCNARY
      CENTER ON RACE, POVERTY & THE          HOUSING AUTHORITY OF KINGS COUNTY
      ENVIRONMENT                            670 SOUTH IRWIN STREET
      1224 JEFFERSON STREET, SUITE 25        HANFORD, CA 93230
      DELANO, CA 93215
      GREENACTION                            NANETTE VILLARREAL
      ONE HALLIDIE PLAZA, SUITE 760          KINGS UNITED WAY
      SAN FRANCISCO, CA 94102                11050 13TH AVE
                                             HANFORD, CA 93230
      KINGS COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION       CENTRAL VALLEY CHRISTIAN HOUSING
      1144 W. LACEY BLVD.                    DEVELOPMENT
      HANFORD, CA 93230                      2222 W. SUNNYSIDE AVE
                                             VISALIA, CA 93277
      AMERICAN RED CROSS                     CORNERSTONE RECOVERY SYSTEMS
      MARIE DAVIS                            TOM DOYLE
      505 WEST MAIN STREET                   801 W. 7TH STREET
      VISALIA, CALIFORNIA 93291              POST OFFICE BOX 1124
                                             HANFORD, CALIFORNIA 93232
      CHAMPIONS RECOVERY ALTERNATIVE         CORCORAN EMERGENCY AID
      PROGRAMS                               MARILYN NOLAN
      SUE WEISENHAUS-BRAZ                    2121 W. WHITLEY AVE
      700 NORTH IRWIN STREET                 POST OFFICE BOX 393
      HANFORD, CALIFORNIA 93230              CORCORAN, CALIFORNIA 93212
      KINGS COMMUNITY ACTION                 LEMOORE CHRISTIAN AID, INC.
      ORGANIZATION                           JANEY CASTILLO
      EMERGENCY SVCS PROGRAM AND             224 N. LEMOORE AVE.
      WOMAN’S SHELTER                        POST OFFICE BOX 134
      LUPE GARCIA
      YMCA OF KINGS COUNTY                   OPERATION LIFE TRANSFORMED
      LAURA T. MARTIN                        KIM MARRERO
      1010 W. GRANGEVILLE BLVD               748 W. SANDSTONE COURT
      HANFORD, CALIFORNIA 93230              HANFORD, CALIFORNIA 93230
      KINGS COUNTY COMMISSION ON             THE SALVATION ARMY
      AGING                                  MAJOR GREGORY MOODY
      ADULT SOCIAL DAY CARE PROGRAM          380 E. IVY STREET
      SHARON L.T. DEMASTERS                  POST OFFICE BOX 987
      1197 SOUTH DRIVE                       HANFORD, CALIFORNIA 93232
Kings County and Cities of             Appendix C - 3                            2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                       Housing Element

Appendix C
      KINGS PARTNERSHIP FOR CHILDREN-         CHURCH OF THE SAVIOUR, SOUP KITCHEN
      SAT. ENRICHMENT PROGRAM                 CAROL DYER
      DR. KIM WILDEY                          519 NORTH DOUTY STREET
      11593 SOUTH 10TH AVE, POST OFFICE       HANFORD, CALIFORNIA 93230
      BOX 185
      K-POP                                   UNITED CEREBRAL PALSY OF CENTRAL
      3056 CASTRO VALLEY BLVD,                CALIFORNIA
      SUITE 186                               DEBBIE GIBSON
      CASTRO VALLEY, CA 94546                 606 WEST SIXTH STREET
                                              HANFORD, CALIFORNIA 93230
      CHAMPIONS RECOVERY ALTERNATIVE          SELF HELP ENTERPRISES
      PROGRAMS                                TOM COLLISHAW
      SUE WEISENHAUS-BRAZ                     8445 W ELOWIN CT
      700 NORTH IRWIN STREET                  VISALIA, CA 93291-9262
      HANFORD, CALIFORNIA 93230
                                              SELF HELP ENTERPRISES
                                              DOUG PINGEL
                                              8445 W ELOWIN CT
                                              VISALIA, CA 93291-9262
Kings County and Cities of              Appendix C - 4                            2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                        Housing Element
Appendix C
Table C-3. Summary of Public Comments
2009-2014 Kings County Housing Element Update
 Comment                                           Response
 How does the recession affect the regional        The RHNA was prepared and adopted based on
 housing needs – will it be reduced?               a statewide long-term growth forecast. Each
                                                   jurisdiction’s needs will not be revised due to
                                                   current economic conditions; however, it is
                                                   important to note that the RHNA is a planning
                                                   tool, not a construction mandate. If housing
                                                   production slows due to overall economic
                                                   conditions, jurisdictions will not be penalized if
                                                   they are making a good-faith effort to facilitate
                                                   development.
 Our city has a lot of affordable housing. More    In preparing the Regional Housing Needs Plan,
 move-up housing is needed to create a             KCAG and the jurisdictions considered current
 balanced community and stimulate economic         housing affordability and allocations were
 development.                                      adjusted accordingly.
 The need for affordable housing and special       Significant public subsidies are required to make
 needs housing is greater than the supply.         affordable and special needs housing
                                                   development feasible. It is unfortunate that the
                                                   resources are less that the need, particularly
                                                   under current economic conditions. Public
                                                   agencies are expected to use their powers such
                                                   as land use planning and zoning regulations to
                                                   remove constraints and facilitate housing
                                                   production, to the extent feasible.
 Is the potential residential development          The land inventory is based on both General
 capacity estimated in the land inventory tables   Plan and zoning designations of territory within
 based on General Plan or zoning? Does it          the current City limits only. It is anticipated that
 reflect areas outside the current City            zone changes will occur during the planning
 boundaries but within the Sphere of Influence?    period. No change to the Housing Element is
 What happens if zoning designations change?       necessary unless zone changes were to reduce
                                                   the City’s potential sites for housing below the
                                                   level required to accommodate the RHNA.
 Does farmworker housing need to be adjacent       Housing for farmworkers does not need to be on
 to an agricultural zone?                          or adjacent to agricultural land, although special
                                                   rules apply to employee housing on land zoned
                                                   for agriculture (the Employee Housing Act).
                                                   Farmworker housing may be built wherever
                                                   other types of housing are permitted, such as
                                                   multi-family apartments.
 Where did the population forecast in the          The California Department of Finance,
Kings County and Cities of                   Appendix C - 5                                      2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                                       Housing Element

Appendix C
 Housing Element come from?                 Demographic Research Unit prepares updated
                                            forecasts of population and housing on a regular
                                            basis for California and its counties.
Kings County and Cities of            Appendix C - 6                                    2009-2014
Avenal, Corcoran, Hanford and Lemoore                                              Housing Element
